THE CODE OF THE TOWN OF TYRONE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Town Council 
____________ 
Adopted: October 6, 2011 
Effective: October 6, 2011 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
TOWN OF 
TYRONE, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Don C. Rehwaldt (Mayor) 
Tracy L. Young, Post #1 (Councilman) 
Howard Eric Dial, Post #2 (Councilman) 
Ken Matthews, Post #3 (Councilman) 
Gloria Furr, Post #4 (Councilman) 
Town Council 
____________ 
Richard Newbern 
Town Manager 
____________ 
Dennis Davenport 
Town Attorney 
____________ 
Vacant 
Town Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Tyrone, Georgia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1984 Code, as supplemented through February 7, 2002 (except that titles 1-4 were the 1984 Code as found on the town's webpage), and ordinances subsequently adopted by the town council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1984 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Howard George, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Richard Newbern, Town Manager, Ms. Pam Megill, Town Clerk, Mr. Dennis A. Davenport, Town Attorney, and Mr. Patrick A. Stough, Assistant Town Attorney, for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Tyrone, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and tge Town of Tyrone, Georgia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Tyrone, Georgia. 2011. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2011-12B 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF TYRONE, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the Town of Tyrone and It is Hereby Ordained by Authority of Same: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the Town of Tyrone, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 113, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before May 19, 2011, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. (a) Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, work on the public streets or public works of the Town for a term not exceeding 12 months or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(4)  The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of Code on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. 
(5)  The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an the intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after the May 19, 2011, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption by the Mayor and Council. 
    So enacted this 6th day of October, 2011. 
MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF TYRONE 
By 
      Don Rehwaldt, Mayor   ATTEST: 
      Dee Baker, Acting Town Clerk   Approved as to form: 
      Dennis A. Devenport, 
      Town Attorney   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 2011-11  5-19-2011 Include 1 2011-12  9- 1-2011 Include 1 2011-12-B 10- 6-2011 Include 1 2011-14 12- 1-2011 Include 1 2012-08-A  7-19-2012 Include 1 2012-08  9-20-2012 Omit 1 2012-11  9-20-2012 Include 1 2013-03  2- 7-2013 Include 2 2013-04  3- 7-2013 Include 2 2013-06  3- 7-2013 Include 2 2013-07  3-21-2013 Include 2 2013-14  6-20-2013 Include 3 2013-15  6- 6-2013 Include 3 2013-21 11- 7-2013 Include 3 2013-22 11-21-2013 Include 3 2014-01  1- 2-2014 Include 3 2014-03  2- 6-2014 Include 4 2014-04  2-20-2014 Include 4 2014-08 10- 2-2014 Include 4 2014-11 11- 6-2014 Include 4 2015-04  6-18-2015 Include 5 2015-05  8- 6-2015 Include 5 2015-07 10- 1-2015 Include 6 2016-02  5-17-2016 Include 6 2016-03 10- 6-2016 Include 7 2016-04 12- 1-2016 Include 7 2017-01  5- 4-2017 Include 7 2017-02  5- 4-2017 Include 7 2017-03  5- 4-2017 Include 7 2017-04  6- 1-2017 Omit 7 2017-05  7- 6-2017 Include 8 2017-06  7- 6-2017 Include 8 2017-07  7- 6-2017 Include 8 2017-08 11- 2-2017 Include 8 2017-09 11- 2-2017 Include 8 2018-01  1- 4-2018 Omit 8 2018-02  2-15-2018 Include 9 2018-03  4-19-2018 Include 9 2018-04  5- 3-2018 Omit 9 2018-05  5- 3-2018 Omit 9 2018-06  5-17-2018 Include 9 2018-07  5-17-2018 Include 9  
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Municipal Court 
Borrowing 
Accounting and Budget 
Procurement and Property Management 
Municipal Services 
Regulatory Functions 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Town Charter, being 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No. 348), page 3876. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the act and the enacting clause have been deleted. 

[ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL] 

Sec. 1.101. - Incorporation. 
    This act shall constitute the whole Charter of the Town of Tyrone, repealing and replacing the Charter provided by an Act of the General Assembly approved August, 1911 (Ga. L. 182, p. 1604), as amended by an Act approved March 24, 1939 (Ga. L. 1939, p. 1375), and by an Act approved March 22, 1974 (Ga. L. 1974, p. 3030). The Town of Tyrone, Georgia, in the County of Fayette and the inhabitants thereof, are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of Tyrone, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession, may sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, in all the courts of law and equity, and in all actions whatsoever, and may have and use a common seal and change it at pleasure. 
Sec. 1.102. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  "Town" shall mean the Town of Tyrone, Georgia. 
(b)  "Councilman" shall mean a person elected to the town council as provided in this Act. 
(c)  "Public way" shall mean any land used by the public as a passageway, including but not limited to streets, roads, highways, expressways, freeways, boulevards, avenues, parkways, alleys, lanes, sidewalks, walks, bridges, viaducts, subways, underpasses, tunnels, and other thoroughfares, and including the rights-of-way of such public ways. 
(d)  "Code" shall mean any publication or compilation of rules, regulations, specifications, standards, limitations, or requirements by an agency of the federal or state government, or by a municipality, or by a trade association or other organization generally recognized as an authority in its field of activity. 
(e)  "Agency" shall mean any office, court, utility, board, commission, institution, or other organization in charge of or administering any public function or municipal affair of the town. 
(f)  "Officer" shall mean and include the mayor, councilmen, town judge, member of boards and commissions, and any other persons classified as public officers by the laws or judicial decisions of this state. An "officer" as herein defined shall fill an "office," and an "employee" shall fill a "position of employment." 
(g)  "Elector" shall mean a person residing within the town who is qualified to vote therein. 
(h)  The masculine shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural and vice versa. 
(i)  The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
(j)  "Member of the council" shall mean the mayor and each councilman. 
Sec. 1.103. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the Town of Tyrone shall be those existing on the effective date of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The current boundaries of the Town of Tyrone, at all times, shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the town clerk and to be designated as the case may be: "Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the Town of Tyrone, Georgia." Alterations in these boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entries upon or additions to such map or description. Such entries or additions shall be made under the direction of the mayor. Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the mayor shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The town council may provide for the redrawing of any such map. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 1) 
Sec. 1.104. - Specific powers. 
    The corporate powers of the government of the Town of Tyrone, to be exercised by the governing authority, may include the following: 
(a)  To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(b)  To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions, and to license and regulate such privileges, occupations, trades and professions, and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; 
(c)  To make appropriations for the support of the government of the town, to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the town; 
(d)  To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the town and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(e)  To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the town; 
(f)  To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the town and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(g)  To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the town, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under Code sections 22-1-8 and 22-2-21 of the O.C.G.A., article 2 of chapter 2 of title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. §§ 22-1-8, 22-2-21], or under other applicable laws, as are or may be enacted; 
(h)  To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; 
(i)  To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services, not to exceed periods of ten years; to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with such regulations established by the Public Service Commission; 
(j)  To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the town; 
(k)  To grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities; 
(l)  To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, airports, hospitals, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the town, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 or Title 32 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. titles 22 and 32] or other applicable laws, as are or may be enacted; 
(m)  To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(n)  To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes and to regulate all housing, building, and building trades; to license all building trades, and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures; 
(o)  To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(p)  To regulate or prohibit junk dealers; pawn shops; the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the use and sale of firearms; and to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; 
(q)  To regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; 
(r)  To license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortune telling or palmistry; 
(s)  To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof within or abutting the corporate limits of the town and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(t)  To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(u)  To regulate the emission of smoke, dust, sand, or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the town; 
(v)  To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(w)  To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(x)  To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(y)  To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the town from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(z)  To levy a fee, charge or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a sewer service charge fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; 
(aa)  To charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees, and to charge the same from time to time; such fees to be levied on the users connection with the sewerage system; 
(bb)  To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the town and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(cc)  To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(dd)  To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the town and the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(ee)  To establish minimum standards for and to regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing, and housing, for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of inhabitants of the town and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(ff)  To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court shall work out such sentence in any public works or services or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the town; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(gg)  To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of loitering, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness and disturbing the peace in the corporate limits of the town and to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein, and to prohibit or regulate by ordinance such other conduct and activities within said town which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this state, is deemed by the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the town or to the welfare of the citizens thereof; 
(hh)  To regulate and license, or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same, if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; to provide punishment for violation of ordinance enacted hereunder; 
(ii)  To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the town; 
(jj)  To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the town; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amount to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; 
(kk)  To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the town; 
(ll)  To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(mm)  To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefor; 
(nn)  To create, alter or abolish departments; boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the town, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(oo)  To make, ordain and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience and interest of the town and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order and good government of the town; 
(pp)  To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(qq)  To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen; 
(rr)  To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the town, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well being of the citizens of the city; 
(ss)  To establish a volunteer fire department and an auxiliary police force; to levy a tax for the purpose of operating a volunteer fire department and an auxiliary police force; to expend part of this tax levy for the payment of premiums of personal liability insurance for each member of the auxiliary police force and for each member of the volunteer fire department in an amount fixed at the discretion of the mayor and council; 
(tt)  To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the town and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under the laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, §§ 2-5) 
Sec. 1.105. - General powers. 
    In addition to all other powers herein granted, the town shall be vested with any and all powers which municipal corporations are or may hereafter be, authorized or required to exercise under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein; and any and all powers which the town was heretofore authorized to exercise upon the effective date of this Charter. 
Sec. 1.106. - Construction. 
    The powers of the town shall be construed liberally and in favor of the town. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the town as stated in this Charter. It is the intention hereof to grant the town full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the town and all of its affairs. 
Sec. 1.107. - Exercise of powers. 
    All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the town, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision such powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the governing authority and as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.108. - Ordinances. 
    All ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations now in force in the town not inconsistent with this Charter, are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the governing authority. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 
CHAPTER 1. - GOVERNING BODY 

Sec. 2.101. - Creation; composition; number; election. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the Town of Tyrone shall be vested in a town council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by article V of this Charter. For the purpose of electing councilmembers, positions on the council shall be numbered as posts 1 through 4. The terms of office of the mayor and councilmembers shall be four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  (1)  The councilmembers from posts 3 and 4 who are in office immediately prior to the date this paragraph becomes effective in 2003, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in such office, shall serve out their terms of office, which shall expire December 31, 2003, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those successors shall be elected at the municipal general election in 2003, shall take office January 1 immediately following that election, and shall serve for initial terms of office which shall expire December 31, 2005, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. 
(2)  The mayor and councilmembers from posts 1 and 2 who are in office immediately prior to the date this paragraph becomes effective in 2003, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in such office, shall serve out their terms of office, which shall expire December 31, 2004, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those successors shall be elected at the municipal general election in 2004, shall take office January 1 immediately following that election, and serve for initial terms of office which shall expire December 31, 2007, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. 
(3)  Successors to the mayor and councilmembers whose initial terms of office are to expire as provided in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection, and all future successors to such officers whose terms are to expire, shall be elected at the municipal general election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office January 1 immediately following that election, and shall serve for terms of office of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(4)  For purposes of this Charter, the terms "councilmen" and "councilmembers" shall be synonymous. 
(c)  The municipal general election for the Town of Tyrone shall be conducted on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in 2003 and 2004 and on that day thereafter in only the odd-numbered years. 
(1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 278), page 4704, § 1; 1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 355), page 4571, § 1; Ord. No. 188, 12-21-1989; 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1023), page 4759, § 1; 2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 318), page 4489, § 1; 2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 6) 
Sec. 2.102. - Qualifications of office. 
    No person shall be elected to serve as mayor or councilmember until he or she shall have been a resident of the Town of Tyrone for a period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the election of the mayor or members of the council, and he or she shall continue to reside therein during the period of service and shall have attained 21 years of age prior to the date of the election. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 118), page 4065, § 1; Ord. No. 188, 12-21-1989; 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1023), page 4759, § 1) 
Sec. 2.103. - Vacancy; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Forfeiture of office. The mayor or any councilman shall forfeit his office if he: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(2)  Willfully and knowingly violates any express prohibition of this Charter; or 
(3)  Is convicted of a felony. 
(c)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilman shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in article V [of this Charter]. 
Sec. 2.104. - Compensation and expenses. 
    The mayor shall receive an annual salary and each councilman shall receive such annual salary as shall be fixed by the town council which shall not be reduced during the term for which such official shall have been appointed or elected. Said salaries shall be paid in 12 equal monthly installments on the last day of each month. The mayor and councilmen shall also be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
Sec. 2.105. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Holding other offices. Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective town office or town employment during the term for which he was elected. 
(b)  Voting when personally interested. Neither the mayor nor any other member of the council shall vote upon any question in which he is personally interested. 
Sec. 2.106. - Inquiries and investigations. 
    Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the mayor and council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the town and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 7) 
Sec. 2.107. - General power and authority of the council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the Town of Tyrone as provided by article I. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, the Constitution, and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the Town of Tyrone and may enforce such ordinance by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)  The council may by ordinance create, change, alter, abolish, or consolidate offices, agencies, and departments, of the town and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies, and departments expressly provided for by this Charter. 
Sec. 2.108. - Manner of election. 
    All elections for town offices shall be nonpartisan. Political parties shall not conduct primaries for town offices and all names of candidates for town offices shall be listed without party designations. The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast shall be elected. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 8) 
CHAPTER 2. - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2.201. - Organization. 
(a)  During the last meeting of each election year, or as otherwise provided, the council shall hold a special meeting at which the oath of office shall be administered to the mayor-elect and newly elected councilmembers as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform all the duties of (mayor or councilmember, as the case may be) of the town; that I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof; that I am not a holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I am by the laws of the State of Georgia prohibited from holding; that I am not an officer or employee of the Town of Tyrone, Georgia; that I am otherwise qualified to hold this office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia; that I am a resident of the place required by law; and that I will support the Constitution of the United States and the State of Georgia." 
(b)  The council by majority vote of all the members thereof shall elect one of their number to be mayor pro tem, who shall serve for a term of one year and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
(1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 442), page 5244, § 1; 2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 9) 
Sec. 2.202. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess any regular meeting on any weekday or hour it may fix, and may transact any business at such continued meetings that may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(b)  Special meetings of the council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, or shall be left at their residence at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmen are present when the special meeting is called. Notice of any special meeting may be waived in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice of any special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members present. With such consent any business which may be transacted in a regular meeting may be conducted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the council shall be public. 
Sec. 2.203. - Rules of procedure. 
    The council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
Sec. 2.204. - Quorum; voting. 
    The mayor and three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. A minimum of three votes shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. The mayor shall vote only in the event of a tie vote. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 10) 
Sec. 2.205. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
(a)  Except as herein provided, every official action of the council which is to become law shall be by ordinance. Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the Town of Tyrone hereby ordains...." 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the council and read at a regular or special meeting of the council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. The clerk shall read the heading of the ordinance, shall distribute a copy to the mayor, and shall file a copy in the office of the clerk. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 11) 
Sec. 2.206. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally accepted that: 
(1)  The requirements of section 2.207 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adoption ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.207 of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 12) 
Sec. 2.207. - Signing; authenticating. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his or her signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. Every ordinance shall be signed by the mayor as a matter of course after final adoption and stamped with the town seal. Each ordinance shall also be approved as to form by the town attorney and shall be signed by the town attorney to indicate such approval. 
(b)  The council shall cause the general and permanent ordinances and the amendments to this Charter to be printed periodically, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the council. Following publication of the first Code of the Town of Tyrone and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed substantially the same style as the Code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 13) 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 
CHAPTER 1. - MAYOR 

Sec. 3.101. - Chief executive office. 
    The mayor shall be the chief executive of the Town of Tyrone. He shall possess, have and exercise all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the town under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this Charter. 
Sec. 3.102. - Terms; qualifications; compensation. 
    The mayor shall be elected for a term of four years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall have attained the age of 21 years prior to the date of the election and shall have been a resident of the Town of Tyrone for a period of at least 12 months immediately preceding his or her election. He or she shall continue to reside in the Town of Tyrone during the period of his or her service. The mayor shall receive such annual salary as shall be fixed by the town council which shall not be reduced during the term for which he or she shall have been appointed or elected. The mayor shall also receive compensation for any actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his or her duties of office as provided in section 2.104. 
(1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 442), page 5244, § 2; Ord. No. 188, 12-21-1989; 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1023), page 4759, § 1; 2003 Ga. Laws (Act No. 318), page 4489, § 2; 2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 14) 
Sec. 3.103. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  As the chief executive of the Town of Tyrone, the mayor shall: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the town are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Appoint and remove all officers, department heads and employees of the town with the approval of the town council except as otherwise provided in this Charter; 
(3)  Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the town and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(4)  Prepare and submit to the council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital improvement program; 
(5)  Submit to the council at least once a year a statement covering the financial and general conditions of the town and from time to time such other information as the council may request; 
(6)  Recommend to the council such measures relative to the affairs of the town, improvement of the government and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient; 
(7)  Call special meetings of the council as provided for in section 2.202; 
(8)  Sign ordinances as provided in section 2.207; 
(9)  Examine and audit all accounts of the town before payment; 
(10)  Require any department, agency or officer of the town to submit written reports on the duties thereof whenever he deems it expedient; 
(11)  Appoint and be an ex officio member of all standing committees and special committees of the town council; 
(12)  Preside at all meetings of the town council; 
(13)  See that all meetings are conducted in a parliamentary manner, and shall preserve order and decorum in such meetings; 
(14)  See that all funds of the town are properly accounted and that all revenues are properly and promptly collected; 
(15)  Inspect or cause to be inspected the records and books of account of the officers of the town and shall see that they are properly and correctly kept; 
(16)  See that order is maintained in the town and that its property and effects are preserved; 
(17)  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this Charter or ordinance. 
(b)  The said mayor shall have authority to: 
(1)  Inflict punishment upon any person guilty of contempt of the council by imposing such sentence or penalty as may be authorized by the ordinance of the town; 
(2)  Bind the town by signing any contract, obligation or other matter entered into and authorized by ordinance or resolution of the council, properly passed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter; further, such authorization and/or approval must have been given by the council prior to execution of any such contract(s); 
(3)  Do acts and things as may be proper and necessary in the proper conduct of the affairs of the town and as may be hereafter authorized. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 5345, § 1; Ord. No. 52, § 1, 1-15-1981; 1985 Ga. Laws, page 5304, § 1; Ord. No. 91, § 1, 7-19-1984; 1988 Ga. Laws page 5228, § 1; Ord. No. 130, § 1, 3-19-1987; 2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 15) 
Sec. 3.104. - Mayor pro tem. 
    During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore, or in his or her absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmembers chosen by the council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor as long as such absence or disability shall continue. Notwithstanding any provisions in this Charter to the contrary, in the event that it is necessary for the mayor pro tempore to assume the role of mayor in order to preside over meetings of the council, the mayor pro tempore shall be entitled to vote. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 16) 
Sec. 3.105. - Town manager. 
    The mayor and town council shall have the right and authority to create the office of town manager when deemed necessary. The town manager shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and town council. 
CHAPTER 2. - ORGANIZATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3.201. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  The council may establish, abolish, merge or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the town, as it shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the town. The council shall prescribe the functions and duties of the existing departments, offices, and agencies hereafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the function or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the town. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the town shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by the council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees, and positions as may be provided by this Charter or by ordinance consistent therewith, and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the mayor and council. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the town shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. Vacancies occurring in the appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed by this Charter for an original appointment. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the town shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(e)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by the town council. 
Sec. 3.202. - Boards, commissions and authorities. 
(a)  All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the town shall be appointed by the council in such manner and for such terms of office as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by applicable state law. 
(b)  Any vacancy in office of any members of a board, commission, or authority of the town shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or any applicable state law. 
(c)  No member of any board, commission or authority shall assume office until he shall have executed and filed with the clerk of council an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his office, such oath to be administered by the mayor. 
(d)  Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three-fourths members of the council. 
(e)  Members of boards, commissions and authorities may receive expenses in the performance of their official duties as approved by the council. 
(f)  The qualifications required of members of boards, commissions, and authorities shall be as prescribed by ordinance. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by applicable state law, each board, commission and authority of the town government shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice chairman for terms of one year and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the town. Each board, commission, or authority of the town government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the town, or applicable state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the town. 
Sec. 3.203. - Town attorney. 
    The mayor shall appoint with approval of council a town attorney for a term of one year. The town attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the town in all litigation in which the town is part; shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the town concerning legal aspects of the town's affairs; and shall approve as to form and legality all contracts, deeds, bonds, ordinances, resolutions, and motions as requested by the mayor or council. The town attorney is not a public official of the town and does not take an oath of office. The town attorney shall at all times be an independent contractor. A law firm, rather than an individual, may be designated as town attorney. 
(Ord. No. 214, 7-17-1991; 2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 17) 
Sec. 3.204. - Consolidation of functions. 
    The council may consolidate any two or more of the positions of clerk of council, town tax collector, and town accountant, or any other positions or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holders of any other positions. 
Sec. 3.205. - Town clerk. 
    The council shall appoint a town clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The town clerk shall be custodian of the official town seal and town records, maintain town council records required by this Charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the town council. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 18) 
CHAPTER 3. - PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 3.301. - Personnel policies. 
    The council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning personnel policies as may be necessary for adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the Town of Tyrone. All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 19) 
Sec. 3.302. - Position classification and pay plans. 
    The mayor shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the council for approval. Said plans may apply to all employees of the Town of Tyrone, and of any of its agencies and offices. When a pay plan has been adopted, the council shall not increase or decrease the salaries of individual employees except by amendment of said pay plan. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 
MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 4.101. - Creation. 
    When it is deemed necessary by the town council, a court shall be established to be known as the Municipal Court of the Town of Tyrone which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said town and to punish for a violation of the same. The judge of the court shall have the power and authority to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance, and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court, to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the town constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. Said court shall be presided over by the judge of said court. In the absence or disqualification of the judge, the judge pro tem shall preside and shall exercise the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. 
Sec. 4.102. - Judge. 
(a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. The judge shall be appointed by the mayor and council and shall serve for one year. The compensation of the judge shall be fixed by the council. 
(b)  The judge pro tem shall serve in the absence of the judge, shall have the same qualifications as the judge, shall be appointed by the council, and shall take the same oath as the judge. 
(c)  Before entering on duties of his office, the judge shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state, that he will truly, honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the council. 
(d)  The mayor upon recommendation of judge of the municipal court shall appoint a prosecutor of municipal court subject to approval of majority of council. 
(e)  The town attorney is prohibited from representing a defendant on trial in the municipal court of the Town of Tyrone. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 5347, §§ 1, 5; Ord. of 10-15-1981, §§ 1, 5) 
Sec. 4.103. - Convening. 
    Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. 
Sec. 4.104. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish crimes against the Town of Tyrone and violation of its ordinances. The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. Unless a lesser penalty is provided by ordinance, the judge shall have the power to impose fines, costs, and forfeitures for the violation of any law or ordinance, of the Town of Tyrone passed in accordance with this Charter, to an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each offense, to imprison offenders for a period of not more than 12 months for each offense, or sentence offenders to labor on the roads and streets or other public works of said town for not more than 12 months for each offense or any one or more of these punishments in the discretion of the judge. 
(b)  The municipal court shall adopt a schedule of fee for the superior court as now set. 
(c)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish bail and recognizance to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for appearance of persons charged with violations. All cash bonds shall be immediately deposited with the court clerk and not retained by the arresting officer. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his or her bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi, at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and placed fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the Town of Tyrone or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for town property taxes. 
(d)  The municipal court judge shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated and shall have all power vested in the justice of the peace. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of said court. 
(f)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoena and warrants which may be served or executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by state law. 
(g)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the Town of Tyrone granted by state laws generally to mayor's, recorder's and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 5347, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 10-15-1981, §§ 2, 3; 2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, §§ 20, 21) 
Sec. 4.105. - Appeal. 
    Any defendant who is dissatisfied with the judgment or sentence of the municipal court shall have the right to seek review of said judgment or sentence by filing a petition for the writ of certiorari in the superior court of Fayette County as provided by the general law of this state. Upon the filing of a notice of intention to petition for certiorari with the clerk of the municipal court in writing and within ten days after the date of the final judgment, it shall be the duty of the judge of said court to assess a reasonable bond pending the review of the judgment of conviction, with such surety or sureties to be approved by the clerk of said court, and such bond, when filed and approved as provided herein, shall act as a supersedeas of judgment until the final judgment of the superior court. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 5347, § 4; Ord. of 10-15-1981, § 4) 
Sec. 4.106. - Rules for court. 
    With the approval of the council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations relative to the procedure of the operation of the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted for said court shall be filed with the town clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5.101. - Applicability of general laws. 
    The procedures and requirements for election of all elected officials of the Town of Tyrone as to primary, special, or general elections shall be in conformity with the provisions of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended. The town shall maintain its own system of registration of electors. The procedure for the registration of electors, preparation of electors lists, and the maintenance of such lists and system of such registration shall be as is provided for in subsection (c) of code section 21-2-212 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-212(c)]. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 22) 
Sec. 5.102. - Qualifying; nomination and election of candidates; absentee ballots. 
    Consistent with state law, the council may, by ordinance, prescribe rules and regulations governing qualifying fees, nomination of candidates, absentee ballots, write-in votes, challenge of votes, purging of registration lists, and such other rules and regulations as may be necessary for the conduct of elections in the Town of Tyrone. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 23) 
Sec. 5.103. - Vacancies. 
    If the office of mayor or any councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, said vacancy in office shall be filled by the majority vote of the remaining members of the council, by appointment, until the next municipal general election for mayor or that post at which election a successor shall be elected, provided that the vacancy does not exceed 12 months. Should the vacancy period exceed 12 months, then a special election shall be called to determine the person who shall fill the unexpired term, with said election to be in compliance with this Charter and titles 21 and 45 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. titles 21 and 45] or other applicable laws as are or may be enacted. In cases of filling more than one vacancy, where the remaining officials do not constitute a quorum, the requirement of a quorum shall be dispensed with for the purpose of filling vacancies in accordance with this section only, section 2.204 of this Charter notwithstanding. The qualifications of candidates shall conform to the applicable provisions of this Charter and title 21 of the O.C.G.A., as now or hereafter amended. 
(1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 355), page 4571, § 2; 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 442), page 5244, § 2; 2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 24) 
Sec. 5.104. - Grounds for removal. 
    The mayor or any councilman shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(a)  Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(b)  Conviction of a felony; 
(c)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(d)  Willful violation of any express prohibition of this Charter; 
(e)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(f)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by law. 
Sec. 5.105. - Procedure for removal. 
    Removal of an elected officer from office may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(a)  By action of three-fourths vote of the entire membership of the council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the council to the Superior Court of Fayette County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(b)  By information filed in the Superior Court of Fayette County as provided by law. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE AND FISCAL TAXATION 

Sec. 6.101. - Property taxes. 
    All property subject to taxation for state or county purposes, including the capital stock of merchants and public service companies, assessed as of January 1 in each fiscal year, shall be subject to the property tax levied by the Town of Tyrone. As provided by Georgia law, the council shall use the county assessment for the year in which the town taxes are to be levied. The council by ordinance may also, if the council deems it necessary, authorize another governmental unit to collect the tax and remit such collections to the town. 
Sec. 6.102. - Tax levy. 
    The council shall be authorized to levy an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the town for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the town government, providing governmental services, building up reserves for capital improvements, and for any other public purpose as determined by the council in its discretion. The ad valorem tax shall not exceed 15 mills on each dollar of taxable value. The council is also authorized to provide for sufficient levy to pay principal and interest on general obligations 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 25) 
Sec. 6.103. - Tax due dates and tax bills. 
    The council shall provide by ordinance when the taxes of the city shall fall due and in what length of time said taxes may be paid and shall provide by ordinance for the payment of taxes due to the town in installments, or in one lump sum, and when and how and upon what terms such taxes shall be due and payable, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. The council by ordinance shall also determine the penalty and interest to be paid on delinquent taxes. On and after the date when such taxes become delinquent, the tax records of the town shall have the force and effect of a judgment of a court of record. 
Sec. 6.104. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
    The council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi. fa. issued by the town clerk or any other official designated by the council and executed by any police officer of the town or police officer designated by the town under the same procedure provided by the laws governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property upon which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment date of each year, which lien shall be superior to all other liens, except that it shall have equal dignity with those of federal, state or county taxes. In cases of hardship, the council shall have discretionary authority to waive any and all penalties imposed by this Charter on delinquent taxes, fees, assessments, or on other amounts due to the town. 
Sec. 6.105. - Licenses, occupational taxes, excise taxes. 
    The council by ordinance shall have full power to levy such occupation taxes upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations which have one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits, as the council may deem expedient for the public health, safety, benefit, convenience, or advantage of the town; to also levy such occupation taxes upon those businesses or practitioners of professions and occupations which have one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the corporate limits for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers and clients or which own personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the corporate limits, provided that said business or practitioner does not perform a larger volume of said business or service within the limits of any other local government authorized to levy occupation taxes; to classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful; to impose regulatory fees on businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations doing business within the corporate limits; to compel the payment of such taxes or fees by execution or any other lawful manner; and to make laws and regulations necessary or proper to carry out the powers herein conferred and to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof. The council shall have full power and authority to levy an excise tax not prohibited by general law. Such excise tax shall include, but is not limited to, a tax on insurance policies of town residents and a telephone tax. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 26) 
Sec. 6.106. - Sewer service charges. 
    The council by ordinance shall have the right, power and authority to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer services rendered both within and without the corporate limits of the Town of Tyrone, to provide for the cost and expense of providing for the collection and disposal of sewage. If unpaid, said sewer service charge shall constitute a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be second in priority only to liens for county and town property taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for town property taxes. 
Sec. 6.107. - Sanitary and health service charge. 
    The council shall have authority by ordinance to provide for, to enforce, to levy and to collect the cost of sanitary and health services necessary in the operation of the town from all individuals, firms and corporations, residing in or doing business in said town benefiting from such service. Such authority shall include the power to assess, levy and collect annual or monthly sanitary taxes of fees in such amount or amounts, and based upon and in accordance with such classification of property and sanitary service or service provided, as may be fixed by ordinance. Said sanitary taxes and the assessment thereof shall be a charge and lien against the real estate in respect to which said taxes are so assessed, and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except liens for county and town property taxes, and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for town property taxes. 
Sec. 6.201. - Disbursements by checks. 
    All disbursements shall be made by checks signed by the town clerk and countersigned by the mayor. 
Sec. 6.202. - Official depository. 
    The council shall designate an official depository or depositories for deposit and safekeeping of the funds of the town, and may require such collateral security as it deems necessary. 
BORROWING 
Sec. 6.203. - General obligation bonds. 
    The council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this Charter or program or venture authorized under this Charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.204. - Revenue bonds. 
    Revenue bonds may be issued by the council as provided in article 3 of chapter 82 of title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 32-80-60 et seq.] or as otherwise provided by law. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 27) 
Sec. 6.205. - Short-term notes. 
    Pursuant to applicable state law the town may obtain temporary loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year. 
ACCOUNTING AND BUDGET 
Sec. 6.206. - Fiscal year. 
    The council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department or institution, agency and activity of the town government, unless otherwise provided by state law. 
Sec. 6.207. - Preparation of budgets. 
    The council shall provide by ordinance the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvement program and a capital budget including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budgets and programs. 
Sec. 6.208. - Submission of operating budget to town council. 
    On or before a date fixed by the council but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a proposed operating budget for the next fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the town, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget and such other comments and information as he may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the town clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
    The proposed operating budget and the capital improvements budget shall show separately for the general fund, each utility, and each other fund the following: 
(a)  Revenue and expenditures during the preceding fiscal year; 
(b)  Appropriations and estimated revenue and expenditures for the current fiscal year; 
(c)  Estimated revenue and recommended expenditures for the next fiscal year; 
(d)  A comparative statement of the assets, liabilities, reserves, and surplus at the end of the preceding year and estimated assets, liabilities, reserves and surplus at the end of the current fiscal year; and 
(e)  Such other information and data, such as work programs and unit costs, in justification of recommended expenditures, as may be considered necessary by the mayor or requested by the council. 
Sec. 6.209. - Public hearing. 
    After receiving the budget from the mayor, the council shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon and shall cause a public notice thereof to be published once in the official town newspaper at least ten days in advance of the date of the hearing. Said notice shall be published during the week the proposed budget is submitted by the mayor to the council and shall advise the residents of the town of the availability of the proposed budget and of the date of the public hearing. The public hearing shall be held before the council at the stated time and place, and all persons present shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Said public hearing shall be held at least one week prior to the meeting of the council at which the adoption of the proposed budget shall be considered. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 28) 
Sec. 6.210. - Acting by council on budget. 
(a)  The council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor; except, that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditure required by law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves and revenues, constituting the fund availability of such fund. 
(b)  The council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the 28th day of [the] last month of each fiscal year. If the council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriation ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose or activity as set out in the budget document. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
(d)  The council shall not make any appropriations in excess of estimated revenue, except to provide for an actual emergency threatening the health, property or lives of the inhabitants of the city; providing the council by three-fourths vote agrees there is such an emergency. 
Sec. 6.211. - Property tax levies. 
    As the next order of business following adoption of the operating budget, the council shall levy by ordinance an annual tax on all real and personal property within the Town of Tyrone. The tax rate set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the Town of Tyrone. 
Sec. 6.212. - Additional appropriations. 
    The council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget, at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose, but any such additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies. 
Sec. 6.213. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by city council but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The council shall have power to accept with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening the lives, health, or property of the inhabitants, when passed by three-fourths vote of the membership of the council. 
(b)  The council shall adopt the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the 28th day of the last month of each fiscal year. No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall elapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his recommendations thereon. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a vote of the council. 
PROCUREMENT AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT 
Sec. 6.214. - Contracting procedures. 
    All contracts shall be made or authorized by the council, and no contracts shall bind the city unless reduced to writing and approved by the council. All contracts, and all ordinances or resolutions making contracts or authorizing the same, shall be drawn by the city attorney or shall be submitted to him before authorizing by the council. 
Sec. 6.215. - Centralized purchasing. 
(a)  The council shall have the authority by ordinance to prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the Town of Tyrone, if the council deems it necessary. 
(b)  The council may sell or convey, or both, any real or personal property owned or held by the town for governmental or other purposes. All sales of municipal property shall be made to the highest responsible bidder, either by sealed bids or by auction after notice has been given. The town shall have the right to reject any and all bids or to cancel any proposed sale or auction. The town shall cause notice to be published once in the official organ of Fayette County or in the official legal organ of the Town of Tyrone, not less than 15 days nor more than 60 days proceeding the last day for the receipt of proposals. The legal notice shall include a general description of the property to be sold if the property is personal property or a legal description of the property to be sold if the property is real property. If the sale is by sealed bids, the notice shall also contain an invitation for proposals and shall state the conditions of the proposed sale, the address at which bid blanks and other written materials connected with the proposed sale may be obtained, and the date, time, and place for the opening of the bids. If the sale is by auction, the notice shall also contain the conditions of the proposed sale and shall state the date, time, and place of the proposed sale. Bids received in connection with a sale by sealed bidding shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the legal notice. All such bids shall be retained and kept available for public inspection for a period of not less than 60 days from the date on which such bids are opened. Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this subsection to the contrary, the town shall not be required to make sales in the open market, shall not be required to advertise, and shall not be required to accept bids if the property sought to be sold is personal property with an estimated value of $500.00 or less or is a lot from any municipal cemetery which the town at any time may hold. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the town from trading or exchanging real property belonging to the town for other real property where the property so acquired by exchange shall be of equal or greater value than the property previously belonging to the town; provided, however, that within six weeks preceding the closing of any such proposed exchange of real property, a notice of the proposed exchange of real property shall be published in the official organ of the town once a week for four weeks. The value of both the property belonging to the town and that to be acquired through the exchange shall be determined by appraisals, and the value so determined shall be approved by the town council. 
(c)  The council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(d)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the town, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the town, the council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the town a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the town has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this subsection to the contrary, the town shall comply with any disposition of property requirements imposed by title 36 of the O.C.G.A. and those requirements otherwise imposed by this Charter. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, §§ 29, 30) 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND REGULATORY FUNCTIONS 
MUNICIPAL SERVICES 

Sec. 7.101. - Streets. 
    The council is hereby vested with the power to layout, open, widen, change, straighten, alter, improve, vacate, abandon, and otherwise to exercise complete control over the streets, alleys, squares and sidewalks of the Town of Tyrone. 
    The council shall provide for the removal of any and all obstacles and nuisances in regard to the streets, alleys or sidewalks or other public places within the town and shall adopt appropriate ordinances to accomplish this purpose. 
Sec. 7.102. - Municipal utilities. 
    The council shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, build, maintain and operate a system of waterworks, electric lights, sewerage, and gas distribution; to establish rates and charge fees for services rendered in any of said systems; to finance any of said systems through appropriate bond issues in accordance with the laws of Georgia; to exercise the power of eminent domain in regard to any of said systems, both within and without the corporate limits; and to contract to furnish the services of any of said systems to consumers outside the corporate limits of the Town of Tyrone. 
Sec. 7.103. - Sewers and drains. 
    The council shall have the power and authority to provide for the establishment, extension, and maintenance of a system of sewers and drains, together with a sewerage disposal system. This power includes the authority to extend said system beyond the corporate limits. For these purposes the town is granted the power of eminent domain both within and without its corporate limits. The council may provide by ordinance for reasonable connection fees for tapping on to the water and sewer lines of said town, and may compel citizens to tap into the same when such service is made available. They may cause said connection to be made when the owners refuse, and issue executions to be made for the amount so expended, which execution shall create a lien on the property connected with said water and sewerage systems from the date of the order or connection. 
Sec. 7.104. - Right-of-way. 
    The Town of Tyrone shall have the right, easement and franchise of laying the necessary mains, pipes, conduits and drains for waterworks and sewerage system purposes along the highways in the County of Fayette without cost; it shall have full power and authority to enact and enforce such rules, regulations and ordinances as may be necessary to protect the water basin and watershed, from which the water supply is taken, from contamination and to protect said water works and sewerage system, including the mains, pipes, and conduits whether the same be situated within or without the corporate limits of said town. 
Sec. 7.105. - Eminent domain. 
    The council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, build, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and any other public improvements inside or outside the town and to regulate the use thereof and, for such purposes, property may be taken under title 22 and title 32 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. titles 22 and 32], subject to such amendments as shall be enacted, or any other applicable laws, as are now or may hereafter be enacted. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 31) 
REGULATORY FUNCTIONS 
Sec. 7.106. - Power to regulate and license. 
    The council shall have the power and authority to provide by ordinance for the registration of and imposition of regulatory fees on any trade, business, occupation, vocation, profession, or any and every other undertaking pursued for the purpose of personal gain or profit of whatever nature engaged in or carried on within the limits of the Town of Tyrone, regardless whether or not the subject has an office or establishment within said town. The council shall be authorized to fix the amount, terms, and manner of registering such businesses, professions, or occupations and imposing such fees, provided that this authority is subject to the Constitutions and laws of the United States and the State of Georgia. This power is conferred for the purpose of regulation under the police powers of the town and for the purpose of raising revenue for the operation of the town government through the imposition of a tax or fee on the privilege of operating within the town. This authority extends over individuals, partnerships, associations, and corporations and their agents and any other legal entity capable of transacting business. 
(2008 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1448), page 3885, § 32) 
Sec. 7.107. - Franchises. 
    The Council shall have the authority to exercise control over the use of streets of the Town of Tyrone. The power is hereby conferred upon the council to grant franchises for the use of said town streets and alleys, for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone and cable companies, electric companies, gas companies and transportation companies. This franchise right extends to, but is not limited to, the erection of poles, stringing of wires, laying of pipes, lines or conduits both above and below the ground surface. The council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, in the consideration of such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 30 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the town receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the town clerk and the registration book to be kept by him or her. The council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 4596, § 1; Ord. No. 266, § 1, 6-1-1994) 
Sec. 7.108. - Building, housing, electrical and plumbing regulations. 
    The council shall have the power and authority to enact such reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem necessary or expedient regarding the construction and maintenance of buildings, remodeling of buildings, plumbing, and electrical wiring and equipping of buildings, in order to promote the safety and welfare of its citizens and to guard against fire or other property damage. This power may, in the discretion of the council, be exercised by adoption of any such standard building, housing, gas, heating and air-conditioning, electrical, and plumbing codes as may be deemed appropriate. The council shall be empowered to engage the necessary personnel to enforce such rules and regulations as adopted, and to charge reasonable fees of inspections and permits; and may require the obtaining of a permit as a condition precedent to any construction, building, electrical or plumbing work. The council may enact all ordinances necessary to enforce such rules and regulations. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8.101. - Official bonds. 
    The officers and employees of the Town of Tyrone, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require. 
Sec. 8.102. - Existing ordinances and regulations. 
    Existing ordinances and resolutions of the Town of Tyrone not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter shall continue in effect until council has acted on said ordinances and resolutions. Within two years of the effective date of this Charter, the council shall review all existing ordinances and resolutions, and shall adopt, repeal, modify, or amend by majority vote of the council said ordinances and resolutions. All existing ordinances and resolutions not acted on by council shall be automatically repealed at the end of the above mentioned two-year period. 
Sec. 8.103. - General laws may be used. 
    The council in its discretion may elect to use the provisions of any general laws of the state in addition to or instead of the provisions of this Act (Charter). 
Sec. 8.104. - Section captions. 
    The captions to the several sections of this Charter are informative only and are not to be considered as part thereof. 
Sec. 8.105. - Severability. 
    If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part or parts held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 8.106. - Effective date. 
    This Charter shall become effective on the first day of the month following the signature of the governor, or the first day of the month following the month in which said Charter shall become effective by operation of law. 
Sec. 8.107. - Repealer. 
    All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act (Charter) are hereby repealed. 
APPENDIX A. - CODE OF ETHICS AND PROHIBITED PRACTICES 
1.  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the town or any agency or political entity to which this code of ethics applies shall knowingly: 
(a)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(b)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair his independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(c)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he is employed without proper legal authorization, or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others; 
(d)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he is employed; provided, however, that any elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(e)  Represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the council by which he is employed; and 
(f)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he has a financial interest. 
2.  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the consolidated government who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the council. The mayor or any councilman who has a private interest in any matter pending before the council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the council and he shall be entered on the records of the council and he shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency of political entity to which this code of ethics applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such agency or entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
3.  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the town or any agency or entity to which this code of ethics applies shall use property owned by such governmental body for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
4.  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this code of ethics which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale render said contract or sale voidable as to that party, at the option of the council. 
5.  Ineligibility of elected officials. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilman shall hold any other elective or appointive office in the town or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which he was elected. No former mayor and no former councilman shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
6.  Political activities of certain officers and employees. No appointive officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. 
7.  Penalties for violation. Any town officer or employee who willfully conceals such financial interest or willfully violates any of the requirements of this section shall upon conviction be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his office or position. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ga. Laws 
Year Act No. Page Section Section 
this Charter 1982 5345 1 3.103 5347 1, 5 4.102 2, 3 4.104 4 4.105 1983 278 4704 1 2.101 1985 355 4571 1 2.101 2 5.103 5304 1 3.103 1987 442 5244 1 2.201 2 3.102 5.103 1988 1 3.103 1989 118 4065 1 2.102 1990 1023 4759 1 2.101 2.102 3.102 1995 4596 1 7.107 2003 318 4489 1 2.101 2 3.102 2008 1448 3885 1 1.103 2 1.104 6 2.101 7 2.106 8 2.108 9 2.201 10 2.204 11 2.205 12 2.206 13 2.207 14 3.102 15 3.103 16 3.104 17 3.203 18 3.205 19 3.301 20, 21 4.104 22 5.101 23 5.102 24 5.103 25 6.102 26 6.105 27 6.204 28 6.209 29, 30 6.215 31 7.105 32 7.106  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of sections of the basic Charter of those ordinances which are included herein. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Charter 52  1-15-1981 1 3.103 10-15-1981(Ord.) 1 4.102 2, 3 4.104 4 4.105 5 4.102 91  7-19-1984 1 3.103 130  3-19-1987 1 3.103 188 12-21-1989 2.101, 2.102 3.102 214  7-17-1991 3.203 266  6- 1-1994 1 7.107  
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - PUBLIC FACILITIES AUTHORITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is 1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 251), page 393. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. The title of the act and enacting clause have been deleted. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
    This Act may be cited as the "Town of Tyrone Public Facilities Authority Act." 
Sec. 2. - Town of Tyrone Public Facilities Authority. 
(a)  There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Town of Tyrone Public Facilities Authority which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style and title; and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority or the trustee acting under the trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents and employees of the authority. The authority is hereby granted the same exemptions and exclusions from taxes as are now granted to cities and counties for the operation of facilities similar to facilities to be operated by the authority as provided under the provisions of this Act. 
(b)  The authority shall consist of three members who shall be residents of the Town of Tyrone and who shall be appointed by the mayor and council of the Town of Tyrone. The members of the authority shall be appointed to serve for a term of three years from the date of such appointment and until their successors shall have been selected and appointed, except that the initial terms for appointments shall be made for one-, two- and three-year terms to provide for future continuity. 
    The Mayor or one of the members of the Council of the Town of Tyrone may be appointed to serve as members of the authority, but in no event shall there be serving at any one time as a member of the authority more than one member of the Council or the Mayor. The term of office of any member who holds his appointment by reason of his being a member of the appointing body shall expire when his term of office as a member of such appointing body expires. 
    Any member of the authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself. Immediately after such appointments, the members of such authority shall enter upon their duties. Any vacancy on the authority shall be filled in the same manner as was the original appointment of the member whose termination of membership resulted in such vacancy, and the person so selected and appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. The authority shall elect one of its members as chairman and another member as vice chairman. It shall also elect a secretary and treasurer who does not necessarily have to be a member of the authority; and, if not a member, he or she shall have no voting rights. Two-thirds of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the authority. The members of the authority shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  The word "authority" shall mean the Town of Tyrone Public Facilities Authority created in section 2 of this Act. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance and operation of buildings and the usual facilities, furnishings, equipment, and real and personal property related thereto, and extensions and improvements of such buildings, equipment, facilities and property, the acquisition of the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and the lease and sale of any part or all of such buildings, facilities, furnishings and equipment, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance and operation of such facilities and areas deemed by the authority to be necessary, convenient or desirable. 
(c)  The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired and the cost of all conveyances in fee simple of the authority's title thereto and leases thereof, the cost of all machinery, furnishings and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project, or the placing of the same in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(d)  The terms "revenue bonds," "bonds" and "obligations," as used in this Act, shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 36) [O.C.G.A. § 32-80-60 et seq.], as amended, and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for in this Act. 
(e)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all properties used, leased and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
Sec. 4. - Powers. 
    The authority shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(b)  To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority; and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; and if the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any lands, the title to which shall then be in the Town of Tyrone, the governing authority or body of said town is hereby authorized to convey title to such lands to the authority upon payment to the credit of the general funds of said town the reasonable value of such lands, such value to be determined by three appraisers to be agreed upon by the governing authority and the chairman of the authority; 
(d)  To appoint, select and employ officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(e)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and to dispose, by conveyance of its title in fee simple, of real and personal property of every kind and character; and any and all persons, firms and corporations, the state and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions or agencies of the state are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations and counties and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease and sublease agreements, with the State of Georgia or any agencies or departments thereof relative to buildings and facilities, areas and facilities and relative to any property which such department or other agency or department of the State of Georgia has now, or may hereafter obtain, by lease from the United States government or any agency or department thereof; and the authority is specifically authorized to convey title, in fee simple, to any and all of its lands and any improvements thereon to any persons, firms, corporations, counties, municipalities, the State of Georgia or the United States government, or any agency or department thereof, subject to the rights and interests of the holders of any of the bonds or obligations authorized to be issued hereunder, and by the resolution or trust indenture of the authority authorizing the issuance of any of its bonds or obligations as provided in section 17 of this Act; 
(f)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(g)  To accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(h)  To accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may impose; 
(i)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(j)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; 
(k)  The authority and the trustee acting under the trust indenture are specifically authorized from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real or personal, or interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the authority was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in section 17 hereof; 
(l)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes from any bank, banks or other lending institutions for a period of time not to exceed ten years and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same by assigning all rights to and pledging all funds to be received by the authority from a lease or leases entered into by the authority as the lessor and the Town of Tyrone as the lessee; 
(m)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Sec. 5. - Revenue bonds. 
    This authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the authority created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated and shall bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed in the Revenue Bond Law or any amendment thereto. Interest shall be payable semiannually, principal shall mature at such time or times not exceeding forty years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to and in conformity with the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 36), as amended, amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761), as amended, and all procedures pertaining to such issuance and the conditions thereof shall be the same as those contained in said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto. 
Sec. 6. - Same; form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
    The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places for payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to the principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
Sec. 7. - Same; signatures; seal. 
    All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the authority and attested by the secretary and treasurer of the authority and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto; and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and secretary and treasurer of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes, the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. 
Sec. 8. - Same; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
    All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under laws of the state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
Sec. 9. - Same; sale; proceeds. 
    The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority, and the proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose provided in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
Sec. 10. - Same; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
    Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 11. - Same; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
    The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond or any coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 12. - Same; conditions precedent to issuance. 
    Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this Act. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of its members. 
Sec. 13. - Credit not pledged. 
    Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the Town of Tyrone nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said town, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the said town to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment; and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
Sec. 14. - Trust indenture as security. 
    In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the authority, including the proceeds derived from the sale from time to time of any surplus property of the authority, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the project, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the authority, both real and personal, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Sec. 15. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
    The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Sec. 16. - Sinking fund. 
    The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued and any monies derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal, of the authority, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide; and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund, which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)  Any premium upon bonds acquired by redemption, payment or otherwise; 
(4)  The necessary charges of the paying agent or agents for paying principal and interest; and 
(5)  Any investment fees or charges. 
    The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture; but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, any surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not be reissued, printed and delivered. 
Sec. 17. - Remedies of bondholders. 
    Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 18. - Refunding bonds. 
    The authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Sec. 19. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
    Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Fayette County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court, which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 20. - Validation. 
    Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law, as amended. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States government or any department or agency of the United States government, if subject to being sued and if consenting to same, which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated; and the state or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as a part of the basis of the security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the authority issuing the same, the state and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said Town of Tyrone Public Facilities Authority. 
Sec. 21. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
    While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds; and no other entity, department, agency or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds nor will the state itself so compete with the authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Sec. 22. - Monies received considered trust funds. 
    All monies received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Sec. 23. - Purpose of the authority. 
    Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this Act, the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining and operating buildings and the usual facilities, furnishings, equipment and property related thereto, and related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring parking areas in connection therewith, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and to lease or sell any or all of such facilities including real property and to do any and all things deemed by the authority as necessary, convenient or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
Sec. 24. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
    The authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and revise from time to time rates, fees, tolls and charges and to collect such rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or subleases of its lands or facilities, and to determine the price and terms at and under which its lands or facilities may be sold and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipment, betterment or extension of its lands and facilities and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, including the revenues of improvements, betterments or extensions thereafter made or the sale of any of its lands and facilities. 
Sec. 25. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
    It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act, including the basis on which facilities shall be furnished. 
Sec. 26. - Meetings. 
(a)  All meetings of the authority shall be opened to the public at all times. Ample notice shall be given to all members of the authority and to the public of any special or called meeting of the authority. The minutes of all meetings and all actions taken by the authority shall likewise be opened to public inspection. 
(b)  Each purchase made in behalf of the authority of personal property or services in excess of $500.00 shall be accomplished pursuant to competitive bids, after having published invitations to bid in the official organ of the Town of Tyrone prior to the award of any contract. All bids shall be opened during meetings of the authority and the rejection or acceptance thereof shall be entered upon the minutes of the authority. 
(c)  Any surplus or unserviceable property of the authority shall be disposed of pursuant to competitive bids which shall be advertised in the official organ of the Town of Tyrone. All bids for the disposal of such property shall be opened during public meetings of the authority and the acceptance and rejection thereof shall be entered upon the minutes of the authority. 
(d)  The affirmative action of at least two members of the authority shall be required in order that any action on behalf of the authority may be taken. 
(e)  At the conclusion of each fiscal year of the authority, the affairs of the authority shall be audited by a certified public accounting firm. The mayor and council of the Town of Tyrone shall select the firm which shall conduct the audit. A synopsis of the audit shall be published in the official organ of the Town of Tyrone as soon as the report of the auditors is submitted to the authority. 
(f)  All funds of the authority which are not required for the normal operations of the authority shall be invested in interest-bearing investments within 30 days of their receipt by the authority. 
Sec. 27. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
    The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Sec. 28. - Liberal construction of act. 
    This Act, being for the purpose of promoting the health and general welfare of the citizens of the United States, of the State of Georgia and of the Town of Tyrone, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
Sec. 29. - Effect of partial invalidity of act. 
    Should any sentence, clause, phrase or part of this Act be declared for any reason to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect such remainder of this Act or any part hereof, other than the part so held to be invalid, but the remaining provisions of this Act shall remain in full force and effect; and it is the express intention of this Act to enact each provision of this Act independently of any other provision hereof. 
Sec. 30. - Town powers. 
    This Act does not in any way take from the Town of Tyrone the authority to own, develop, operate and maintain buildings or facilities or to issue revenue bonds as is provided by the Revenue Bond Law of Georgia (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 36) [O.C.G.A. § 32-80-60 et seq.], as amended, amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761), as amended. 
Sec. 31. - Effective date. 
    This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the governor or upon its becoming law without his approval. However, the authority shall not become operative until such time as the governing authority of the Town of Tyrone shall, by appropriate resolution, declare the need for the authority within the town. 
Sec. 32. - Repealer. 
    All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of local acts not amendatory of the Charter that are included herein. 
Ga. Laws 
Year Act No. Page Section this 
Related Laws 1979 251 393 Art. I  
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters in subparts A and B shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the Town of Tyrone, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-1) 
State Law reference- Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
    Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
    Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
    As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
    Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the Town of Tyrone, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. The Code consists of subparts A and B. 
    Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
    Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Fayette County, Georgia. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a town officer or town employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
    Following. The term "following" means next after. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
    Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a servant, agent or employee. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
    May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect. 
    Mayor and council. The term "mayor and council" means the town council. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Municipality. The term "municipality" means the Town of Tyrone. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. The singular and plural number includes the other, unless expressly excluded. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
    O.C.G.A., state acts. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. A reference to a state act, whether by year and act number; year, act number and page; year and page; or short title is a reference to such act, as amended. 
    Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the town. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" means any place including, but not limited to, buildings or conveyances to which the public has, or is permitted to have access, including restaurants, soda fountains, hotel dining rooms, lobbies and corridors of hotels, and any highway, street, lane, park or place of public resort or amusement. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
    Street or road. The term "street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the town, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
    Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Town. The term "town" means the Town of Tyrone, Georgia. 
    Town council, council. The term "town council" or "council" means the town council of the town. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
    Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes printing and all numerals, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, cross references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: 
    "Section ____________ of The Code of the Town of Tyrone, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: 
    "The Code of the Town of Tyrone, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered ____________ , that reads as follows:...." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-7) 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the town. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change section or other numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-7) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a town officer or town employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months, work on the public streets or public works of the town for a term not exceeding 12 months or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(4)  The court shall have the power and authority to place any person found guilty of a violation of Code on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. 
(d)  Pursuant to the Jail Construction and Staffing Act (O.C.G.A. § 15-21-90 et seq.), the same being hereby adopted by, in any case where a fine or costs are imposed by the municipal court, those additional penalties specified in such act shall be imposed on those persons convicted of violations of any law or ordinance in the municipal court 
(e)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(f)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-6) 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-5) 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any the following ordinances or portions of ordinances not in this Code, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(6)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(7)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(8)  Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(9)  Providing for or dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(10)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(11)  Providing for zoning or rezoning property. 
(12)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(13)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(14)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Holidays. 
    The following days are observed as official town holidays: 
(1)  New Year's Day. 
(2)  MLK Jr. Birthday. 
(3)  Memorial Day. 
(4)  Independence Day. 
(5)  Labor Day. 
(6)  Thanksgiving. 
(7)  Day after Thanksgiving. 
(8)  Christmas Eve. 
(9)  Christmas Day. 
(10)  Employee's birthday (floating). 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-9) 
Secs. 2-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWN COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-21. - Salaries of mayor and council. 
(a)  The salary of the duly elected and qualified mayor of the town shall be $800.00 per month. The mayor shall also be entitled to reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred while on legitimate town business. 
(b)  The salary of each member of the duly elected and qualified town council shall be $400.00 per month. The town councilmembers shall also be entitled to reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred while on legitimate town business. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1-4) 
State Law reference- Authority of governing authority to fix salaries of governing body, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Secs. 2-22-2-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 2-46. - Council meetings; meeting times and days. 
    The town council shall normally meet at the town hall or such other place as may be designated by it, on the first and third Thursday in each month at 7:00 p.m. The council may, in its discretion, suspend, continue or cancel regular meetings as circumstances require. The organizational meeting shall be held on the first regularly scheduled council meeting in January. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1-5; Ord. No. 445, § 1, 8-21-2003) 
State Law reference- Public meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-47. - Order of business. 
    The following order of business shall be observed in the transactions of business before the council: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Invocation. 
(3)  Pledge of Allegiance. 
(4)  Approval of minutes. 
(5)  Approval of agenda. 
(6)  Presentations/recognition. 
(7)  Old business. 
(8)  New business. 
(9)  Consent agenda. 
(10)  Public comments (all). 
(11)  Staff comments. 
(12)  Council comments. 
(13)  Executive session (if required). 
(14)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1-6) 
Sec. 2-48. - Rules of procedure. 
    If, at the time of a meeting, the mayor determines that all councilmembers have been notified or an attempt has been made to notify all councilmembers and that a quorum of the councilmembers is present, he shall have the authority to call the meeting to order. The call to order shall not require any preceding action that may be issued solely by the authority of the mayor. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3) 
Sec. 2-49. - Mayor pro tem references. 
    All references in this division to mayor shall also include the mayor pro tem. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(h)(7)) 
Sec. 2-50. - Public discussion. 
(a)  Whenever public discussion of a matter before the council is allowed, any member of the public shall have the right to discuss the matter at hand prior to the presentment of the motion. 
(b)  The right of a member of the public to discuss a matter before the council shall be limited to three minutes per topic, unless as otherwise granted by special permission of the mayor. 
(c)  All discussion shall relate solely to the matter at hand. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(h)(6)) 
Sec. 2-51. - Action chart. 
    Actions shall be taken on motions as follows: 
Type Second Discussion Priority Regular motion X X None Amendment X X None Withdrawal None None X Table None X X Reconsideration X X None Call the question None None X Point of order None X X Out of order None X X Adjournment None X None  
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3) 
Secs. 2-52-2-75. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Motions 

Sec. 2-76. - General requirements. 
    The councilmembers can take action only when a motion to take such action is made and passed by the council. The passage of all ordinances must be accomplished by motion. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(a)) 
Sec. 2-77. - Procedure. 
(a)  Before a motion can be discussed or voted upon by the councilmembers, it must be presented to the council by a member of the council. The presentment is made by merely stating the motion. 
(b)  Immediately after the motion is presented to the council, the mayor shall ask for a councilmember to second the motion. If the motion is not seconded, it shall fail for lack of a second and cannot be remade until the next meeting of the council, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(c)  If the motion is seconded, the mayor shall immediately ask for discussion of the motion. Discussion of the motion shall be limited to the councilmembers and shall relate solely to the motion on hand; however, any councilmember may question a member of the audience or staff provided such question shall pertain strictly to the motion on hand. 
(d)  Upon the conclusion of discussion, the mayor shall cause the motion to be restated and shall then call the question. 
(e)  A councilmember is not permitted to speak against his own motion. However, if the councilmember changes his mind after hearing the motion discussed, the councilmember may vote against it. The person who seconds the motion can speak against the motion because a second means "Let's discuss it," not "I agree." 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(b)) 
Sec. 2-78. - Amendment. 
(a)  An amendment may be suggested by any member of the council. The amendment shall be suggested only during the discussion of the original motion. 
(b)  A motion can be amended only with the consent of the councilmember making the motion. If the councilmember who seconded the original motion disagrees with the amendment, he shall be allowed to withdraw his second. When a second is withdrawn, the mayor shall immediately request a new second. 
(c)  After a motion is amended, the mayor shall call for discussion and proceed with the consideration of the motion in the manner provided in section 2-77. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(c)) 
Sec. 2-79. - Withdrawal. 
(a)  Any motion may be withdrawn at the discretion of the councilmember making the motion. 
(b)  Motions may be withdrawn at any time prior to but not during nor after the restating of the motion by the mayor. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(d)) 
Sec. 2-80. - Tabling. 
(a)  During the discussion of a motion, the motion may be tabled for further discussion by the council upon the motion of any councilmember other than the councilmember who made the original motion. 
(b)  The motion to table shall specify the time and place for the continued discussion. 
(c)  Discussion of the original motion shall immediately cease when a motion to table is made. 
(d)  A motion to table shall not require a second but shall require discussion, restating the motion and a call of the question. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(e)) 
Sec. 2-81. - Reconsideration. 
(a)  A motion, which has been passed or defeated, or which fails for lack of a second, may be reconsidered by the councilmembers during the same meeting provided the council passes a motion for reconsideration. Otherwise, the original motion may not be presented to the council again until its next meeting. 
(b)  A motion for reconsideration can only be made by a councilmember who voted against the original motion, if defeated, or in favor of the original motion, if passed. Otherwise, any councilmember may make a motion for reconsideration. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(f)) 
Sec. 2-82. - Vote. 
(a)  Councilmember in favor of a motion shall say "aye" while holding his right hand. 
(b)  A councilmember against a motion shall say "nay" while holding his right hand. 
(c)  A councilmember present but refusing to vote shall be recorded as abstaining. 
(d)  All votes shall be by simple majority unless as otherwise required by ordinance or state law. 
(e)  A unanimous passing vote shall mean a vote in which all members of the council present vote in favor of the motion. 
(f)  The preceding procedures apply to all votes taken by the mayor and council except for the annual election of the mayor pro tempore. The annual election of the mayor pro tempore shall be conducted by any legal voting method which shall be agreed upon prior to the election. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(g)) 
Secs. 2-83-2-107. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Special Motions 

Sec. 2-108. - Call the question. 
(a)  During the discussion of any motion, any councilmember may move to call the question in order to end discussion and have the vote on the pending motion. 
(b)  When a councilmember has moved to call the question, discussion of the original motion shall cease and the mayor shall immediately restate the motion and then proceed with a vote on whether to call the question. A second of a motion to call the question shall not be necessary. 
(c)  If the vote is in favor of the motion to call the question, the mayor shall immediately call the question on the original motion. 
(d)  If the vote is against the motion to call the question, discussion of the original motion shall continue. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(h)(1)) 
Sec. 2-109. - Continuance. 
(a)  During the discussion of any motion, any councilmember may move for a continuance in order to have any particular item continued to the next meeting. A motion for continuance requires a second; however, no vote shall be necessary for the continuance to take effect. 
(b)  When a councilmember has moved for a continuance, discussion of the agenda item shall cease once the motion receives a second. A motion for continuance accompanied by a second shall automatically place the subject item on the agenda for the next scheduled meeting of the council. 
(c)  If the motion for a continuance does not receive a second, the motion shall die for the lack of a second. 
(d)  There shall be no more than one continuance allowed for any one agenda item. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(h)(2)) 
Sec. 2-110. - Point of order. 
(a)  Whenever a councilmember has a question as to the procedure being followed by the mayor, he may raise a point of order. A point of order requires no second. 
(b)  Upon the raising of a point of order, the mayor shall stop the meeting and the councilmember shall state his question. The meeting shall continue after a determination of the question has been rendered by the mayor. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(h)(3)) 
Sec. 2-111. - Out of order. 
(a)  The mayor shall have the authority to cite any individual out of order when that individual, in the opinion of the mayor, violates these rules of procedure. 
(b)  No other action shall be required in citing an individual out of order. 
(c)  When an individual has been cited as out of order, the mayor shall state the reasons therefor and shall give the individual directions regarding compliance with these rules. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(h)(4)) 
Sec. 2-112. - Adjournment. 
(a)  Adjournment of the meeting must be by motion. 
(b)  A motion to adjourn does not require a second but does require discussion. 
(c)  When a motion to adjourn is passed, the council can no longer act until another meeting is called to order. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3(h)(5)) 
Secs. 2-113-2-137. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General power over officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-138. - Employee handbook. 
    The employee handbook attached to Ord. No. 2009-12 as exhibit "A" is hereby adopted as the employee handbook of the town. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, 12-3-2009) 
Sec. 2-139. - Defense of officials by town. 
    Pursuant to the grant of authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 45-9-21, the town shall undertake to defend any civil, criminal or quasi-criminal actions brought or maintained against the town, any elected or appointed official, or any employees of the town in their individual capacity which arise out of the performance of their duties or which are in any way connected therewith, whether based upon negligence, violation of contract rights, or violation of civil, constitutional, common law or statutory rights; however, no defense shall be furnished to any person charged with a criminal offense involving theft, embezzlement or other like crime with respect to the property or money of or in which the town has an interest. Such costs of defense shall include, but not be limited to, attorneys' fees, court costs, deposition costs, witness fees and compensation, and all other like costs, expenses and fees. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1-2) 
Sec. 2-140. - Conflicts of interest. 
    It shall be unlawful for any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the town or any agency or political entity of the town to knowingly violate the provisions of section 1 of appendix A of the Charter. Penalties for such violation shall be as prescribed therein. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1-3) 
Sec. 2-141. - Issuance of citations. 
    All town officers and town employees are hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of ordinances that they are authorized to enforce. 
Secs. 2-142-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC OFFICERS 

Sec. 2-166. - Town officers. 
(a)  The officers of the town shall be those provided for by the Charter and those positions established by the town council. 
(b)  There is hereby created the office of town manager. The town manager shall perform those duties assigned to him by the mayor and council including the closing of roads as necessary. 
(c)  There is hereby created the office of chief of police. The chief of police shall have the authority to close roads as necessary. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-1) 
Sec. 2-167. - Town clerk. 
(a)  Before entering upon the duties of office, the town clerk shall take the prescribed oath and be bonded at the town's expense in the amount of not less than $25,000.00. 
(b)  In addition to the duties of the town clerk under the town Charter, the town clerk shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Attendance at council meeting and minutes thereof. The town clerk or his designee shall attend all meetings of the town council and shall take the minutes thereof and shall record the same in suitable books. 
(2)  Communication of information to town council. The town clerk shall communicate to the town council, all information he may acquire that may be conducive to the efficiency of the town government and the welfare of the people. 
(3)  Preservation, arrangement, indexing, etc. of papers, records and documents. The town clerk or his designee shall have charge of and be responsible for the preservation of all papers, records and documents of every description belonging to the town and shall arrange and file all such papers in such manner as will facilitate access to them. 
(4)  Issuing of notices. The town clerk shall issue all notices, personal and general, which the laws, orders and interest of the town require in the administration of its government. 
(5)  Attestation of executions. The town clerk shall attest all executions issued by authority of the town council. 
(6)  Attestation and sealing of deeds, contracts, etc. The town clerk shall attest and affix the town seal to all deeds to real property sold by the town, including lots in the town cemeteries, and all contracts, agreements and other obligations issued or authorized by the town council. 
(7)  Monthly report to town manager. The town clerk shall make out and submit to the town manager, for examination prior to the second regular monthly meeting of the council, a report of transactions as town clerk for the preceding month. 
(8)  Additional duties. The town clerk shall perform all other duties that may be imposed upon him by the laws of the state or the provisions of this Code and the ordinances or resolutions of the town or by direction of the town manager. 
(Code 1984, §§ 2-4-3, 2-4-4) 
Sec. 2-168. - Code enforcement officer. 
(a)  The position of code enforcement officer is hereby established for the town. 
(b)  The town manager or an individual or individuals designated by the town manager shall serve as the code enforcement officer for the town. 
(c)  The code enforcement officer shall have the authority, in addition to other remedies and after due notice to the owner of the property or the permit holder or any other person violating any provision of this Code, the zoning ordinance of the town, the subdivision regulations of the town, the tree and landscape ordinances of the town, and any other ordinance or regulation of the town, to issue a citation to such owner of the property or the permit holder or any other person and require the presence of the violator in the municipal court. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-6; Ord. No. 440, § I, 6-19-2003) 
Secs. 2-169-2-191. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-192. - Departments established. 
    The following departments of the town are here by established: 
(1)  Administration. 
(2)  Police. 
(3)  Court services. 
(4)  Developmental services. 
(5)  Finance-Human resource. 
(6)  Public works, maintenance and sanitation. 
(7)  Recreation. 
(8)  Library. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-8) 
Secs. 2-193-2-222. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Bonds, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-38-1, 36-82-1 et seq.; budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; local government investment pool, O.C.G.A. § 36-85-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-223. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year for the town shall be from July 1 through June 30. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-7) 
State Law reference- Fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-224. - Records relating to money and fiscal transaction. 
    The finance manager or his designee shall keep a regular set of records in which he shall enter all of the town's money and fiscal transactions on every description in plain detail. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-1) 
Sec. 2-225. - Collection of taxes and other revenue and responsibility for sums collected. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the finance manager to collect all taxes levied by the mayor and council according to the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the town for the support of the town government, all sums paid as occupational taxes imposed by the town council for the privilege of conducting business within the town, or otherwise, and all sums realized under assessment levied by the town council for defraying the expenses of paving or otherwise improving the streets or sidewalks of for any other purpose. 
(b)  The finance manager shall be the financial and budget officer for the town and shall collect and receive the entire revenue of the town derived from any sources whatsoever. After such collection, the finance manager shall be responsible to the town for all sums coming into his possession. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-2) 
Sec. 2-226. - Deposit of funds; bank books. 
    The finance manager or his designee shall deposit, in a timely fashion, to the credit of the town, in the banks designated by the town council as town depositories, all monies received by him and belonging to the town. The finance manager or his designee shall keep records of such deposits made by him, with the dates thereof, which records shall always be open to the inspection of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-3) 
Sec. 2-227. - Checkbooks and receipts; preservation and numbering of original accounts or demands. 
    The finance manager or his designee shall keep a record of all checks drawn by him on funds on deposit in the banks to the credit of the town, with the names of the persons in whose favor checks are drawn and for what purpose and to which department such checks shall respectively be chargeable. He shall, at the time of drawing such checks, take receipts for all moneys paid and he keep a record of such receipts. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-4) 
Sec. 2-228. - Disbursements by check or draft. 
    All disbursements shall be made by checks signed by the town manager and countersigned by the mayor, or in the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem. No money on deposit in any bank to the credit of the town shall be withdrawn from such bank or disbursed otherwise than through checks or drafts thus drawn and signed by the town manager and countersigned by the mayor or, in the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-5) 
Sec. 2-229. - Duties regarding paid bonds, coupons. 
    The finance manager shall cancel, mutilate and preserve all town bonds and coupons that have been paid, and shall keep a record of same. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-6) 
Sec. 2-230. - Deposit and disbursement of town funds; signing of checks. 
    Any officer receiving money for the town shall deliver to the finance manager or his designee for deposit all such moneys in the banks designated by the governing body in the name of the town. Such banks shall pay out no funds so deposited except on checks that shall be signed by the town manager and countersigned by the mayor or, in the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem and shall specify to whom payable and the purpose for which drawn. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-9) 
Secs. 2-231-2-253. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 

Sec. 2-254. - Public facilities authority. 
    The mayor and council declare a need for a public facilities authority within the town, and as such the mayor and council will utilize the public facilities authority in accordance with the act passed by the state legislature. 
(Code 1984, § 6-1-21; Res. of 6-21-1979) 
State Law reference- Town of Tyrone Public Authorities Act, Ga. L. 1979, p. 3938. 
Sec. 2-255. - Industrial development authority. 
    There is a need for an industrial development authority as contemplated in O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 62 (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.) and such authority is hereby created, to be known as the Tyrone Industrial Development Authority and to operate for the purpose of developing and promoting trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities within the corporate limits of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-1-31; Res. of 4-19-1984) 
Secs. 2-256-2-273. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-274. - Adoption of program. 
    The mayor and council hereby adopts the records management program set forth in O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99, and such rules and regulations established pursuant to said statute as a basis for establishing a records management program. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-26) 
Sec. 2-275. - Committee; records management officer. 
    The records committee shall be responsible for the administration of the records management program, and the town clerk is designated as records management officer for the town. The town clerk will act for and on behalf of the town in directing and coordinating all records management matters. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-27) 
Sec. 2-276. - Committee composition and duties. 
    There is hereby created a records committee consisting of three members appointed by the mayor, which shall include the town clerk, clerk of the municipal court, and the library director, or their designees. It is the duty of the records committee to meet, at least annually, to review and recommend approval, disapproval or modification of records retention schedules to the mayor and council. Review of records retention schedules will be based upon legal, fiscal, administrative and historical retention requirements. The records management officer shall serve as a chairperson of this committee, and the final approval authority shall be the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-28) 
Sec. 2-277. - Archival depository. 
    An archival depository will be selected to store those records determined to have permanent historical value. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-29) 
Sec. 2-278. - Centralized records center. 
    A centralized records center and/or local holding area shall be established. All records not required for day-to-day office operation shall be transferred to the records center or local holding area until destroyed, in accordance with the approved records retention schedule. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-30) 
Sec. 2-279. - Destruction of records. 
    No record shall be altered or destroyed except in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-31) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulatory authority over alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage means all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, spirituous liquors, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
    Brown bag establishment means any restaurant, private club or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. 
    Brown bagging means the act of patrons entering any restaurant, private club, or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business and bringing in and consuming the patrons' own alcoholic beverage. 
    Close corporation means a domestic corporation that does not: 
(1)  Have more than five stockholders; 
(2)  Have a corporation as a shareholder; or 
(3)  Have more than one class of stock. 
    Distilled spirits or spirituous liquors means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines, whiskey, rum, gin, brandy, vodka, tequila and all other alcoholic beverages of a similar nature and with similar alcoholic content. 
    Family means includes any person related to the holder of a license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to civil law. 
    Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
    Hotel means every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential. To meet the definition of "hotel" under this chapter, the facility must have 50 or more rooms used for sleeping accommodations of such guests and one or more public dining rooms, with an adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least 25 persons, where meals are regularly served to such guests. As used in this section, the term "seating" shall mean that no more than 25 percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two individuals. All sleeping accommodations and dining rooms must be conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a restaurant in their premises, and the holder of such franchise shall be eligible for a license under the "hotel" classification. At least 55 percent of the receipts of the dining room or rooms shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring in the dining room, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other non-employee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called in the dining room from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this section, the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 4-147. Receipts for room rentals shall not be included in the calculations. 
    Individual means a natural person. 
    Interest in license means an individual is deemed to have an interest in a license if: 
(1)  He is the owner of the license. 
(2)  He is the co-owner of the license. 
(3)  He is a partner in any partnership that owns an interest in a license. 
(4)  He is a stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in any corporation and or is a stockholder in any corporation that has fewer than 25 stockholders, which owns an interest in a license. 
(5)  He shares in any income or corpus of any trust fund having any interest in a license to sell at retail. 
    License representative. If a license representative is required, the license representative shall be a resident of the State of Georgia and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis. 
    Lounge/bar means a separate room connected with, a part of, and adjacent to, a restaurant or a room located in hotels as defined herein, and which serves no food. A lounge/bar shall not be permitted to sell or serve alcoholic beverages. 
    Malt beverage. 
(1)  The term "malt beverage" means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including, but not limited to, ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, malt liquor, small beer and strong beer. 
(2)  The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    Meal or regular meal. 
(1)  The term "meal" or "regular meal" means a meal which is prepared on the premises according to the order of the patron or customer given to a waiter or waitress at the table, booth or counter area where the customer is seated and served by the waiter or waitress at said table, booth or counter area. 
(2)  The term "meal" or "regular meal" does not include food served in a specialty shop; nor food served over the counter; nor "short order meals" such as sandwiches, hot dogs or hamburgers; nor prepackaged, individual meals. 
    Minor means any person under the age of 21 years. 
    Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
    Premises/outlet means a definite enclosed area or other outside area with controlled ingress and egress wherein spirituous liquors, alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wine is sold and consumed, or sold therein by the package to be consumed elsewhere. 
    Private club. 
(1)  The term "private club" means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of the state which: 
a.  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
b.  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
c.  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
1.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
2.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
d.  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(2)  A private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall not be licensed under this chapter, nor permitted to sell or serve such beverages at all. All distance requirements as set forth in this chapter shall apply. 
    Private residence means a house, dwelling or structure wherein not less than one, nor more than two families reside and shall not include a mobile home court, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, nor a boardinghouse or roominghouse where there are five or more boarders or roomers. Any building occupied as a residence located within an area zoned for business shall not be construed as a private residence. 
    Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, but not including short order or quick or fast food shops, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room seating of at least 25 persons, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. Meals shall be served at least six days a week, with the exception of weeks including holidays, vacations and periods of renovation, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of distilled spirits, malt beverages and wines to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. As used in this definition, the term "seating" means that no more than 25 percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two individuals. As used in this definition, the term "principal business" shall mean that at least 55 percent of the receipts of such business shall come from the sale of food. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation, are all receipts of all persons laboring on the premises, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other non-employee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called to the premises from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. For purposes of this definition, the calculations of receipts for alcoholic beverages shall be made pursuant to the scheduling of pricing and the regulations contained therein as required by section 4-147. 
    Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail. 
    Retail package dealer means any person who sells malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages for consumption off the premises at retail. Such sales must be in connection with sales of other products. 
    Sales by the drink means any person who sells distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
    Wholesale or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail package dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
    Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, grapes, or other natural products by natural fermentation. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, sake, natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-2; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 3-7-2013) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 4-2. - Purpose and authority to regulate alcoholic beverages in the town. 
(a)  This chapter has been enacted in furtherance of the police powers of the town and in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sales of alcoholic beverages, to protect and preserve schools and churches, to give effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhood and property values, and to protect against the evils of concentration of ownership or control of the retail outlets for alcoholic beverages or to prevent undesirable persons from controlling the retail alcoholic beverage industry. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter are ordained under and by virtue of the authority granted by the laws of the state, O.C.G.A. title 3. To adopt all reasonable rules and regulations as may fall within the police powers of the municipality to regulate any such business; O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110, granting such municipality the full power to adopt all reasonable rules and regulations governing the conduct of any such licensee including, but not limited to, the regulation of hours of business, types of employees, and other matters which may fall within the police powers of such municipality; O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 and 3-5-42, authorizing municipal licenses for the business of manufacturing, distributing and selling malt beverages at wholesale and retail; and O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40, authorizing municipal licenses for the manufacturing, distributing and selling wine at wholesale and retail. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages and nudity on the premises are ordained by virtue of the authority granted by the constitution and laws of the United States and the state, as most recently delineated by the Supreme Court of Georgia in its decisions of Gravely vs. Bacon and SJ.T., Inc. vs. Richmond County in order to avoid the effects of criminal interests and negative effects on this community by the decreased safety and welfare of the town's citizens, the hindering of commercial growth in the town, and the deterioration of the town's economic base. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-1) 
Sec. 4-3. - Violations prohibited. 
    No person shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or assist another in evading or avoiding the licensing requirements or in the payment of the taxes and fees imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-110; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 6, 1-20-2011) 
Sec. 4-4. - Sale, possession, etc., of alcoholic beverages on which state tax or license fee not paid prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the town, possess, conceal, store or convey any wine, malt beverage, distilled spirits or other alcoholic beverages on which any tax or license fee imposed by the laws of the state or this chapter have not been paid, and any such beverages as above described that are found without a state tax stamp shall be seized as contraband and immediately delivered to the state revenue commissioner as provided by law. Any violation of this section shall be punished as provided for in section 1-7. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-29. 
Sec. 4-5. - Furnishing to, or possession by, persons under 21 years of age; proper identification; procedure where false identification tendered. 
(a)  Except as otherwise authorized by law: 
(1)  No person knowingly, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age; 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, attempt to purchase, or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage; 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage; 
(4)  No person knowingly or intentionally shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age; or 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (2), and (4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in the state; or 
(2)  At a religious ceremony. 
(c)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a)(1), (2), and (4) of this section shall not apply with respect to the possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption by a person under 21 years of age when the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(d)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not apply with respect to sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100-40-5-104. The term "proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate and shall not include any traffic citation and complaint form. 
(e)  If such conduct is not otherwise prohibited pursuant to section 4-6, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any person under 21 years of age from: 
(1)  Dispensing, serving, selling, or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment; 
(2)  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or 
(3)  Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
(f)  Testimony by any person under 21 years of age, when given in an administrative or judicial proceeding against another person for violation of any provision of this section, shall not be used in any administrative or judicial proceedings brought against such testifying person under 21 years of age. 
(g)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and to be furnished with proper identification as provided for in subsection (d) of this section in order to verify the age of such person; and the failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly. 
(h)  Any retailer or retail consumption dealer, or any person acting on behalf of such retailer or retail consumption dealer, who upon requesting proper identification from a person attempting to purchase alcoholic beverages from such retailer or retail consumption dealer pursuant to subsection (g) of this section is tendered a driver's license which indicates that such driver's license is falsified, is not the driver's license of the person presenting it, or that such person is under the age of 21 years, the person to whom said license is tendered shall be authorized to either write down the name, address, and license number or to seize and retain such driver's license and in either event shall immediately thereafter summon a law enforcement officer who shall be authorized to seize the license either at the scene or at such time as the license can be located. The procedures and rules connected with the retention of such license by the officer shall be the same as those provided for the acceptance of a driver's license as bail on arrest for traffic offenses pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 4-6. - Persons under 18 years of age not to be allowed or required to serve, sell, or take orders for alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries, or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Sec. 4-7. - Consumption prohibited; open containers. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "open container" means any container, containing alcoholic beverages, which is immediately capable of being consumed from or the seal of which has been broken. 
(b)  No person shall possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage while walking, standing or otherwise occupying any public street, road, or highway, sidewalk adjacent thereto, public park, or public parking lot. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in or on other publicly owned properties of the town is prohibited. 
(c)  No person shall possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage on the premises of any retail package licensee, including parking lots located adjacent thereto. 
(d)  No person shall enter or leave the premises of an establishment licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises with an open container of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-5) 
Sec. 4-8. - Quantity possession restricted. 
    Any distilled spirits found in the possession of any person shall have been purchased by the person for use and consumption from a lawful and authorized retailer and properly stamped. This prohibition shall not apply to possession of distilled spirits by a properly licensed wholesaler or its employees making deliveries to a properly licensed premises. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-7) 
Sec. 4-9. - Sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption only on the premises. 
    No person shall be allowed to sell, distribute, or give away alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption only on the premises except as set forth in this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-8) 
Sec. 4-10. - Establishments to be kept in orderly manner. 
    It shall be the duty of all persons or employees of persons granted a license under article III of this chapter to keep the premises clear at all times of all persons who are rowdy and noisy, who are intoxicated, or who are becoming intoxicated, who fail to keep the peace, or who do anything tending to breach peace and cause a public disturbance. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-9) 
Sec. 4-11. - Times for sales. 
(a)  No distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine shall be sold, or dispensed, or delivered, or given away to any person except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, except as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages on election days is permitted within the town. 
(c)  The sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, is expressly prohibited within the town. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-10; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 1-20-2011) 
State Law reference- Hours of sale, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 4-12. - Possession to give away in order to induce trade. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on hand for the purpose of giving the same away to induce trade, any fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt, or any similar fermented beverages, wine or distilled spirits that contain more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-12) 
Sec. 4-13. - Deliveries prohibited off premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler or distributor to make deliveries of alcoholic beverages except to a location licensed for the retail sale of such beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any retail package dealer or person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises only to make deliveries of any malt beverages and/or wine or distilled spirits to any location off the licensed premises. 
(c)  The prohibition set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to hotel in-room service that shall be regulated as set forth in section 4-148. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-13) 
Sec. 4-14. - Sales on licensed premises. 
    Only those individuals who are agents, clerks, or employees of the licensee shall handle, sell or serve alcoholic beverages on a licensed premises. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-14) 
Sec. 4-15. - Sale to intoxicated person forbidden. 
    Alcoholic beverage licensees and their agents, clerks and employees are prohibited from selling, bartering, exchanging, giving, providing, or furnishing any alcoholic beverage to any person who is in a noticeable state of intoxication. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22. 
Sec. 4-16. - Alcoholic beverage sales for cash only. 
    All sales of alcoholic beverages shall be for cash upon sale. Sales on credit are specifically prohibited except that the use of a credit card for the purchase of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine shall not be prohibited provided such retail credit card represents an unqualified obligation to pay without recourse on the part of the person, institution or agency issuing such card. The running of a tab at a licensed consumption premises shall not be prohibited provided the consumer pays all charges prior to departing the premises. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-16) 
Sec. 4-17. - Persons prohibited from interest in license. 
    No elected or appointed official or employee of the town may hold an interest in a license issued under this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-17) 
Sec. 4-18. - Sale of alcoholic beverage without town license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture for sale, or possess, for the purpose of sale, any alcoholic beverage where such person does not have a license from the town to sell or possess for sale such alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-18) 
Secs. 4-19-4-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXATION 

Sec. 4-40. - Tax on malt beverages and wine. 
(a)  In addition to the annual retail license fee required for the sale of alcoholic beverage, there is hereby levied and imposed upon all wholesale dealers selling malt beverages within the town a specific excise tax as follows: 
(1)  $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 151/2 gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 151/2 gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, the tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  An excise tax is hereby imposed on wine sold within the limits of the town at the rate of $0.22 per liter. 
(c)  Each wholesale dealer selling wine within the corporate limits shall file a report by the tenth day of each month showing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of wine, by size and type of container, constituting a beginning and ending inventory for the month, sold within the corporate limits. Each wholesale dealer shall remit to the town on the tenth day for the month succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made, the amount of excise tax due in accordance with the section. 
(d)  The excise tax provided for in this section shall be in addition to any license fee, occupation tax or other charge which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling malt beverages or wines at retail or wholesale, within the town. 
(e)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance of the tax in subsection (b) of this section shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty of ten percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of ten percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount of the remittance that would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-91) 
State Law reference- Local tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 et seq.; local tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60 et seq. 
Sec. 4-41. - Taxation of beverages by the drink. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means the license representative. 
    Drink means any distilled spirits, served for consumption on the premises. 
    Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
    Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of any distilled spirits by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration of any distilled spirits by the drink. 
    Tax means the tax imposed by this section. 
(b)  Tax levied. There is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a tax of three percent of the purchase price of every sale distilled spirits purchased by the drink in the town. 
(c)  Collection of tax; information to town. Every licensee or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax herein imposed from purchasers of any distilled spirits by the drink sold within his licensed premises. Such licensee or his agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the town to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(d)  Payment of tax by licensee; collection fee. 
(1)  Due date of taxes. All taxes collected by any licensee or agent hereunder shall be due and payable to the town on or before the tenth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as set forth herein. 
(2)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; execution. On or before the tenth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the town clerk, in such form as the town may prescribe, by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of tax hereunder. 
(3)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person shall be required to file the return with the town clerk. 
(4)  Collection fee allowed licensees or agents. Licensees or agents collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction shall be the same under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951 (Ga. Laws, p. 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(e)  Deficiency determinations. 
(1)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the town clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the town by any person, the town clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one, or more than one, monthly period. 
(2)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(3)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the town clerk may offset overpayments; for a period or periods, against underpayments; for another period or periods, against underpayments; for another period or periods, against penalties; and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on overpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(4)  Penalty; negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to gross negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of such deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(5)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency determination has been made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provision of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto, in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(6)  Notice of town clerk's determination; service of. The town clerk, or his designated representative, shall give to the licensee written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail, if by mail such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his address as it appears in the records of the town clerk. In the case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(7)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three year's after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(f)  Determination if no return made. 
(1)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return, the town clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in the town which is subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information that is or may come into the possession of the town clerk. Upon the basis of tins estimate, the town clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the town, adding to the sum thus determined, a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(2)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest. In making a determination, the town clerk may offset overpayments for a period or periods against the interest, penalties or underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(3)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payments. 
(4)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in subsection (f)(1) of this section. 
(5)  Giving of notice; manner of service. Promptly after making his determination, the town clerk shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(g)  Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. Any person who fails to pay the tax herein imposed to the town or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the town within the time required, shall pay a penalty in the amount of 15 percent of the tax plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof. 
(h)  Administration; enforcement; rules; records; confidentiality of reports. 
(1)  Authority of the town clerk. The town clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(2)  Rules and regulations. The town clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the town and the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(3)  Records required from licensee; form. Every licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the town shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the town clerk may require. 
(4)  Examination of records; audits. The town clerk or any person authorized in writing by the town may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(5)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article, the town clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to the sales of distilled spirits which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the town clerk and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the date or dates of such sales, and such information as the town clerk may require. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-92) 
State Law reference- Tax authorized, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-130, 3-7-60. 
Secs. 4-42-4-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSES 

Sec. 4-71. - License required to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued by the town clerk. The fees for such licenses shall be as set forth annually by the mayor and council. A table of said fees shall be maintained by the town clerk. 
(b)  All licenses issued herein shall constitute a mere grant of a privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this ordinance, the charter, related ordinances, this Code, and the Constitution, laws and regulations of the state and the United States of America applicable to such business. 
(c)  All licenses issued under this article shall have printed on the face the following words: 
    "THIS LICENSE IS A PRIVILEGE AND IS SUBJECT TO BEING REVOKED AND ANNULLED BY THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF TYRONE AND IS SUBJECT TO LAWS, ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS HEREAFTER ADOPTED." 
(d)  Both the licensee or license representative shall be the authorized and duly constituted agent for service of all notices and processes required to be served on or given hereunder for any action or proceeding or uses of any nature whatsoever permitted under the provisions of the ordinance or under any other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-21; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 2, 1-20-2011) 
State Law reference- Local alcoholic beverage license fees, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-50, 3-5-43. 
Sec. 4-72. - Contents of application for license. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license under this article for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall apply to the town council upon forms to be prepared and provided by the town clerk and shall be considered only at the first regular monthly meeting of the town council. Such application shall state: 
(1)  The location of the proposed business; 
(2)  The nature and character of the proposed business; 
(3)  If the business is to be operated by an individual, the name and address of that individual; 
(4)  If the business is to be operated by a partnership, the name and address of all general partners, the licensee and the license representative; 
(5)  If the business is to be operated by a close corporation, the names and addresses of all officers, directors, stockholders, licensee and license representative; 
(6)  If the business is to be operated by a corporation, other than a close corporation, the name of the corporation, the address of the corporate office, the name and address of the registered agent for service of process for the corporation, and the name and address of the licensee and license representative; and 
(7)  Such other appropriate information as may be required by the town council. 
(b)  The truth of the contents of an application for a license shall be sworn to by the licensee and the license representative. 
(c)  The licensee shall also file with the clerk a completed state department of revenue alcohol tax and control unit form ATT-17, which has been filed with the state. 
(d)  The application, when filed with the town clerk, shall be accompanied by a processing and investigation fee of $350.00. Such fee shall cover costs of investigating the license applicant and shall be credited against the first annual license fee upon grant of a license. Said processing fee will not be refunded if the requested license is not granted. 
(e)  When the license is approved, the license fee must be paid by certified check or cash within 30 days and prior to the issuance of the license. 
(f)  If the person applying fails to receive a license from the state, any license fees in excess of the processing and investigative fees paid to the town shall be refunded. 
(g)  Only one application form and accompanying documents must be filed for each business premises. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-22) 
Sec. 4-73. - Notice of application advertisement. 
(a)  All persons applying for a license under the terms of this article shall give notice of that application by placing a notice in the town legal organ for two consecutive weeks prior to the week when the application shall be heard by the town council. An affidavit from the publisher of said legal organ shall be filed with the town clerk prior to the hearing. 
(b)  Said notice shall contain the location of the proposed business, names of all persons as they appear on the application as required by section 4-72, and the date and time the town council will hear the application. The advertisement shall be the type used for legal ads in the legal organ of the town, and the notice referred to shall be in the following form: 
    NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR RETAIL LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
    ____________ has/have made application to the Council of the Town of Tyrone for a retail license to sell alcoholic beverages at the following location. The application will be heard by Town Council at a public hearing to be held at ____________ o'clock p.m. on the day of ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
    Signed ____________ 
    Licensee 
Note: Names of the individual, general partners, corporation, licensee and license representative must be shown. 
(c)  Those applying for a license shall place signs upon the location of the proposed business. Said signs shall read as follows: 
    "ALCOHOL BEVERAGE LICENSE APPLIED FOR. HEARING BEFORE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF TYRONE, GA, ON THE ____________ DAY OF ____________ , 20 ____________ ." 
(d)  The town council shall post the signs described in subsection (c) of this section on the location of the proposed business for two weeks prior to the week of the hearing. Each sign shall be obtained from the town, and the applicant shall pay a fee of $25.00 per sign. Each sign shall face toward all public or private property adjoining the proposed location. Such signs shall be placed where they can be easily seen from all public or private property adjoining the proposed location. An affidavit from the applicant certifying posting shall be filed with the town clerk prior to the hearing. 
(e)  This subsection does not apply when application is made for a license transfer pursuant to section 4-92. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-30) 
Sec. 4-74. - Supporting documents to be filed with application. 
    Those applying for a license shall submit in support of the application for license the following documents: 
(1)  A certificate from a state registered land surveyor showing a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises and the shortest straight line distance from the closest point of the licensed premises to the nearest property line of any residence, church building, alcoholic treatment center building, school building, educational building, school, college building, college campus, or other establishments engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages located within a radius of 600 feet of the premises. 
(2)  The affidavit of each person whose name appears on an application for a license, pursuant to section 4-72, swearing that said person has not, within five years prior to the date of the application, been convicted of nor entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony, misdemeanor, or other charge relating to the sale, manufacture, distribution, taxability, possession or use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs including the offense of driving a motor vehicle under the influence of alcohol or drugs; has not entered a guilty plea or been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor of a crime opposed to decency and morality. 
(3)  A copy of a deed showing the applicant to be the owner of the premises for which the license is sought or a copy of a lease showing any interest the owner of the premises has in the business for which the license is sought. 
(4)  A certificate of the chief of police of the town certifying that each person, named in an application pursuant to section 4-72, has been investigated and found not to have been convicted of nor to have entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, misdemeanor or other charge relating to the sale, manufacture, distribution, taxability, possession or use of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs within five years prior to the date of the application for license; has not entered a guilty plea or been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor of a crime opposed to decency and morality. For those applicants, who, within the last five-year period, have resided or do reside in a state other than Georgia, the applicant must furnish a certified copy of a driver history and criminal background history from the state or states in which he has resided or resides to the chief of police. 
(5)  If the same person is serving as the licensee and the license representative, he shall submit an affidavit certifying that he is at least 21 years of age, a resident of the State of Georgia and a manager of the business. 
(6)  If the licensee is not the license representative, an affidavit from the license representative certifying that he is at least 21 years of age, a resident of the State of Georgia and a manager of the business. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-23; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 2, 3-7-2013) 
Sec. 4-75. - Required citizenship. 
    No license under this article shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States or a permanent resident alien. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements of this section shall apply to all partners. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-24) 
Sec. 4-76. - Required residency; license representative. 
    If the licensee is not a resident of the State of Georgia, the licensee must designate a license representative who shall be a resident of the State of Georgia and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis. 
(Ord. No. 2013-06, § 3, 3-7-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-06, § 3, adopted Mar. 7, 2013, repealed former § 4-76, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1984, § 2-8-25. 
Sec. 4-77. - Misleading or omitted information. 
    Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission left out of an original application for a license under this article shall be cause for the denial thereof. If any license has been granted under these circumstances, there shall be cause for revocation of same. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-26) 
Sec. 4-78. - Compliance with zoning regulations. 
(a)  No license under this article shall be issued unless the location meets currently applicable provisions of the zoning ordinances of the town as amended; further, no license shall be issued unless the location is within the commercial or industrial zoning districts. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to those business establishments holding a valid retail package license for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, provided that such license remains current and does not become and remain inactive for a period exceeding 12 months from the date last issued. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-27) 
Sec. 4-79. - Payment of taxes and other debts to town. 
    The town clerk shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have any outstanding taxes, special assessments, unpaid utilities or any other monies owed to the town. No license shall be issued, renewed or considered for issuance to an applicant that has any outstanding payments to the town. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-28) 
Sec. 4-80. - No licenses issued within prohibited distances. 
(a)  No license shall be issued pursuant to this article for the sale of any alcoholic beverages on premises located within: 
(1)  300 feet of a branch of a public library; 
(2)  300 feet of any church or residence in any residential district other than the AR zoning district; except that for a consumption on premises only pouring license, the distance requirement shall be 250 feet of any residence in any residential district other than the AR zoning district; 
(3)  600 feet of any school building, school grounds or college campus; 
(4)  300 feet of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state, the county, or the town; 
(5)  600 feet of any structure used as a residence on property that is zoned AR. 
(b)  Schools applicable. The schools or colleges referred to herein shall include only such state, county, town, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state, and shall not include private schools or colleges wherein only specialized subjects, such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
(c)  Church applicable. Church referred to herein shall include only such churches which maintain a permanent place of public religious worship, and include only those church-owned properties upon which such activities take place. 
(d)  Method of measuring. The distances set out in subsections (a)(1) through (4) of this section shall be measured from the closest point of the licensed premises to the nearest property line of the residence, church, school, college campus, library or treatment center by the shortest straight line; provided, however, that the distance set out in subsection (a)(5) of this section shall be measured from the closest point of the licensed premises to the nearest point of the structure used as a residence. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to those business establishments holding a valid pouring or on-premises consumption license for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived provided that such license remains current and does not become and remain inactive for a period exceeding 12 months from the date last issued. The provisions of this section shall apply to such business establishments seeking a license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises only. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-29; Ord. No. 2013-21, § 1, 11-7-2013) 
State Law reference- Location restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 4-81. - Personal interests; restrictions on number of licenses. 
(a)  No person, or member of his family, shall own, hold or control any interest in more than: 
(1)  One license to sell wine at retail in the town; 
(2)  Two licenses to sell malt beverages at retail in the town; 
(3)  Two combined licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in the town; 
(4)  One license to operate as a retail consumption dealer or retail package dealer if said person also has an interest in a license to operate as a wholesale dealer in the town. 
(b)  It is provided that no more than a total of two licenses shall be issued for the sale of any type of alcoholic beverages to any one person or member of his family. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-36) 
Sec. 4-82. - Combining retail and retail consumption licenses. 
(a)  No premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall hold a license for, or allow the retail consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No retail package license shall be issued for, or in connection with, any restaurant, cafe or eating-place. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-37) 
Sec. 4-83. - Annexed areas; continuance of business. 
    Where a retail alcoholic beverage license exists in an area outside the town limits, upon annexation of such area, the same may be continued, subject to all restrictions and requirements of this article except section 4-79. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-38) 
Sec. 4-84. - Standards to be applied in granting licenses; withdrawal of application. 
(a)  The standards to be applied by the mayor and council, acting in its discretion to grant or deny a license, shall include whether, in the best judgment of the mayor and council, the applicant, based on all information obtained in the application process, possesses the qualities of sound judgment and discretion necessary for one who dispenses alcoholic beverages to the public generally. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing standards, should any applicant fail to attend a public hearing before the mayor and council regarding a new license, a request to transfer a license, a request to change a license or a license representative, or a request to relocate the business of a license, the mayor and council may consider such application or request to have been withdrawn the applicant. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-40; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 4, 1-20-2011) 
Sec. 4-85. - Applicants meeting standards will be granted license; reason for denial to be given in writing. 
(a)  All applicants for a license meeting the ascertainable standards of this article will be granted the license or licenses requested, upon the hearing; and the council in applying the facts to the licensing criteria will act in a judicial capacity. 
(b)  Whenever an application for license is denied by the town council the reasons for such denial shall be stated in writing and entered upon the minutes. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-41) 
Sec. 4-86. - Persons who are not entitled to a license. 
    It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages to: 
(1)  A person who has entered a plea of nolo contendere within a five-year period prior to the date of application for a license, entered a guilty plea or been convicted of a felony, or of a crime opposed to decency and morality, or who has entered a plea of nolo contendere within a five-year period prior to the date of application for a license, entered a guilty plea or been convicted of a crime involving violation of the ordinances of the town relating to the use, sale, manufacture, distribution, taxability or possession of beer, wine or liquor or violations of the laws of the state and federal government pertaining to the manufacture, possession, transportation, use, or sale of beer, wine or intoxicating liquors, or taxability thereof. 
(2)  A person whose license under this article has been revoked for cause or who has had a license under this article revoked for cause. 
(3)  A person whose place or business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent qualifies as the license representative. 
(4)  Any law enforcement officer and officer or employee of the town or county. 
(5)  Any person who is not eligible for a state alcoholic beverage license. 
Code 1984, § 2-8-42) 
Sec. 4-87. - Issuance of license by town clerk. 
(a)  Upon approval by the mayor and council of the application for license and the timely payment of the license fee, the town clerk shall issue the appropriate license for the year in which said approval was granted. 
(b)  If issued to a corporation, said license shall be issued in the name of said corporation, the licensee and the license representative. 
(c)  If issued to a partnership, said license shall be issued in the name of all general partners, the licensee and the license representative. 
(d)  If issued to an individual, said license shall be issued to that individual as licensee and the license representative. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-31; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 3, 1-20-2011) 
Sec. 4-88. - Payment of license fee; pro-rated. 
(a)  For any new license granted hereunder prior to June 30 of each year, the licensee shall pay the full annual license fee. 
(b)  For any new license granted hereunder subsequent to July 1 of each year, the license fee shall be reduced by one-half. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-32) 
Sec. 4-89. - Completion of proposed licensed premises; additions to licensed premises. 
(a)  Prior to the construction, renovation or completion of a licensed premises, the applicant may obtain a license only if plans for the proposed premises comply with applicable provisions of this article; however, no sales of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed upon said premises until they are completed according to the plans submitted and unless all other provisions of this article are complied with. 
(b)  Prior to the beginning of construction of any addition to a licensed premises, the licensee shall submit to the town clerk, a new survey and plans showing the location and dimensions of the addition to the licensed premises. Following completion of the addition, the licensee shall furnish a certificate from the surveyor stating that the completed addition to the licensed premises is as shown on the plat previously submitted. If any addition to the licensed premises violates any provisions of this article, the license granted hereunder shall be automatically canceled and all fees forfeited. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-34) 
Sec. 4-90. - Time limit for commencement of business in licensed establishment; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of licenses hereunder must within six months after the issuance of said license open the establishment referred to in said license. If said license holder fails to open the licensed establishment or receive a time extension from the town council within said six-month period the license shall be canceled and all fees forfeited. 
(b)  Any holder of a license who, after beginning operation, ceases to operate the business for a three-month period automatically forfeits his license, and said license shall be automatically canceled and all fees forfeited. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-35) 
Sec. 4-91. - Renewal of licenses by town clerk. 
    All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year of issue. Licenses may be renewed as herein set forth: 
(1)  The town clerk shall send a letter to all license holders on or before October 1 of each year to remind said license holders of the renewal deadline for the subsequent year. 
(2)  The licensee shall file a renewal application form with the town clerk on or before November 1 of each year. 
(3)  The application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall report on the licensee's activity, if any, and upon activity at the location of the licensed business, if any, during the year. 
(4)  If the chief reports any activity that constitutes probable cause for not renewing a license, the renewal shall not be made by the town clerk. The term "due cause" shall consist of any violation as set forth in section 4-93. 
(5)  Written notice of the reason or reasons for such nonrenewal shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee at the licensed premises or mailed to the address shown on the renewal application. Licensee shall have ten days from the date of the written notice to request a public hearing before the town council, as provided for in section 4-93. 
(6)  Provided that due cause does not exist for not renewing the license, the town clerk shall issue the renewal license upon payment of the annual license fee by the licensee on or before the last business day in November preceding the year for which the license is sought. 
(7)  Any change in the name of the licensee or license representative shall require the filing of the application and payment of the fee set forth in section 4-72(d). 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-33) 
Sec. 4-92. - License transfers, change licensee, or license representative or relocation of business. 
(a)  Retail alcoholic beverage licenses may be transferred from one owner to another with the approval of the town clerk, provided: 
(1)  The business has existed at the same location and licenses have not been transferred for more than one year. 
(2)  All existing alcoholic beverage licenses issued to the existing owner for that location shall be transferred. 
(3)  All provisions of section 4-72 shall be completed by the new owner, except for subsection (a), provided such information was previously supplied by the existing owner or previous owners and has not changed. 
(4)  A transfer fee in the amount of $100.00 is paid to the town clerk upon filing of the request. 
(b)  Requests for a change in licensee or license representative. 
(1)  All requests for a change in licensee or license representative must be approved by the town clerk and shall provide all appropriate information or supporting documents required under sections 4-72 and 4-74 as outlined in an approved form to be supplied by the town clerk for that purpose. 
(2)  A fee in the amount of $100.00 is to be paid to the town clerk upon the filing of the request. 
(c)  So long as there is no change in ownership, a temporary license representative may be appointed by the licensee for a period not to exceed 30 days, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The temporary license representative makes application by providing all appropriate information or supporting documents required under sections 4-72 and 4-74 as outlined in an approved form to be supplied by the town clerk for this purpose; 
(2)  The application is approved by the town clerk prior to the issuance of an amended license; 
(3)  There shall be no residence requirement for a temporary license representative; 
(4)  There shall be no extension of the 30-day period of operation or any temporary license representative, without approval of the town clerk; and 
(5)  No fee shall be required at the time of filing the application for a temporary license representative provided that within ten calendar days a request for a change in the license representative is filed in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  All business relocations must be approved by the town clerk and the licensee and license representative shall provide all appropriate information and supporting documents as required under sections 4-72 and 4-74. Requirements of section 4-73 relating to advertising must be met. Additional license fees shall not be required provided there is no change in the named licensee or license representative. 
(e)  Any violation of this section shall constitute due cause for probation, suspension or revocation of the license or licenses granted by the council. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-39) 
Sec. 4-93. - Grounds for suspension or revocation; notice; hearing; bond for reinstatement. 
(a)  Any license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the town may be suspended, revoked, or placed on probation for due cause as hereinafter defined. The term "due cause," for purposes of this section, shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Arrest or conviction (to include a plea of nolo contendere) by local, state or federal authorities of the licensee, license representative or any employees of the licensee for any felony, or any misdemeanor of a crime opposed to decency and morality, or any law, regulation or ordinance involving beverage alcohol, gambling, or tax law violations; 
(2)  Citations issued by local, state or federal authorities to the licensee, license representative or any employees of the licensee for violations of any part of this ordinance or any regulation pertaining to state or federal licensing of the possession, sale or distribution of beverage alcohol; 
(3)  Suspension or revocation of any state license required as condition for the possession, sale or distribution of beverage alcohol; 
(4)  Material falsification of any fact given in application for a license issued under this article or bearing upon the licensee's qualification therefor; any act which may be construed as a subterfuge in an effort to circumvent any of the qualifications for a license under this article shall be deemed a violation of the requirement attempted to be circumvented; 
(5)  The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report and maintain any records or remit or pay any renewal license fee imposed, sales taxes, or excise taxes required under the town ordinances; 
(6)  Any other factors known to the licensing authority whereby it is objectively shown the licensee, by reason of business experience, financial standing, trade association, personal association, record of arrests, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is licensed in conformity with federal, state or local laws. 
With respect to this subsection, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the volatile act was done with the knowledge or consent of the licensee; provided, however, that such presumption may be rebutted only by evidence which precludes every other reasonable hypothesis save that such licensee did not know, assist or aide in such occurrence, or in the exercise of full diligence could not have discovered or prevented such activity. 
(b)  Action to suspend, revoke, or place a licensee on probation shall be commenced by the town clerk making written recommendation to the town council, and giving written notice to the licensee, either by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service upon the licensee or his agent at the licensed location, stating the grounds therefor, and the date, time and place such matter will be heard by the town council. 
Notice shall be served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Included in the notice shall be an advisement of the licensee's right to be heard before the council. Any licensee requiring subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses or documents at the hearing shall file a written request with the town manager at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued for good cause only. 
(c)  All final decisions to suspend, revoke, or place a license on probation shall be made by the town council, in writing with the reasons therefor stated. Notice of a final decision shall be given the licensee with three business days. 
(d)  Hearings shall only be as formal as necessary to preserve order and shall be compatible with the principles of justice. The town attorney or his designee shall present the town's case and bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that due cause exists to suspend or revoke the license. The licensee may be represented by legal counsel, may confront and cross-examine witnesses, and shall have the right to call witnesses and present evidence in his behalf. A hearing record shall be maintained by the town; however, either party may arrange for transcription by a court reporter at his sole expense. Hearings shall be presided over by the mayor who shall preserve order and rule upon all matters of evidence. Irrelevant, immaterial and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(e)  Upon the second suspension, revocation, or probation of a license within any five-year period, as a prerequisite or reinstatement or reissuance of the license, the licensee, in addition to the requisite fees assessed under this article, shall post a surety bond, payable to the town, in the amount of $5,000.00, conditioned upon the licensee maintaining the operation for which he is licensed in conformity with all federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. Upon any subsequent act giving due cause for suspension, revocation, or probation of the license, the bond shall be forfeited and license revoked. 
(f)  Appeals to the mayor and council regarding the denial of a license by the town clerk pursuant to section 4-85 shall be heard utilizing the procedures set forth in this section. 
(g)  Appeals from an action by the mayor and council to affirm the decision of the town administrator to deny a license or to revoke or suspend a license pursuant to this article shall be by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-100) 
Sec. 4-94. - Licensee. 
    The licensee for all businesses shall be at least 21 years of age and: 
(1)  If the business is to be operated by an individual, the licensee shall be that individual. 
(2)  If the business is to be operated by a partnership, the licensee shall be an individual who is a partner; or, if all partners are non-individuals, then the licensee shall be an individual who is an officer of any corporation which is a partner, or, an individual who is an officer, manager or agent of any unincorporated entity which is a partner. 
(3)  If the business is to be operated by a corporation, the licensee shall be an officer of the corporation. 
(4)  If the licensee is a resident of the State of Georgia and a manager of the business who is on the premises on a regular basis, the licensee may also be the license representative of the business. If not, a license representative shall be named in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-2; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 4, 3-7-2013) 
Secs. 4-95-4-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 4-117. - Physical requirements of applicant's premises. 
(a)  No license shall be granted to a retailer under the provision of this article, unless the front entrance to the premises is clearly visible from a public street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply where the licensee has a location in a shopping center or multiple-story business building. 
(b)  Where a building in which a retailer intends to operate under the provisions of this article is at the time of the application for such license not in existence or not yet completed, the license may be issued for such location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this article. 
(c)  No sales shall be made from such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with said plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-51) 
Sec. 4-118. - Sanitary regulations, immoral conduct, etc.; inspection and report by fire department. 
(a)  All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity, or public indecency on the premises. 
(b)  The fire department shall, upon request of the town clerk, inspect such premises and report its findings to the town clerk. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times with all fire regulations of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-52) 
Sec. 4-119. - Interior visibility required. 
    No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing that prevents a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or opening of any door of any retail package alcoholic beverage store, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-53) 
Sec. 4-120. - Lighted electric advertising signs on wine or malt beverage establishments. 
    No licensee operating premises wherein package wine or malt beverages are sold shall operate lighted electrical signs or devices advertising such beverages except during the hours that such products are being offered for sale to the public. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-54) 
Sec. 4-121. - Slot machines, etc.; prohibited on premises. 
(a)  Except as otherwise permitted in this section, no retail licensee shall permit on such licensee's premises any slot machines, video games, mechanical music boxes, pinball machines or coin-operated amusement machines of any kind or character. 
(b)  Convenience stores, the primary purpose of which is the sale of food items, may utilize coin-operated amusement devices as provided by the section of this Code regarding the regulation and licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, provided all such machines shall be located in a separate room from the room in which package alcoholic beverages are stored or offered for sale. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-55) 
Sec. 4-122. - Sale in poolrooms and billiard parlors prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell package beer, malt, beverages and wine in poolrooms or billiard parlors. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-56) 
Sec. 4-123. - Sunday sales. 
    Retail dealers in malt beverages or wine shall be permitted to make package sales of malt beverages and wine on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2011-14, § 1, 12-1-2011) 
Secs. 4-124-4-142. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SALES BY THE DRINK[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Sales of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4-143. - Licenses. 
    Any type of alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises may be granted only to a restaurant, a private club, or a hotel/motel as defined under section 4-1. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-70) 
State Law reference- Licenses for sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110. 
Sec. 4-144. - Sale of food. 
    In order for an establishment to qualify for a pouring license for distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises, only, as a restaurant, private club or restaurant in a hotel, such establishment must have at least 55 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises. For this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other nonfood or nonalcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-71) 
Sec. 4-145. - Standards to determine sleeping or seating capacity; inspections; compliance with fire requirements. 
    Where a minimum sleeping or seating capacity is prescribed in this article, the same shall be judged by existing ordinances of the town, county or state regulations or by reasonable standards. The fire department, shall, upon request of the town clerk, inspect such premises and report its findings to the town clerk. All premises licensed hereunder shall conform at all times to all fire regulations of the town, county, and state. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-72) 
Sec. 4-146. - Sales outside of licensed premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any sale of alcoholic beverages to be made outside of the premises licensed for such sale. If sales are to be made outside of the building; such as a covered porch, or sidewalk immediately in front of, or the side of, the premises authorized to sell alcoholic beverages, the area must be adequately enclosed by a permanent fence at least three feet high with access to and an exit from a portal into and out of the building only. Sales are to be made to seated patrons only. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-73) 
Sec. 4-147. - Pricing. 
(a)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the prices charged for all alcoholic beverages to be served and consumed on each licensed establishment or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. The schedule of prices shall be posted in a conspicuous manner as to be in view of the paying public, and the schedule shall be effective for not less than one day. 
(b)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons. 
(2)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during that business day, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(6)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during that business day. 
(7)  Encourage or permit on the licensed establishment any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(8)  Issue to any customer any coupon, receipt, ticket or other item purporting to authorize the receipt of any free or reduced-price alcoholic beverage. 
(9)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any patron any alcoholic beverage if said patron has in such patron's possession or control any unconsumed alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed establishment, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time provided all patrons or customers are allowed equal access to such free food or entertainment. No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests. No provision of this section shall prohibit a licensee from offering packages in which alcoholic beverages and food or lodging are offered as a unit; provided the value of the alcoholic beverage is established at a uniform level for each package so offered. And that the alcoholic beverage delivered as part of the package does not exceed the package allowance, and the tax due on the package allowance is remitted in full to the town for each package sold. 
(e)  No hotel or motel maintaining more than one licensed establishment upon its premises shall allow the promotion of one of its licensed establishments over another on the basis of prices for alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  For the purposes of this section, the term "business day" means that period running from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday and Sunday from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-74) 
Sec. 4-148. - Hotel in-room service. 
    Licenses obtained by hotels shall include the right to serve alcoholic beverages by the drink to registered guests in their hotel rooms as well as to deliver alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages to registered guests' rooms when such beverages have been ordered by such guests and/or to provide a cabinet or other facility in a hotel guest's room which contains alcoholic beverages for which licensed, and which is provided upon written request of the guest, and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest, and for which the sale of the alcoholic beverages contained therein is final at the time requested, except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused and unopened portion. All alcoholic beverages sold or distributed under this section shall be obtained by the hotel directly from a licensed wholesaler or distributor and shall be stored on the premises of the hotel until sold or served. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-75) 
State Law reference- Sales in hotels and motels, O.C.G.A. § 3-9-10 et seq. 
Sec. 4-149. - Maintenance of premises; improper conduct; nudity prohibited. 
(a)  All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with provisions and regulations of the town, county and state governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage establishment means any restaurant holding a license under this article for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
    Simulate means to counterfeit, feign, imitate, or pretend in such a manner that a reasonable observer could be led to believe that the actual act is or may be occurring. 
    Substantially nude means dressed or undressed in a manner so as to plainly expose to view any portion of a male's or female's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals, or any portion of the female breasts below the top of the areola. 
(c)  No person shall appear substantially nude in any alcoholic beverage establishment, and no owner or manager of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall permit any person to appear substantially nude on the licensed premises. 
(d)  No owner or manager of an alcoholic beverage establishment shall permit any person to perform acts of, or acts that, constitute or simulate: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(2)  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; provided that random acts of patrons or employees, whose actions do not constitute actions taken pursuant to encouragement or acquiescence of the management of the establishment and are not for the purposes of entertainment, promotion, publicity, or notoriety shall not constitute violations of this section. 
(e)  The restrictions of subsections (c) and (d) of this section shall apply only to persons physically present on the licensed premises, and shall apply regardless of whether such persons are categorized as owners, agents, employees, patrons, and independent contractors or otherwise. 
(f)  In addition to prosecution of any person for violation of this section, the alcoholic beverage license of any premises upon which a violation of this section occurs shall be subject to suspension or revocation. Any such revocation or suspension action shall follow the procedures outlined in section 4-93. Any conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the municipal court to a charge of violation of this section shall be admissible in a license suspension or revocation proceeding. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-76) 
Sec. 4-150. - Reports of sales to be made quarterly; suspension, revocation. 
(a)  Licensees shall, within 30 days following the end of each quarter, file with the town clerk a report sworn to by the licensee, setting forth gross sales of the licensee for the quarter, sales of food and nonalcoholic beverages, and sales of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Should the total sales from food and nonalcoholic beverages reported by any licensee for consumption on the premises not exceed those from the sale of all alcoholic beverages as required by this ordinance for any two consecutive reporting periods, the license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor and council after a hearing as provided for in section 4-93. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-77) 
Sec. 4-151. - Additional certification. 
    In addition to the reporting requirements detailed in section 4-150, the town clerk may require that the licensee furnish a statement from a certified public accountant that reports the percentage of the licensee's total sales derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages sold on the premises compared to the sale of all alcoholic beverages sold on the premises in the licensee's most recent reporting period. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-78) 
Sec. 4-152. - Areas of sales. 
    All restaurants and private club eating areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that those inside the premises may view them. The sale of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room that is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties that have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Room service to hotel guests in their hotel rooms, provided a property licensed restaurant or supper club is located on the premises; and 
(3)  Private clubs. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-79) 
Sec. 4-153. - Employment. 
    No licensee shall knowingly employ on any licensed premises, in any capacity whatsoever, including performers, dancers, entertainers, and musicians, any person who has been convicted within the preceding ten years of any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-80) 
Sec. 4-154. - Employee prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of a restaurant, or private club to engage in the following: 
(1)  Dance or sit with customers on the premises while on duty status, including breaks; 
(2)  Allow any customer to purchase food or drink, alcoholic or nonalcoholic, for an employee while on duty status, including break periods; 
(3)  For an employee to consume or simulate the consumption of any alcoholic beverage while on duty status at the premises of his employer, including breaks; and 
(4)  Require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit at the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or non-alcoholic; or money with which to purchase same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manager to solicit for himself, or for any other, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "employee" shall also apply to performers, dancers, entertainers, musicians engaged in temporary work, as well as regular employees. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the term "breaks" or "break periods" is defined as that period of time that the employee is off duty but remains upon the premises of the licensed establishment awaiting to go back on duty. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-81) 
Sec. 4-155. - Dancing on the premises. 
    Patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on the premises sales only where: 
(1)  Adequate space exists; 
(2)  All fire and safety regulations are met; and 
(3)  Prior approval of the chief of police and the chief of fire department has been obtained. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-82) 
Sec. 4-156. - Consumption on the premises only. 
(a)  All distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine sold by the drink for consumption on the premises shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises. Each licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person so removes any alcoholic beverages from the premises in any type of container. 
(b)  Each consumption-on-the-premises licensee shall post in a prominent place at each exit from the licensed premises a sign in substantially the following form: 
    "IT IS A VIOLATION OF TOWN ORDINANCE TO TAKE ANY TYPE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE FROM THIS OUTLET." 
Such sign shall be uniform letters not less than one inch in height. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-83) 
Sec. 4-157. - Exterior advertisement of alcoholic beverages. 
    No advertising of alcoholic beverages shall be published or disseminated in the town which: 
(1)  Contains any statement, design, or pretrial representation which falsely implies that the product has been endorsed, made, or used by, or provided for, or under the supervision of or in association with the specifications of any religious organization, the town, or any other local governmental entity. 
(2)  Contains any reference, directly or indirectly, which falsely implies an endorsement by, or relationship with, any school, college or university. 
(3)  Is directed to, or promotes in any way, the sale of alcoholic beverages to persons under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages in the state. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-84) 
Sec. 4-158. - Lighted electric advertising signs on distilled spirits, wine or malt beverage establishments. 
    No licensee operating premises wherein distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages are sold by the drink shall operate lighted electrical signs or devices advertising such beverages except during the hours that such products are being offered for sale to the public. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-85) 
Sec. 4-159. - Sale in poolrooms and billiard parlors; minors prohibited if sold. 
    It shall be lawful to sell beer, malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises, only, in poolrooms or billiard parlors provided such poolrooms or billiard parlors also meet the requirements of a restaurant as defined in this chapter; however, in any poolroom or billiard parlor where beer, wine or malt beverages are sold it shall be unlawful for the proprietor or operator to allow anyone under the age of 18 years to patronize such business establishment unless accompanied by a parent or guardian or who possess a written permission from a parent or guardian, which permit is witnessed by a notary public with seal. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-86) 
Sec. 4-160. - Brown bagging; brown bag establishments. 
    Brown bagging and brown bag establishments as defined in this chapter shall be prohibited within the town. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-87) 
Sec. 4-161. - Lounges; bars prohibited. 
    Lounges or bars as defined in this chapter shall be prohibited within the town. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-88) 
Sec. 4-162. - Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
    Sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 5(2-8-89), 1-20-2011) 
State Law reference- Sunday sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7. 
Sec. 4-163. - Alcoholic beverage handling permits. 
(a)  Any person, manager, or employee who is responsible to sell, serve, deliver, dispense, or take orders for alcoholic beverages in restaurants, hotels, conference centers, lounges, stores or any other business entity, or who handles alcoholic beverages in package stores, or who works as a security employee in any on-premises consumption or package store, whether or not such person is contracted or an employee of such package store or on-premises consumption location, shall apply to the town police department for an alcoholic beverage handling permit or have a valid server's permit issued from another law enforcement jurisdiction within the county. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed establishment to hire any person, or to permit any person to work or assist in any capacity to sell, serve, deliver, dispense or take orders for alcoholic beverages until such person has procured a town alcoholic beverage handling permit or have a valid server's permit issued from another law enforcement jurisdiction within the county. 
(c)  Alcoholic beverage handling permits shall not be issued to any person who has pled guilty to, or has been convicted of a violation of the provisions of this chapter, or any similar provisions from any other jurisdiction or state law, or convicted of a violation of any offense relating to the manufacture, sale or use of alcoholic beverages, to include driving under the influence of alcohol, within the preceding two years. For the purpose of this section, an indictment, plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere shall constitute a violation. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverage handling permits shall not be issued to any person who has pled guilty to or has been convicted of, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any misdemeanor or felony relating to illegal gambling, soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegal drugs/narcotics, theft, crimes of violence, sexual offenses, or any other crime opposed to the decency, morality, or public welfare (including identity and credit card fraud) within the previous five years from the date of their application for a handling permit. Additionally, alcoholic beverage handling permits will not be issued to any person who is serving probation for a felony sentence involving any felony described above. 
(e)  Town alcoholic beverage handling permits will be issued by the town police department. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed establishment employee to sell, serve, deliver, dispense or take orders for alcoholic beverages within the town limits without having been issued a valid alcoholic beverage handling permit from the chief of police or a valid server's permit from another law enforcement jurisdiction within the county. 
(1)  Prior to selling, serving, delivering, dispensing or taking orders for alcoholic beverages, employees who work for a licensed establishment may be fingerprinted, and will be photographed and cleared through a background investigation initiated by the police department. The employees shall make themselves available for photographing and other investigation, including fingerprinting, as may be required by the police department in accordance with state law and local ordinance. The employee shall sign a waiver and authorization form authorizing the police department to request on behalf of the applicant criminal history reports from the state department of public safety or any other appropriate state or federal government entity. 
(2)  Once cleared, a permit shall be issued to the employee indicating that such person is eligible to sell, serve, deliver, dispense or take orders for alcoholic beverages for the purpose of on-premises consumption. The permit shall be worn and visible at all times. 
(3)  The alcoholic beverage handling permit may be used at multiple locations if requested by the applicant; however, when applying for a handling permit, the applicant must list all applicable town locations for which the employee works. Proof of employment will be required for each location. 
(4)  All alcoholic beverage handling permits are the sole and exclusive property of the town. Destruction, theft, defacement, or detriment of identification shall be punishable as a felony under state law. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for a person to alter, deface or fraudulently produce a town alcoholic beverage handling permit. 
(6)  The permit issued under this section shall be issued only to eligible persons who are at least 18 years of age. 
(g)  No alcoholic beverage handling permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the chief of police and a background check has been completed. The applicant will submit an annual administrative processing fee of $25.00 to be included upon receipt of their application. In the event that the applicant does not meet the eligibility requirements, the fee is nonrefundable. Such application shall include, but not be limited to, the name, current home address, telephone number, social security number, date of birth, proof of the date of birth of the applicant and the identity of the applicant, including at least one photographic identity card issued by a governmental agency, height, weight, hair and eye color and a list of prior arrest and time of service in jail or prison. The fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(1)  If there is no record of a violation of this article and the employee is determined eligible, the chief of police or his designee shall issue an alcoholic beverage handling permit. If it is found that the employee cannot be cleared, the applicant shall be notified that they do not meet eligibility requirements. 
(2)  Permits will be renewed annually prior to the expiration date indicated on the handling permit. Upon renewal, proof of completion of a course of instruction for servers and date of completion must be submitted. 
(3)  For those applicants who, within the past five-year period, have resided or currently reside in a state other than this state, the applicant must furnish to the chief of police a certified copy of a driver's history and criminal background history from the state in which the driver resides. 
(4)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in the completion of a background investigation may be terminated by the chief of police. 
(5)  An employee excluded from being granted or maintaining a permit under these terms shall have the right to appeal such exclusion to the appeal board, which will consist of chiefs of police from all participating agencies within the county. The decision of the appeal board shall be final. An applicant for a permit may appeal the decision of the appeal board by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 5, chapter 4 (O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq.). 
(h)  It shall be the duty of all individuals holding alcoholic beverage licenses or their license representative to file with the chief of police the names of all employees authorized to handle, sell, serve, deliver, dispense or take orders for alcoholic beverages, to include security personnel. The information will consist of the name of the establishment, the permit number, the employee's name, home address and home phone number. Such list shall be filed upon obtaining the initial alcoholic beverage license or, for those businesses that are not open on the date, the licensee's premises opened to the public. An updated list of employees shall be filed with the chief of police on an annual basis, before January 31. 
(i)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee or license representative to acquaint all employees engaged in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages with the requirements of this chapter and state law regulating the handling, selling, serving, delivering, dispensing or taking orders for alcoholic beverages. 
(j)  This section shall not be construed to require a permit for those employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy, stock clerk (see exception regarding package stores in subsection (a) of this section), cook or dishwasher, or any other employee whose duties do not include handling alcoholic beverages. 
(k)  When on duty in any licensed establishment, every person required to possess an alcoholic beverage handling permit shall have their handling permit on their person and visible at all times. All permits issued under this section shall be made available for inspection upon the demand of any law enforcement officer employed by the police department. 
(l)  The following will be grounds for denial, revocation, or suspension of a permit issued under this section: 
(1)  The omission or falsification of any material information in an application for a permit shall be a violation of this section and grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation of any such permit. 
(2)  The service or selling of alcoholic beverages to any person that the employee or agent knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication is grounds for suspension or revocation of any such permit. 
(3)  The service or selling of alcoholic beverages to any person without requiring proof of age identification as required in this chapter is grounds for suspension or revocation of any such permit. 
(4)  The violation of any law, ordinance or regulation governing the operation of an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or which is reasonably related to the operation of such establishments is grounds for suspension or revocation of any such permit. 
(5)  An employee excluded from being granted or maintaining a permit under these terms, or whose permit is revoked or suspended, shall have the right to appeal such decision in writing within three days of notice of such denial, revocation or suspension to the mayor and council for a hearing in accordance with subsection (g)(5) of this section. 
(Code 1984, § 2-8-89; Ord. No. 2008-510, §§ 1-4, 2-21-2008; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 7, 1-20-2011) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Animals generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned animal means any domesticated animal that has been placed upon public property or within a public building or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property and is unattended or uncared for. Any domesticated animal shall also be considered abandoned, when it has been unattended and without proper food and water for a period in excess of 36 hours, regardless of where said animal may be found or kept. 
    Animal at large means any animal not under restraint and off the property of its owner. 
    Animal under restraint means any animal secured by a leash or lead; or enclosed by way of fence or other enclosure; or under the control of a responsible and competent person and obedient to that person's commands, and the person being present with the animal; or the animal confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion. 
    Companion animal means a domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. Pets include, but are not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, hamsters, horses, mice, reptiles, domesticated wild animals, exotic animals, and other animals associated with man's environment. 
    Domesticated animals means animals that are accustomed to live in or about the habitation of men, including but not limited to cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated wild animals and/or exotic animals. This definition only applies to those animals mentioned herein and is only applicable to this chapter and in no way affects the meaning or application of a definition of the described animal as may be found in any other town ordinance. 
    Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which he is located. 
    Owner means any person having the right of property of, keeping, harboring, or acting as custodian of a domesticated animal. 
    Public nuisance means any animal which: 
(1)  Is found at large or abandoned; 
(2)  Is a vicious animal/fowl as hereinafter defined; 
(3)  Produces, because of quantity, manner or method in which the animals are domesticated or maintained unsanitary conditions in the town; 
(4)  Attacks passersby or passing vehicles; 
(5)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare, or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the county health department, whose rules and regulations are incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and any person that knowingly keeps, owns, harbors, or acts as custodian of an animal constituting said nuisance shall be guilty of an unlawful act and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided. 
    Vicious animal/fowl means any animal/fowl which attacks, bites or injures humans, other animals or fowl without provocation; or which, because of temperament, conditioning or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite or injure other living creatures without provocation; or an animal/fowl which has on one or more occasions caused injury to other living creatures without provocation; or any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or domesticated animals by one or more attacks without provocation of such severity as to cause physical injury. An animal/fowl is not considered vicious if it attacks, bites or menaces: 
(1)  Anyone attacking the owner; 
(2)  Unlawful trespassers on the property of the owner; 
(3)  Any person or animal that has tormented or abused it; 
(4)  In defense of its young or another animal; or 
(5)  Another animal/fowl while accompanying a person who is hunting and while acting in conformity with generally accepted and otherwise lawful hunting practices. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-1; Ord. No. 51, 11-20-1980; Ord. No. 154, 11-17-1988) 
Sec. 6-2. - Hunting on town property prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any wild animal upon any real property owned or leased by the town, except with permission of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 2-15-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, adopted February 15, 2018 repealed the former § 6-2, and enacted a new § 6-2 as set out herein. The former § 6-2 pertained to bird sanctuary; wildlife and derived from Code 1984, § 9-3-2. 
Sec. 6-3. - Running at large prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any domestic animal to allow that animal to run at large within the town. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-3) 
Sec. 6-4. - Keeping of fowl or livestock in town. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "livestock" is defined in the same way that said term is defined in the town's zoning ordinance. 
(b)  The keeping of livestock shall be permitted in the town only on property zoned to the town's A-R agricultural residential zoning district. Furthermore, any such keeping of livestock must satisfy any conditions of zoning for said use provided by the town's zoning ordinance. The keeping of livestock in any manner not consistent with this subsection shall be declared a nuisance. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the keeping of livestock shall be specifically declared a nuisance if the following conditions are not satisfied: 
(1)  Any housing or enclosures used by such livestock shall be well-drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
(2)  Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the county health official. 
(d)  No person shall create, maintain, support, aid, or continue a nuisance by failing to satisfy the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) above. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 3-7-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, adopted Mar. 7, 2013, repealed former § 6-4, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1984, § 9-3-4; Ord. No. 62, 2-18-1982. 
Sec. 6-5. - Cruelty to animals. 
    No person shall, by act, omission or neglect, cause unjustifiable pain, suffering or death to any animal. This section shall not apply to the killing of animals raised for the purpose of providing food nor does it apply to any person who shall hunt wild animals in compliance with the game and fish laws of the state. Furthermore, this section shall not apply to the killing or injuring of animals for humane purposes or in the furtherance of medical or scientific research. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-5; Ord. No. 51, 11-20-1980) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 6-6. - Abandonment of animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon any domesticated animal within the town. Each person who does abandon, knowingly or willingly permits such abandonment, or aids in the abandonment of any domesticated animal shall be in violation of the law and shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-6) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-15.1. 
Sec. 6-7. - Guard dogs. 
    It shall be the duty of each owner, tenant, or custodian of property upon or within which a guard dog is located to conspicuously and prominently post a notice on the outside of the property: 
WARNING 
GUARD DOG 
of either red or black letters upon a white background, which can be easily read at a distance of 25 feet. In the case of a building, such notice shall be conspicuously posted upon such enclosure at a distance not greater than 50 feet apart as well as upon each and every entrance and exit through the enclosure. In the case of apartments, condominiums or businesses located within a larger building where the guard dog is located within the apartment, condominium or building solely, this notice shall be conspicuously posted on or about each and every entrance and exit. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-7; Ord. No. 51, 11-20-1980) 
Sec. 6-8. - Beware of dog notice. 
    Whenever the animal control officer receives a report of a dog with a disposition or propensity to attack or bite any person or animal without provocation, any county animal control officer, town police officer or town code enforcement officer may require a conspicuous sign to be posted and continuously displayed, with letters of no less than two inches in height, to be placed by the owner stating the following: "BEWARE OF DOG." 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-13; Ord. No. 338, 4-3-1997) 
State Law reference- Dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21 et seq. 
Sec. 6-9. - Restraint of animals; while on property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal to ensure that it is confined by way of a fence or other enclosure or is restrained by chain or leash or, in some other physical manner, under the control of a competent person so that it cannot wander off of the real property limits of the owner. It is the intent of this section that all animals be prevented from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of their owners. 
(b)  In addition, all male and female dogs and cats that have not been spayed or neutered must be securely confined in such a way that they cannot be reached by other dogs or cats. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-7.1; Ord. No. 233, § 1, 8-5-1992) 
Sec. 6-10. - Same; while off of property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any animal to keep the animal under control at all times while the animal is off of the real property limits of the owner. For the purposes of this section, an animal is deemed under control when it is confined within a vehicle, parked or in motion, is secured by a leash or other device held by a competent person, is under voice command of a competent person being present with the animal, or is properly confined within an enclosure with permission of the owner of the property where the enclosure is located. 
(b)  Any animal kept in the back of an open pickup truck or anywhere in a convertible car with the top down must be restrained by a leash. Such leash must be of the size and length to restrict the animal within the confines of the car or bed of the truck so as to prohibit the animal from jumping out or over the sides, front or back of such vehicle. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-7.2; Ord. No. 233, § 2, 8-5-1992) 
Sec. 6-11. - Evidence of rabies vaccinations for dogs and cats required. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each owner, custodian or harborer of any dog or cat at least three months of age kept, maintained or harbored within the town, to possess evidence of a current rabies vaccination for such animal. 
(b)  It shall be duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog or cat at least three months of age brought into any areas of the town to obtain evidence of a rabies vaccination for such dog or cat within 14 days from the date of entry into the town. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-12; Ord. No. 338, 4-3-1997) 
Secs. 6-12-6-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 6-41. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The town police department and the county animal control department, its director and employees as established by the county board of commissioners shall have the authority to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  If a violation of this chapter has not been personally witnessed by the police department or the county director or his authorized representative or an employee of the town, a subpoena shall be issued to the person making the complaint, to be and appear on the day and time set for trial, then and there to testify on behalf of the town. The police department or said director shall refuse to respond to anonymous complaints. 
(c)  In the event the owner of any dog or animal is not known and the dog or animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds, or other public places or premises or the property of another without that property owner's permission, as prohibited by this chapter, upon complaint made to or information made known to the animal shelter, the police department, the director, or his authorized representative shall be authorized to immediately take possession of such dog or animal and impound it in the animal shelter. Once impounded, an animal shall be kept for a period of time as defined in section 6-42; thereafter, if the animal is not claimed by anyone after a reasonable effort has been made to locate the owner of the animal as hereinafter provided, the animal may be disposed of in a humane fashion or in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.6 and other applicable state laws and rules. Where the police department or the director or his authorized representative is required in this section to take possession of any dog or animal and to impound it, he may use any and all means available. 
(d)  In all cases of violations of this chapter, the police officers or the director may, in addition to or in lieu of impounding any animal, issue a citation to the owner of said animal. However, in all such instances where the owner of said animal is known or discovered, the police officer or the director shall at least issue a citation to said owners. The citation shall state the violation, the name and address of the owner, and the name of the individual issuing the citation. All citations shall be transferred to the state court of the county, which shall be designated as the municipal court of the town for violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-8; Ord. No. 51, 11-20-1980; Ord. No. 2009-005, § 1, 4-16-2009) 
Sec. 6-42. - A notice to owners of impounded animals. 
(a)  Upon impounding any dog or other animal, the director or his authorized representative shall cause to be made a prompt and reasonable effort to locate the animal's owner and, upon location of same, shall send to said owner, by certified letter, notification of impoundment. If said animal is not claimed by the owner, within three days of the receipt of the certified letter giving notice of impoundment or if the letter is returned by the post office or if within five days of impoundment the owner cannot be located, then it shall be the duty of the director or his authorized representative to dispose of the dog or other animal in a humane fashion. 
(b)  For the first time an owner is found in violation of this Code, regardless of whether or not the animal is picked up and impounded, a fine of $100.00 shall be imposed against the owner of such animal. Upon conviction of or plea of nolo contendere to the second offense by the owner for the same animal, it is mandatory that the animal be spayed or neutered at the owner's expense within one week after the owner claims the animal, whether it is a purebred or mixed breed. A sworn, notarized statement from a veterinarian, licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, must be received by the enforcement officer within ten working days following the animal's release from impoundment. Such statement must state that the animal has been spayed, neutered or euthanized by the veterinarian, in compliance with this chapter or must explain in detail that, for health reasons, the animal cannot be spayed or neutered. The owner of such animal will be considered in violation of this chapter for failure to submit a veterinarian's statement, and shall be guilty of an offense. 
(c)  A $250.00 fine will be imposed for the second offense. Should the animal again be impounded or the owner cited for a third offense, or for any subsequent offense of violating this chapter, a $500.00 fine will be imposed against the owner. 
(d)  In addition to the above provisions, any animal picked up and impounded by the animal shelter will receive a rabies shot, the cost of which will be borne by the owner. 
(e)  If for any reason an animal is impounded and not claimed after notification, the owner will be considered in violation of this chapter for the offense of abandoning the animal, and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500.00 and/or imprisonment and jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(f)  In addition, if an animal is impounded and not claimed, the owner shall be conclusively presumed to have given his consent to the adoption or permanent disposal of the animal in a humane fashion in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.6 and other applicable state laws and rules. 
(g)  If any animal is not claimed as provided within this chapter, the enforcement officer or his authorized representative, in his sole discretion, and after he has satisfied himself that such animal is in good health, may offer the animal for adoption. All animals offered for adoption must be spayed or neutered and must be given a rabies shot. A sworn, notarized statement from a veterinarian, licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, must be received within ten working days following the adoption. Such statement must state that the animal has been spayed or neutered by the veterinarian, or must explain in detail that, for health reasons, the animal can not be spayed or neutered. The owner of such animal will be considered in violation of this chapter for failure to submit a veterinarian's statement, and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500.00 and/or imprisonment and jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(h)  In no event shall any animal be redeemed by its lawful possessor, owner or custodian unless those fees established for boarding the animal are paid. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-9; Ord. No. 51, 11-20-1980; Ord. No. 233, § 3, 8-5-1992) 
Sec. 6-43. - Fee schedule and miscellaneous regulations. 
    Fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be adopted from time to time by the county board of commissioners and kept on file with the director and the town. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-10) 
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - Voting district. 
    The incorporated limits of the town shall constitute the voting district for the town elections. 
(Code 1984, § 2-2-3) 
State Law reference- Designation of precincts, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-260. 
Sec. 8-2. - Polling place. 
    The polling place for town elections shall be the Tyrone First Baptist Church. In addition, early voting may take place at the Tyrone Library during the week preceding the election date. 
(Code 1984, § 2-2-4) 
Sec. 8-3. - Persons qualified to vote. 
    All persons qualified and registered to vote in the last municipal election who have not been purged from the list of electors shall be qualified to vote; and all persons qualified and registered to vote in town elections shall be eligible to vote. 
(Code 1984, § 2-2-6) 
Sec. 8-4. - Office. 
    Each candidate, in his notice of candidacy shall specifically designate the office which he seeks and shall attach thereto an affidavit stating: 
(1)  His residence, with street and number, if any, and his post office address; 
(2)  His profession, business, or occupation, if any; 
(3)  The name of his precinct or election district; 
(4)  That he is a resident and an elector of the town, and is eligible to vote in the election in which he is a candidate; 
(5)  The name of office he is seeking; 
(6)  That he is eligible to hold such office; 
(7)  That he has never been convicted and sentenced in any court of competent jurisdiction for fraudulent violation of primary or election laws, malfeasance in office, or felony involving moral turpitude under the laws in this state or any other state or the United States, or the civil rights have been restored; and 
(8)  That he will not knowingly violate any provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code or any rules and regulations adopted thereunder. 
(Code 1984, § 2-2-13) 
Sec. 8-5. - Plurality determines. 
    The candidates for each respective office who receives the highest number of votes cast for such office by the electors of the town shall be elected to such office. In the event of a run-off election to break a tie vote, the same shall be held two weeks from the general election under the same rules and regulations as applicable to the general election. 
(Code 1984, § 2-2-15) 
Sec. 8-6. - County administration of municipal elections. 
    In those years in which municipal elections in the town coincide with county elections, municipal elections in the town shall be conducted and managed by the board of elections for the county and personnel operating under the supervision of said board of elections. 
(Code 1984, § 2-2-18) 
Chapter 10 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
(a)  Imposition. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(b)  Collection. Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(c)  Administrative provisions. The clerk of the Town of Tyrone is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of the ordinance from which this section derives and amendments thereto in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), by December 31, 2011. 
(d)  Depositing of funds; Use of funds. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this town from charges imposed by this section shall be deposited in the Emergency Telephone System Fund maintained by this town pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(d)(2) and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction. All such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. No. 2011-12, § 1, 9-1-2011) 
Secs. 10-2-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-19. - Defined. 
    As used in this article, the term "emergency management" means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than the functions for which the state and federal governments are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters caused by enemy nuclear attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or by acts of nature, fire, explosion, civil disorders or other causes. These functions include, without limitation: 
(1)  Firefighting services; 
(2)  Law enforcement services; 
(3)  Medical and health services; 
(4)  Rescue services; 
(5)  Engineering services; 
(6)  Warning services; 
(7)  Communications; 
(8)  Defense from radiological fallout; 
(9)  Welfare services; 
(10)  Evacuation, when and where necessary; 
(11)  Emergency transportation; 
(12)  Plant and utility protection; 
(13)  Restoration of public utility services; and 
(14)  Other functions related to protection and well-being of the population of the town; 
together with all other activities necessary or incidental to preparation for and the carrying out of the above functions. 
(Code 1984, § 3-3-1) 
Sec. 10-20. - Office of the emergency management director. 
    There is hereby established the Town of Tyrone Emergency Management Office. The mayor and council shall appoint a director of emergency management for the town. When appointed, the director will be a deputy director on the county emergency management staff and is charged: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the town on matters pertaining to emergency management; 
(2)  With assisting town officials in organizing town departments for emergency operations; 
(3)  With assisting in developing in conjunction with the county emergency management director, the plan for emergency functions for the county ordinance; 
(4)  With rendering reports such as required by governing officials; and 
(5)  With procuring, with authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the town emergency operating center. 
(Code 1984, § 3-3-2) 
Sec. 10-21. - Emergency powers. 
    In the event of an actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other disaster which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the town, the mayor or, in his absence, his legally appointed successor may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues the following emergency powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws, and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management forces; 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give, or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the town, to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well being of the inhabitants of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 3-3-3) 
Sec. 10-22. - Volunteers. 
    All persons, other than officers and employees of the town, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, volunteers shall have the same immunities as town officers and employees. 
(Code 1984, § 3-3-4) 
Sec. 10-23. - Penalties. 
    Persons violating any provision of this chapter, rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, upon conviction thereof, will be punished as a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1984, § 3-3-5) 
Chapter 12 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER DISCHARGES 

Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
    Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sediment Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the town separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the town separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 12-23(b). 
    Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the state environmental protection division (EPD) under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
    Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
    Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
    Town separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, town streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catchbasins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the town; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1(2), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 12-20. - Description. 
    An illicit discharge is defined as any discharge to a municipal or county separate storm sewer system (stormwater drainage system) that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff (except for discharges allowed under an NPDES permit or nonpolluting flows). These non-stormwater discharges occur due to illegal dumping or illegal connections to the stormwater drainage system. This article provides the town with the authority to deal with illicit discharges and establishes enforcement actions for those persons or entities found to be in noncompliance or that refuse to allow access to their facilities. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 12-21. - Findings. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Discharges to the town separate storm sewer system that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. 
(2)  These nonstormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the town separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
(3)  These nonstormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume nonstormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
(4)  The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters. 
(5)  These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the town separate storm sewer system. 
(6)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper nonstormwater discharges to the town separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Therefore, the town adopted this article to prohibit such nonstormwater discharges to the town separate storm sewer system. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the town separate storm sewer system is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 12-22. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the town separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the town separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the town separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the town separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the town separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the area of the town. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Responsibility for administration. The town manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1(1), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 12-23. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the town separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(b)  Exemptions. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the town as being necessary to protect public health and safety. The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the town separate storm sewer system. 
(c)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the town separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates the provisions of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the town separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of the provisions of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the town. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the town requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the town. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1(3), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 12-24. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the town prior to allowing discharges to the town separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1(4), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 12-25. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
(a)  The town shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the town. 
(c)  The owner or operator shall allow the town ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(d)  The town shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the town to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(e)  The town may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the town manager. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(f)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the town and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(g)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the town access to a facility is a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(h)  If the town has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the town is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of the provisions of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the town manager may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1(5), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 12-26. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the town separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the town within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1(6), 12-1-2005) 
Sec. 12-27. - Violations; enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  Violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(2)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the town is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The town is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the town finds that a violation of the provisions of this article has occurred, the town may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with the provisions of this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the town by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the town. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the town manager or his designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the town, then representatives of the town may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. 
(1)  Within 45 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 30 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(2)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the town by reason of such violation. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the town shall deem appropriate, after the town has taken one or more of the actions described above, the town manager may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of the provisions this article, the town may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the town municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be guilty of an offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. 
(1)  The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the town may seek cumulative remedies. 
(2)  The town manager may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this ordinance, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1(7), 12-1-2005) 
Secs. 12-28-12-58. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PHOSPHATES 

Sec. 12-59. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cleaning agent means a laundry detergent, dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner or polish, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is used or intended for use for cleaning purposes. 
    Nutrient means a substance or combination of substances which, if added to waters in sufficient quantities, provides nourishment that promotes growth of aquatic vegetation in densities which: 
(1)  Interfere with use of the waters by humans or by any animal, fish, or plant useful to humans; or 
(2)  Contribute to degradation or alteration of the quality of the waters to an extent detrimental to use by humans or by any animal, fish, or plant that is useful to humans. 
(Code 1984, § 6-4-26; Ord. No. 379, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 12-60. - Declaration of policy. 
    O.C.G.A. § 12-5-27.1 makes it unlawful to sell at retail or use in this state certain cleaning agents containing phosphorus. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the town to encourage the use of clean, phosphate-free, household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale at retail or use of any cleaning agent containing phosphorus either in amounts exceeding five percent by weight which is incidental to manufacturing or 8.7 percent by weight intended for use in a commercial household dishwashing machine. The town finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in wastewater discharge so as to protect the state's rivers and lakes downstream and promote health, safety and welfare, prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the town that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Code 1984, § 6-4-28; Ord. No. 379, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 12-61. - Exclusion. 
(a)  This article does not apply to cleaning agents which are used: 
(1)  In agricultural or dairy production; 
(2)  To clean commercial food or beverage processing equipment or containers; 
(3)  As industrial sanitizers, metal brighteners, or acid cleaner, including those containing phosphoric acid or trisodium phosphate; 
(4)  In industrial processes for metal, fabric, or fiber cleaning and conditioning; 
(5)  In hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, other health care facilities or veterinary hospitals or clinics; 
(6)  By a commercial laundry or textile rental service company or by any other commercial entity: 
a.  To provide laundry service to hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, other health care facilities, or veterinary hospitals or clinics; 
b.  To clean textile products supplied to industrial or commercial users of the products on a rental basis; or 
c.  To clean professional, industrial, or commercial work uniforms; 
(7)  In the manufacture of health care or veterinary supplies; 
(8)  In any medical, biological, chemical, engineering, or other such laboratory, including those associated with any academic or research facility; 
(9)  As water softeners, anti-scale agents, or corrosion inhibitors where such use is in a closed system such as a boiler, air conditioner, cooling tower, or hot water heating system; or 
(10)  To clean hard surfaces including windows, sinks, counters, floors, ovens, food preparation surfaces, and plumbing fixtures. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to cleaning agents which: 
(1)  Are manufactured, stored, sold, or distributed for use other than household laundry detergents or household or commercial dishwashing agents; 
(2)  Contain phosphorus in an amount not exceeding five percent by weight which is incidental to manufacturing; or 
(3)  Contain phosphorus in an amount not exceeding 8.7 percent by weight and which are intended for use in a commercial or household dishwashing machine. 
(c)  This article shall not apply to any natural or commercial fertilizers. 
(Code 1984, § 6-4-29; Ord. No. 379, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 12-62. - Restrictions on sale and use. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level or use any cleaning agent containing phosphorus greater than five percent by weight which is incidental to manufacturing or greater than 8.7 percent by weight and which is intended for use in a commercial or household dishwashing machine. 
(Code 1984, § 6-4-32; Ord. No. 379, 6-4-2001) 
Chapter 14 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. § 25-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Fire marshal. 
    The fire marshal in and for the county is designated as the fire marshal for the town. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-1; Ord. No. 295, 4-19-1995) 
Secs. 14-2-14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE AND STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-21. - Enforcement officer defined. 
    As used in this article, the term "enforcement officer" means the person designated to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 14-22. - Compliance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this article, to permit or maintain such a violation, to refuse to obey any provision hereof, or to fail or refuse to comply with any such provision or regulation except as variation may be allowed by the action of the enforcement officer in writing. Proof of such unlawful act or failure shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such act is that of the owner, occupant or other person in control of the premises. Prosecution or lack thereof of either the owner, occupant, or the person in charge shall not be deemed to relieve any of the others. 
Sec. 14-23. - Permits and plans. 
(a)  The enforcement officer shall examine, or cause to be examined, submitted plans and accompanying documents for evidence of compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the enforcement officer issuing a permit that indicates that applicable provisions of the fire prevention code have been met. 
(c)  Every new business locating in a nonresidential zoning district must complete an inspection application. Such application must also be completed for permitted or conditional uses (excluding single-family residences and home occupations) allowed in the AR agricultural/residential) zoning district. No occupational tax certificate is to be issued by the town until a copy of enforcement officer's certificate of fire safety compliance is received in the office of the town clerk. 
(d)  The adoption of these provisions is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the town relating to construction and maintenance of buildings within the town and relating to public safety, health and general welfare. 
(e)  Subjects covered; functions of officers. It shall be the duty of the enforcement officer to enforce all laws and ordinances of the town covering the following: 
(1)  The prevention of fires; 
(2)  The storage, sale and use of combustible, flammable or explosive materials; 
(3)  The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment; 
(4)  The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes; 
(5)  The means and adequacy of exits, in case of fire, from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters, and all other places in which numbers of persons work, live, or congregate, from time to time, for any purpose; 
(6)  The investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires; 
(7)  The maintenance of fire cause and loss records. 
(f)  The enforcement officer shall examine plans for evidence of compliance with applicable requirements of specific Code sections. The enforcement officer may require tests or other investigations to be conducted by an agency satisfactory to the jurisdiction when appliances, devices, equipment, or systems intended for installation do not specifically meet the requirements of this Code, but meet the intent of this Code. 
(g)  The enforcement officer shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as set forth in other sections of this Code and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law. 
(h)  Investigation of fires. The enforcement officer shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring in the county by which property has been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such fire. The enforcement officer shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the other authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with other agencies in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case. 
(i)  Inspections; orders. The enforcement officer shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises on a periodic basis, and shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the same and for the safeguarding of life and property from fire, explosion and other hazards incident to the use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises. 
(j)  Correction of unsafe conditions. 
(1)  Whenever any inspector, as defined above, shall find in any building, or upon any premises or other places, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of waste paper, boxes, shavings, or any highly flammable materials especially liable to fire, and which are so situated as to endanger property; or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors, or windows liable to interfere with operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, the inspector shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings, subject to the appeals procedure provided for in the county fire prevention code. 
(2)  Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within a reasonable period after the service of the order shall be liable to penalties as hereinafter provided. 
(3)  The service of any such order may be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy of same to such occupant personally, or leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or, in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with such person a copy of the order, or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by mailing such copy by certified mail to the owner's last known post office address. 
(k)  Record of fires. The enforcement officer shall compile and keep a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the same, including injuries, deaths, rescues of persons, and statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance, and if so, in what amount. 
(l)  Annual report. The enforcement officer shall make an annual report of his activities to the town manager. This report shall contain all proceedings under the fire prevention code with such statistics as the enforcement officer may wish to include therein. 
(m)  Amendments. The fire chief of the county fire department and/or the director of emergency services or the enforcement officer shall also recommend any amendments to the county fire prevention code or ordinance which shall be desirable. 
(n)  Scope of fire prevention code. The provisions of the county fire prevention code shall apply equally to both public and private property, and it shall apply to all structures and their occupancies, except as otherwise specified. 
(o)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted in this chapter; or shall fail to comply therewith; or shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder; or shall build in violation of any details, statements, specifications, or plans submitted or approved thereunder; or shall operate not in accordance with the provisions of any certificate, permit, or approval issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken; or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the enforcement officer or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of an offense. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation, nor shall the violation be permitted to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, the application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(p)  Appeals. The town council at the time that an appeal is filed shall serve as the official board of appeals and adjustments for the fire prevention code. Any appeal filed shall conform to the requirements of the International Fire Code as adopted by the town. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-21) 
Sec. 14-24. - Bureau of fire prevention permit/inspection fee schedule. 
    The following fees shall be charged and collected: 
Plan review fees : The fee schedule for building plan reviews shall be as follows: Per square foot $0.10 80%, 100% and first follow-up inspection will be allowed under the construction permit with no additional charge. A second follow-up inspection will require a $25.00 fine or reinspection fee in advance. A third and any subsequent follow-up inspection will require a $50.00 fine or reinspection fee in advance. Certificate of fire safety compliance $50.00 Permit fees : Bonfires, brush, leaves, etc. Residential-One day No charge Commercial (contractors, developers)-60 days $100.00Combustible dust producing operations Temporary or one year maximum $25.00 Compressed or liquefied gases (nonresidential) Storage/transfer/use Temporary or one year maximum $50.00 Explosive materials Storage/transfer/use Temporary only $75.00 Blasting Need proof of insurance and copy of state license Temporary only $75.00 Flammable/combustible liquids Class I Storage/handling/use storage, handling or use of Class I flammable liquids in excess of 15 gal. (58.78 L) inside of any building or in excess of 60 gal. (227.1 L) outside of any buildings $25.00 Class II/Class III Storage/handling/use storage, handling or use of Class II or Class III flammable or combustible liquids in excess of 25 gal. (94.63 L) in a building or 60 gal. (227.1 L) outside of a building $25.00 Storage/handling/use of containers of more than: 2,000 gal. (7570 L) individual water capacity or an aggregate water capacity of 4,000 gal. (15,140 L) of flammable compressed gases $25.00 10,000 gal. (37,850 L) individual water capacity or an aggregate water capacity of 20,000 gal. (75,700 L) of flammable compressed gases $25.00 For each temporary installation of flammable compressed gases in a place of assembly $25.00 Storage/handling/use of containers: Flammable liquefied gases of 2,000 gal. (75,700 L) individual water capacity or an aggregate water capacity of 4,000 gal. (15,140 L) $25.00 Storage/handling/use of liquefied medical gases: Exceeding 2,000 gal. (7570 L) water capacity in any one container or aggregate water capacity of 4,000 gal. (15,140 L) $25.00 Installation or removal of tanks for Class I, II, III of flammable combustible liquids (underground) $100.00 per tank Flammable finishing (paint booths, strippers) Temporary or one year maximum $25.00 Fireworks display (only to displayers) Must provide license $50.00 Pryroxylin plastics - cellulose nitrate Use/storage Temporary or one year maximum $25.00 Chlorine and derivatives (pool supplies: nonresidential) Use/storage Temporary or one year maximum $25.00 Hazardous materials/chemicals Use/storage Temporary or one year maximum $50.00 Welding, cutting and hot work Only one year $10.00 Heated tar pots-roofing operations Use/storage-inspection required $10.00 Loose combustible storage Temporary or one year $25.00 Installation of fire suppression systems To include engineered or pre-engineered systems such as sprinkler systems; hood systems; and other fire protection equipment. (Does not include portable fire extinguisher) $100.00 Copies of documents (including fire reports) $2.00  
Sec. 14-25. - International fire code adopted; conflicts. 
    The 2003 International Fire Code, and all revisions and/or amendments thereto as hereafter enacted, are hereby adopted as the code of fire rules and regulations for the town, with certain exceptions which may be set out. Where the provisions of the 2003 International Fire Code conflict with this article, this article shall be superior and shall control. 
Sec. 14-26. - Open burning. 
    The provisions of this section amend the specific section of article II, Fire Prevention Code, specifically section 307 of the International Fire Prevention Code, and it is hereby amended or revised consistent with this section. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning in any area of the town, except as follows: 
(1)  Open burning not requiring permit. No person shall cause, suffer or allow open burning in any area of the town without a permit except as follows: 
a.  For the recreational purpose of cooking food for immediate human consumption; 
b.  Fires set for the purpose of training firefighting personnel authorized by the county director of fire and emergency services; 
c.  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making equipment where approved safety measures are used; and 
d.  Setting and maintenance by contractors and tradesmen of miscellaneous small warning fires for their workers. 
(2)  Fire extinguished. The county department of fire and emergency services shall have the authority to order that any fire be extinguished if it is determined that there is a danger to public safety, a nuisance or sign of environmental harm. 
(3)  Permits required. If, in the opinion of the fire marshal of the county, there are no adequate disposal facilities reasonably available for the particular combustible materials involved, the following open burning may be allowed with the appropriate permit so long as the burning pile size shall be no greater than ten feet wide, ten feet long, and ten feet high, or 1,000 cubic feet of material; and no more than one pile shall be burning at a time. In addition, all burning (both residential and commercial) shall occur consistent with the requirements of subsection (3)c of this section. 
a.  Residential permit. A residential permit shall be issued without charge for the following types of open burning: 
1.  Reduction of leaves, clippings, brush and limbs on residential property by or through direction of the owner of the premises; 
2.  Disposal of tree limbs from storm damage; or 
3.  For weed abatement, disease, and pest prevention. 
Fire extinguishing equipment such as a garden hose, shovel, rake, or other device shall be readily available. The county department of fire and emergency services retains authority to extinguish any fire in the event that complaints are received. 
b.  Commercial permit. A commercial permit shall be issued by the county bureau of fire prevention for all types of open burning deemed commercial in nature. Commercial permits are available under certain circumstances at no charge. Unless the commercial permit falls clearly within the guidelines requiring no charge, a charge will be assessed for the commercial permit. All types of burning requiring permits are deemed commercial in nature unless they are designated under subsection (3)a of this section. 
1.  The following types of open burning are available without charge but require a commercial permit: 
(i)  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops with the appropriate forestry permit. 
(ii)  Burning over of any forest land by the owner of such land with the appropriate forestry permit and a copy of the prescribed burning unit plan. 
2.  The following types of open burning shall be assessed a permit fee as set from time to time by the county board of commissioners: 
(i)  Destruction of combustible demolition; 
(ii)  Open burning for the purpose of land clearing or construction of right-or way- maintenance provided the prevailing winds at the time of burning are away from the major portion of the area's population. 
3.  Air curtain destructor; requirements. All open burnings which require the type of commercial permit for which the requester is assessed a fee must be accomplished through the proper use of an air curtain destructor: 
(i)  The location of the air curtain destructor must be at least 500 feet from any occupied structure or public road; 
(ii)  No more than one air curtain destructor may be operated within a ten-acre area at one time or there must be at least 1,000 feet between any two air curtain destructors; 
(iii)  Only wood waste consisting of trees, logs, large brush and stumps which are relatively free of soil may be burned in the air curtain destructor; 
(iv)  Tires or other rubber products, plastics, heavy oils or asphaltic based or impregnated materials may not be used to start or maintain the operation of the air curtain destructor; 
(v)  The air curtain destructor must be constructed, installed and operated in a manner consistent with good air pollution control practice for minimizing emissions of fly ash and smoke; and 
(vi)  The cleaning out of the air curtain destructor pit is performed in a manner to prevent fugitive dust. 
c.  Open burning requirements. 
1.  Materials such as heavy oils, gasoline, asphaltic materials, plastic, tires and items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any other material producing dense smoke and/or obnoxious odors shall not be used for starting or maintaining an open fire. 
2.  All burning shall be carried out between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. and all fires shall be completely burned. 
3.  All burning shall be located on private property so as not to interfere with any traffic on the public streets or sidewalks. 
4.  All burning shall be conducted at least 50 feet from any structure or such other minimum distance requirement contained herein, whichever is greater. 
5.  During any open burning, the burning activity shall be constantly attended by a competent person of at least 18 years of age. 
d.  Exceptions. The fire marshal may grant specific or general classes of exceptions to or variances from the particular requirements of any rule, regulation or general order upon such conditions as the director of fire and emergency services may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, if, upon petition, the director of fire and emergency services finds that strict compliance with such rule, regulation, or general order is inappropriate for one of the following reasons: 
1.  Because of conditions beyond the control of the petitioner, i.e., those conditions which, though ordinary diligence be employed, remain unforeseeable or unpredictable, e.g., strikes, walkouts, or other industrial disturbances, embargoes, or other causes of like character; provided, however, that this shall not include conditions solely because they are dependent upon contingencies, i.e. including, but not limited to, the variable cost or availability of maintenance, equipment, labor, raw materials, fuel or energy; 
2.  Because of special circumstances which would render strict compliance unreasonable, unduly burdensome, or impracticable due to special physical conditions or causes; 
3.  Because strict compliance would result in substantial curtailment or closing of the business operation; or 
4.  Because no alternative method of handling is available. 
e.  Additional safety precautions; restrictions. If the fire marshal of the county determines that certain open burning otherwise permitted imposes a threat to the public health, safety and general welfare, the fire marshal shall have the authority to impose additional safety precautions or restrict the burning, including the issuance of a complete ban on the open burning in the particular location. 
f.  Permits prohibited. During an air pollution emergency declared by the town council or other proper county or state authorities, no open burning of any kind shall be permitted unless open burning is required in the performance of an official duty or any public office, or fires necessary to thwart or prevent a hazard which cannot be properly managed by any other means, or as necessary for the protection of public health. 
g.  Penalty. Persons violating this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. 
h.  Blanket prohibition; exceptions. Beginning January 1, 1996, all open burning shall be prohibited during the months of May, June, July, August, and September. The only exceptions to this general prohibition against open burning during the months of May, June, July, August and September shall be: 
1.  For the recreational purpose of cooking food for human consumption; 
2.  Fires set for the purpose of training firefighting personnel when authorized by the county director of fire and emergency services; 
3.  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making equipment where approved safety measures are used. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-24) 
Sec. 14-27. - Sprinklers in multifamily residences. 
    The 2010 edition of NFPA No. 13R, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies Up to and Including Four Stories in Height, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted by reference. 
Secs. 14-28-14-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER FOR FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 14-58. - Definition. 
    The term "private fire protection system" means that pipe and its appurtenances on private property between a source of water and the base of the riser (flange or flange and spigot piece or base fee) for automatic sprinkler systems, open sprinkler systems, water spray fixed systems, stand pipe systems, inlets to foam-making systems or the base elbow of private hydrants or monitor nozzles. When connected to the public water system, the private fire protection system begins at a point designated by the public water system. 
Sec. 14-59. - Mandatory connection to public water system. 
(a)  Every lot of a proposed subdivision shall be supplied with adequate water and waste water facilities which shall be approved by the state commissioner of health. Septic tank drain field approval shall be on an individual lot basis. Where public water or waste water facilities are available within the distance specified below, the subdivider shall assure that every lot of the subdivision shall be provided with public water. 
Number of Lots Minimum Distance From Water Line* Six or more 2,500 feet  
*Measured along public right-of-way to closest point on property. Cost differentials based on line sizes and fire hydrants needed to serve a subdivision versus that needed as part of the overall system will be determined by the water system. 
For each additional lot after six an additional 150 feet shall be added per lot to the minimum distance from a water line requiring connection thereto. 
(b)  Standard fire hydrants will be provided at the spacing defined under section 14-60. Design standards shall be as specified by the American Water Works Association. 
Sec. 14-60. - Hydrant locations. 
(a)  The distance between fire hydrants shall not exceed 600 feet in all residential property within the town. 
(b)  Fire hydrants shall be spaced a distance not to exceed 400 feet apart in industrial, commercial and multifamily residential areas, including but not limited to hotels, motels, nursing homes, offices, educational buildings, apartments and condominiums. 
(c)  Should the public safety require it, the enforcement officer may determine that additional fire hydrants be installed and the minimum spacing between fire hydrants be reduced. 
(d)  Fire service connections shall be not less than 12 inches nor more than 28 inches above the level of the adjoining ground or pavement. 
(e)  Fire hydrants and water mains in shopping centers, apartments, office condominiums, industrial, multifamily residential and other such private developments shall be measured as an extension of the public fire protection system. Systems of such design shall meet the requirements of the public fire protection system in regard to design, installation standards and testing criteria. Appropriate documentation shall be made available to the enforcement officer upon request. Ownership, repair and maintenance shall remain the responsibility of the private developer or owner, or his assigns. 
(f)  Installation approval shall be the responsibility of the water system. Annual inspection shall be the responsibility of the fire marshal. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-23) 
Sec. 14-61. - Standpipes required. 
(a)  Approved standpipe systems shall be installed in all new nonresidential construction exceeding three stories or 36 feet in height. Height shall be determined by measuring from the lowest floor surface at grade to the uppermost floor surface. 
(b)  All standpipe systems shall have a standard Siamese fire department connection. 
(Ord. of 9-24-1987, § 5-4; Ord. No. 90-15, § 9-84, 9-27-1990) 
Secs. 14-62-14-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIRE ALARM CODE 

Sec. 14-81. - Title and purpose. 
    This division shall be known as "the fire alarm code." The purpose of this division is to provide for a safe, efficient, and dependable method of providing uniform fire alarm systems within the town. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-31) 
Sec. 14-82. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Occupancy classification means the use to which the structure is put. Occupancy classification shall further be defined in chapter 3 of the NFPA 101, Life Safety Code. The various classifications shall be ambulatory health care, assembly, business, day care, educational, health care, detention and correctional, residential, mercantile business, industrial and storage. 
    Substantial renovation means repairs and alterations to a structure the total cost of which exceeds 30 percent of the fair market value as shown on the then current property tax records of the county. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-32) 
Sec. 14-83. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person or persons failing to comply with this division shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(b)  If any building or structure fails to comply with the above standards so as to present a hazard to life and property, all persons shall be prohibited from occupying the structure by orders signed by the enforcement officer and posted on the premises. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-41) 
Sec. 14-84. - Scope of division. 
    The provisions of this division apply to the selection, installation, alteration, equipment, and maintenance of all public and private fire alarm systems installed within the town, after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived. The provisions of this division based upon occupancy shall also apply to changes of existing buildings and structures or portions thereof from one occupancy classification to another. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-33) 
Sec. 14-85. - Validity of other laws. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws which prescribe more restrictive limitations. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-34) 
Sec. 14-86. - National fire protection association standards adopted within this article. 
    The following NFPA standards shall apply within the boundaries of the town: 
    Standard 72 National Fire Alarm Code. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-35) 
Sec. 14-87. - Occupancy requirements. 
(a)  Every detention and correctional, educational, health care, and residential structure with an occupant load of greater than 50 persons shall have an appropriate alarm system which shall terminate in a remote supervising station or as otherwise required in NFPA 101. 
(b)  Every assembly structure with an occupancy load of greater than 300 persons shall have an appropriate alarm system which shall terminate in a remote supervising station consistent with a remote supervising station fire alarm system. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-36) 
Sec. 14-88. - False alarm user fee. 
    The enforcement officer is hereby permitted to issue a written warning after the first false alarm transmitted by an automatic signaling device. Said warning shall direct corrective action be taken by the owner and/or subscriber of the alarm system for necessary repairs. Written warnings shall be hand delivered or posted by affixing said warning to the subject property. Subsequent to the issuance of such written warning, the county fire department will be permitted to impose a user fee of $50.00 for each false alarm transmitted from an alarm system within the 90 days immediately following the date upon which said written notice was issued. All fees shall be deposited with the enforcement officer and shall become a part of the general fund of the county. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-37) 
Sec. 14-89. - Special alarm systems. 
    All structures equipped with sprinkler systems which are built or substantially renovated, or which undergo a change in occupancy classification, shall have an automatic water flow alarm installed which will transmit an immediate alarm to a central monitoring station, with the exception of those sprinkler systems located in single-family residential structures. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-38) 
Sec. 14-90. - Public/private systems terminating in the county central communications center. 
(a)  All systems terminating at the central communications center will be inspected and approved before telephone lines and alarm apparatus are installed in the central communications center. 
(b)  The county reserves the right to approve the type and arrangement of alarm equipment placed in the communications center. Should it become necessary to renovate or rearrange the communications center, each owner and/or subscriber of the system shall assume the burden of moving its own equipment. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to place the designated emergency fire telephone number into any automatic device so designed to transmit a recorded message to the communications center. A telephone number will be designated for use in such automatic telephone devices and will be so assigned by the county fire department. 
(d)  All systems terminating in the central communications center shall be connected to a central alarm monitoring board. Each owner and/or subscriber shall bear all expenses incurred in connecting the system. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-39) 
Sec. 14-91. - Solicitation of voluntary compliance. 
    Even though this division is not retroactive, all owners and tenants of buildings may be requested to voluntarily comply for the safety of those living in or doing business within the town. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-40) 
Chapter 16 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Rules and regulations of the county health department. 
    The following rules of the county health department, as promulgated by the state department of public health, are adopted in their entirety to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the town: 
(1)  That certain chapter known as "Tourist Accommodations", chapter 511-6-2, as promulgated by the state department of public health, and as hereafter amended. 
(2)  That certain chapter known as "Food Service", chapter 511-6-1, as promulgated by the state department of public health, and as hereafter amended. 
(3)  Any and all health codes and water quality control acts as adopted by the state and enforceable by the county boards of health, and as hereafter amended. 
(4)  That certain chapter known as "Public Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreational Water Parks," chapter 511-3-5, as promulgated by the state department of public health, and as hereafter amended. 
(Code 1984, § 5-3-1; Ord. No. 322, 6-19-1996; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 11-16-2000; Ord. No. 2018-03, § 1, 4-19-2018) 
Sec. 16-2. - Enforcement. 
    The primary responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter shall be vested with the county health department, which is authorized to utilize the municipal court of the town for the prosecution of violations of this chapter in and for the town. 
(Code 1984, § 5-3-2; Ord. No. 322, 6-19-1996; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 16-3. - Penalties. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision listed in section 16-1 shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1984, § 5-3-3; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 11-16-2000) 
Secs. 16-4-16-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

Sec. 16-25. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Absorption field means a configuration of absorption trenches installed in a portion of land and used for the absorption and final treatment of sewage. 
    Absorption line means a pipe line of perforated pipe or open-joint drain pipe laid in an absorption trench to serve as a conduit for sewage effluent. 
    Absorption pit means a pit, dry well or hole in which aggregate is placed and may be utilized in lieu of or in conjunction with a conventional absorption field, when all other approved methods of disposal has been considered and ruled unapprovable. 
    Absorption trench means an excavation in which an absorption line is laid. 
    Absorption trench bottom area means the total bottom area of all absorption trenches in an absorption field, expressed in square feet. 
    Aggregate means washed gravel or crushed stone, ranging in size from one-half inch to two inches. 
    Alternative on-site management system means any on-site sewage management system which has proven reliability and performance in field use, but which differs in design or operation from the conventional septic tank system or privy. 
    Approved or approval means accepted or acceptable by the town or county board of health, in accordance with applicable specifications stated herein. 
    Bedroom means any room that could be expected to be used for sleeping purposes, is furnished with a closet, and is accessible to a bathroom without going through another room primarily used for sleeping purposes. 
    Black water means wastewater generated by water closets, urinals, bidets, kitchen sinks and garbage disposals. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of a building drainage system inside the walls of a building, which receives the discharge from soil, waste or other drainage systems and conveys the discharge to the building sewer. 
    Building sewer means that part of the horizontal piping of a building drainage system beyond the building drain which receives the discharge from the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, on-site sewage management system or other disposal. 
    Central on-site sewage management system means an on-site sewage management system serving more than one building, business, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. 
    Certified contractor means any person who: 
(1)  Engages in the construction, repair or alteration of an on-site sewage management system; 
(2)  Consistently complies with this regulation; 
(3)  Possesses a valid certification; and 
(4)  Was tested for certification within one year of board of health approval on December 17, 1991. 
    Commercial development means a development other than residential development and shall include any development used for retail, wholesale, commercial/office, industrial, churches and other similar facilities. 
    Conventional septic tank system means and includes any septic tank, absorption field and all associated devices and appurtenances intended to be used for disposal of sewage by soil absorption (and as shown on pages N-3 and N-5) in Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, but does not include alternative or experimental systems. 
    The town or county board of health means the town or county board of health established by O.C.G.A. title 31, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq.). 
    Department means the county health department. 
    Distribution box means a watertight structure which receives sewage effluent from a septic tank, dosing tank or other sewage retention device and distributes it in equal portions to two or more absorption lines. 
    Distribution line means a perforated drain pipe laid in an absorption trench to convey and distribute septic tank effluent. 
    Dosing tank means a watertight tank, located after a septic tank or other sewage retention device, to receive and retain sewage effluent, and so equipped as to discharge sewage effluent intermittently to a distribution box or other distribution device, either by pump or by siphon. 
    Dry sewer means a sanitary sewer constructed to applicable governmental standards, accepted by the appropriate governmental jurisdiction, and not connected to an active public or community sewerage system. 
    Experimental on-site sewage management system means any on-site sewage management system proposed for testing and observation, and approved for such purpose by the town or county board of health, but which has not been fully proven under field use. 
    Floodplain means a generally flat plain or depression susceptible to being flooded from any source, including small and intermittent watercourses and coastal areas subject to intermittent tidal action. 
    Grade means the ratio of vertical drop of pipe invert, trench bottom or ground surface to the horizontal distance traversed. 
    Gray water means wastewater generated by water-using fixtures and appliances, excluding water closets, urinals, bidets, garbage disposals and kitchen sinks. 
    Grease trap means a device in which the grease content of sewage is intercepted and congealed, and from which grease may be skimmed or otherwise removed for proper disposal. 
    Individual water supply system means a system of piping, pumps, tanks or other facilities, utilizing groundwater to supply a single-family dwelling. 
    Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership, or for development, or both, and shall not include any part of the right-of-way of a street or road. 
    Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems means the technical handbook currently adopted and periodically updated which is used by the department in the implementation of this chapter and is available for inspection at the health department. Such Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems is intended as a general guide and its provisions are herein adopted unless inconsistent with other provisions of law or regulation and is hereafter referred to as the "manual" or "Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems." 
    Mobile home park means a parcel of land developed for subsequent rental or lease for placement of two or more mobile homes. 
    Nonsewered toilet system means any portable structure used for the collection, temporary storage and chemical treatment of human body wastes that is not connected to an on-site sewage management system or public or community sewerage system. 
    On-site sewage management system means a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system, whether serving single or multiple buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. Included are conventional septic tank systems, privies, experimental and alternative on-site sewage management systems that may be approved by the town or county board of health. 
    Percolation coefficient means the ratio of trench bottom area to percolation time; it is expressed as the allowable rate of sewage application in gallons per square foot per day. 
    Percolation rate means the time, expressed in minutes per inch, required for water to seep into saturated soil at a constant rate. 
    Percolation test means the method used to measure the percolation rate of water into soil, as described on the soil data sheet available at the town or county health department and as described in the town or county department's current manual. 
    Physical development means development which includes, but is not limited to, site preparation, erection of a structure, road construction, well construction or installation of on-site sewage management systems. 
    Point of availability means the existing or predesigned location at which a public or community sewerage system terminates as determined by the appropriate governmental jurisdiction. 
    Private community sewage disposal system means a private sewage disposal system that serves more than one parcel or tract of land. Private community sewage disposal systems that are not controlled by the town shall not be permitted under any circumstance. 
    Private sewage disposal system means any on-site facility, including drip line systems, approved for the disposal of domestic sewage and commercial wastewater and that is not controlled by the town. Such a facility shall only serve buildings affixed to the lot of record on which the facility is located. 
    Privy means a structure (and necessary appurtenances) used for the sanitary disposal or storage of human wastes without the aid of water carriage; the term does not include chemical, composting, portable or incinerator toilets. 
    Public or community sewage treatment system means any sewage treatment system, including pipe lines or conduits, pumping stations, force mains and all other constructions, devices and appliances appurtenant thereto, designed for treating or conducting sewage for treatment and disposal into lakes, streams or other bodies of surface water. 
    Public water system means a system for the provision to the public of piped water for human consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections, or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily, at least 60 days out of the year. 
    Reserve area means an area designated for the replacement of on-site sewage management systems in accordance with the current regulation should the initial system fail. 
    Septage means a waste that is a fluid mixture of partially treated or untreated sewage solids, liquids and sludge of human or domestic waste, present in or pumped from septic tanks, malfunctioning on-site sewage management systems, grease traps or privies. 
    Septic tank means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to effect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
    Sewage means human excreta, all water-carried nonindustrial wastes, and/or liquid household waste including gray water from residences or similar wastes from commercial and industrial establishments. 
    Sewage lift pump means any device including all appurtenances designed to temporarily store and discharge sewage effluent to a higher elevation to effect disposal to a public or community sewerage system or an on-site sewage management system. It shall meet all requirements as set forth by the health department and shall include, but not be limited to, an alarm system, emergency bypass plumbing to a 50-foot drainfield trench and electrical supply. 
    Soil scientist means a person who holds at least a bachelor of science degree with a major in agronomy or related field, has five years or more experience in soil classification and mapping and use of soil genesis, morphology and classification technology and is an expert at identifying soil features and interpreting their influence on its uses. 
    Special event means any activity attracting more than 50 persons that is sponsored, organized, promoted, managed or financed by any person, group, partnership, organization, corporation, business or governmental entity where individuals congregate to participate in or observe an activity in outdoor or portable enclosed or semi-enclosed structures for more than two consecutive hours. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, mobile home sites or other land or property regardless of the existing or proposed use for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for sale or legacy, and includes resubdivision and where appropriate to the context, related to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. 
    Well means an excavation or opening into the ground by which groundwater is sought or obtained. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-2; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993; Ord. No. 2008-523, § 1, 11-20-2008) 
Sec. 16-26. - Applicability and enforcement. 
(a)  These rules shall have application except in the following cases: 
(1)  To any facility or system under the jurisdiction of and regulated by the department of natural resources or its successor, under the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 15-2-20 et seq.) or its successor; 
(2)  To any public or community sewage treatment system. 
(b)  The town may delegate to the town or county board of health the regulatory and administrative functions of this article. 
(c)  If any provision of this article conflicts with any applicable state rule, the state rule shall control. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-1; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-27. - Enforcement. 
    The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 31, ch. 5 (O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-18; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-28. - General provisions. 
(a)  On-site sewage management system required. Where public community sewage treatment systems are not available, the owner, lessee or agent thereof of every building, residence or property, designed, used or intended to be used for human occupancy or congregation, shall provide an approved on-site sewage management system sufficient for persons normally expected to use or frequent the building, residence or other property for two hours or more. Connection shall be made to a public or community sewage treatment system when such system is available within 200 feet of the property line, or available in a public right-of-way abutting the property (see Tables A and B set out at the end of this chapter). Where a public or community sewage treatment system is to be constructed, or an existing public or community sewer is to be extended to serve a lot, or an approved on-site sewage management system is to be used, the building sewer shall be installed so that it will ensure gravity flow at a self-cleaning velocity throughout. All sinks, lavatories, basins, shower baths, laundry tubs and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances, shall be connected to a public or community sewerage system or to an approved on-site sewage management system. 
(b)  On-site sewage management system construction permit required. No person shall construct, repair or alter an on-site sewage management system without obtaining a construction permit for such purpose from the health department. Written approval may be required for all minor repairs prior to work being performed. No permit or written approval for the construction, repair or alteration of an on-site sewage management system shall be granted until the town or county health department has inspected and approved the site, proposed location and design of the system. A fee shall be charged for a permit application. No person may begin the physical development of a lot or structure thereon, where an on-site sewage management system will be utilized, nor install a new on-site sewage management system without having first applied for and obtained from the town or county health department a construction permit for the installation. 
(c)  Excavations, permanent surfaces and multiple structures. No person shall excavate nor utilize any hole or pit for the purpose of disposing of and burying any type of debris including site cleared material (i.e., logs, stumps), building materials, etc., on any lot or portion thereof which is proposed for development with an on-site sewage management system or where there is an existing system. Only areas preapproved by the health department and any other appropriate governmental jurisdiction for excavation and use of as a trash or debris pit as indicated on the permit to construct an on-site system shall be allowed as an exception to this regulation. All swimming pools, permanent surfaces and other permanent structures where individual on-site sewage management systems are existing or proposed shall be approved by the health department prior to construction. 
(d)  Requirements for on-site sewage management system construction permit issuance or denial. On-site sewage management system construction permits for conventional septic tank systems shall be issued only after a site inspection by the health department shows favorable findings relative to percolation rates, (or a certified soil scientist's report may be accepted in lieu of percolation test results) soil characteristics, groundwater, rock and any other factors which would affect the acceptability of the lot. For construction of conventional septic tank systems, the suitability of the lot must be demonstrated through acceptable soil characteristics and/or percolation rates of less than or equal to 90 min/inch; freedom from groundwater interference or other potential for contamination of groundwater by sewage; absence of impervious strata below the level of the absorption field and absence of undesirable topographic characteristics and other factors which singly, or in combination, affect the acceptability of the lot. Lot suitability and approval for other types of on-site sewage management systems is to be determined by criteria established by the department's manual. The town or county board of health may deny or revoke an on-site sewage management system construction permit upon finding the lot unsuitable or for failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of these rules. Such denial shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5. On-site sewage management construction permits shall remain valid for not more than 12 months from the date of issuance. 
(1)  Issuance of a construction permit for an on-site sewage management system, and subsequent approval of same by representative of the town or county board of health, shall not be construed as a guarantee that such systems will function satisfactorily for a given period of time; furthermore, said representatives do not, by an action taken in effecting compliance with these rules; assume any liability for damages which are caused, or which may be caused, by the malfunction of such system. 
(2)  Residential development requiring on-site sewage systems. No person may sell, offer for sale, lease, begin construction or otherwise begin the physical development of a residential development until all requirements set forth by the health department have been met. 
a.  Preliminary plat processing. Prior to the submission of any residential development to the appropriate governmental jurisdiction for review and approval, the developer shall comply with all the applicable requirements of this regulation. 
b.  Final plat processing. Prior to the approval of any residential development by the appropriate governmental jurisdiction, the health department shall review and approve the plat regarding water supply and sewage disposal. When on-site systems are proposed, lot restrictions shall be noted and recorded as part of the final plat. Unsuitable lots for development with on-site systems shall be recombined with lots approved on the preliminary plat by the health department, or set aside for nonsewage usage purposes. 
(3)  Application for such construction permit shall be made in writing, on forms provided by the town or county board of health. (See pages N-7 and N-8 of the manual.) The application shall include: 
a.  Name and address of the owner and the applicant, if other than the owner; 
b.  Location of the property; 
c.  Plans and specification including location and design of the proposed on-site sewage management system; 
d.  Nature of the facility to be served; 
e.  Location of all water supplies, on or adjacent to the lot, which will bear upon the location of the on-site sewage management system; 
f.  Number of bedrooms in the dwelling, or the number of persons to be served in other types of establishments, or other sewage flow or water usage data; 
g.  Soil characteristics, including soil types and capabilities, frequency and evaluations of seasonal high groundwater tables, occurrence of rock and other impervious strata; 
h.  Signature of owner or agent applying for the permit; 
i.  The following general data shall be submitted by the owner or agent for the owner for review and approval by the health department prior to its issuance of a permit to construct an on-site sewage management system. Specific data requirements are as listed in the current town or county health department "Data Requirements Individual Lot" checklist. 
1.  General site plan. The general site plan shall be based on a boundary survey certified by a land surveyor currently registered in the state, including all specific data as listed in the checklist; showing structure, permanent surfaces (i.e., pools, tennis courts and circular driveways). 
2.  Soil percolation data or certified scientist's reports may be accepted in lieu of percolation tests. 
3.  Soil borings. 
4.  An owner or agent for the owner may request an onsite review by the health department for a lot without obtaining a permit to construct the system. A fee shall be charged for this consultation service. An affirmative favorable opinion of a health department employee or a site visit does not infer nor guarantee the issuance of a permit to construct an on-site sewage management system. Submission of site plans, construction plans, etc., by any individual, owner, consultant firm, etc., shall not imply nor be construed to imply or infer any approval or preapproval of a site proposed to be developed with an on-site sewage management system. 
5.  However, part of the information required for the application may be waived, provided the town or county board of health deems that information is available from previously submitted subdivision or mobile home park data, or from other sources, sufficient to make an adequate appraisal of the acceptability of the proposed lot for on-site sewage management system installation. 
6.  If industrial wastes are planned to be discharged into an individual sewage disposal system, a letter from either the EPA or other related government agency, stating the approval to discharge industrial waste into the ground. 
7.  Additional data. Any other additional supportive data or information required by the health department not specified in the checklist shall be submitted including an individual lot grading/site plan, upon request. 
(e)  Inspection. No person may cover or use a new on-site management system, nor may a person cover or use a repair of an existing management system until final inspection has been made by the town or county board of health to determine compliance with the provisions of the construction permit issued under this section and written approval has been issued by the town or county board of health. 
(1)  A copy of the final inspection of an on-site sewage management system shall be provided to the owner, builder, developer or agent, whichever is appropriate. 
(2)  Any grading, filling or other landscaping or construction activities on the lot subsequent to final inspection by the town or county board of health which may adversely affect the on-site sewage management system shall render the approval void. 
(3)  The health department shall require random spot check inspections/excavations in areas covered for construction purposes to ensure compliance with the regulations. 
(4)  The septic tank contractor must have a copy of the valid health department permit and a responsible representative on site during the construction inspection. 
(5)  Failure to comply with these requirements will necessitate rescheduling the inspection and charging an additional fee. Continued disregard of these procedures may jeopardize contractor certification. 
(f)  Maintenance. It is the property owner's responsibility to maintain and operate the on-site sewage management system in a safe and sanitary manner so as not to constitute a public health hazard or nuisance. Where an on-site sewage management system is proposed to serve facilities under separate ownership, a contract to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the system, signed by all owners, shall exist as a precondition to the issuance of a permit for the construction of the on-site sewage management system. 
(g)  Prohibited discharge. No person shall allow the unapproved discharge or spillage of sewage, nor shall an on-site sewage management system be used or maintained in such a manner that will allow the seepage or discharge of effluent from such system to the ground surface, to a watercourse, drainage ditch, open trench, canal, storm drain or storm sewer, water well, abandoned well, lake, stream, river, estuary, groundwater or other body of water. 
(1)  In the event that a failure of an on-site sewage management system cannot be repaired, then either connection to a public or community sewerage system shall be made or the premises shall be vacated until connection to the public or community sewerage system can be completed. 
(2)  The health department may put signs or require signs to be posted on a premises prohibiting occupancy where a health hazard exists (i.e., failing on-site sewage management system). Signs shall be removed only by the health department. No one may occupy the premises until the health hazard is eliminated as approved by the health department. 
(h)  Design limits on conventional septic tank systems. To provide for the maintenance of sanitary conditions through the proper functioning of a conventional septic tank system for a reasonable period of time, no such system may be installed, constructed or used, having a septic tank design capacity of less than 750 gallons or more than 10,000 gallons, or where the total length of absorption trenches required would exceed 3,000 linear feet, or where the total absorption trench bottom area required would exceed 9,000 square feet. 
(i)  Submission of plans, specifications, and soil data. Plans, specifications, soil data and, if required, percolation test data, submitted to the town or county board of health for the purpose of obtaining a construction permit to install a central on-site sewage management system to serve a commercial, industrial or institutional facility, which will produce a sewage flow in excess of 2,000 gallons per day, a travel trailer and/or mobile home park, or multiple-family dwelling of two or more family units shall bear the registration number and signature of a registered professional engineer, certified and registered under the laws of this state. The town or county board of health may accept plans, specification, soil data and percolation test data for commercial, industrial or institutional facilities with sewage flows of 2,000 gallons or less per day and for single-family dwellings when prepared in accordance with these rules, by any person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the town or county board of health that he has sufficient knowledge of on-site sewage management system design, soil evaluation, and of conducting percolation tests. 
(j)  Soil data acceptability. Soil data deemed to be acceptable by the town or county board of health shall include information on soil characteristics obtained from published soil surveys and/or unpublished reports and field data developed by the Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture, or from special investigations conducted by a soil scientist. These soil scientist's reports may be accepted in lieu of percolation test results. 
(k)  All property requiring an individual residential or commercial sewage disposal system shall have at least two separate approvable designated areas within which sewage systems may be installed on the subject property. All such areas must meet total capacity requirements for the subject property as developed. At least one of the approval areas must demonstrate conditions sufficient for successful installation of a conventional sewage disposal system. One of the designated areas shall be utilized for the initial installation of the individual sewage disposal system at the time of the development of the property. The second designated area shall be available as the location of a replacement sewage disposal system in the event that the first system fails for any reason. Disturbance of any area designated for the replacement system, including grading, paving and burial of trash, shall not be permitted. The lead environmentalist, on behalf of the town or county board of health shall enforce this regulation and review any and all proposals for replacement system in the event of failure of the originally installed sewage disposal system. 
(l)  The minimum lot size or land area which may be served by a septic system shall be that lot size or land area required by the zoning ordinance as well as the rules and regulations adopted by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-3; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-29. - Connection to sewer. 
    The owner, lessee or agent thereof of any building, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation, shall provide a system to dispose of the sewage generated within the building, residence or other facility. Connection shall be made to a public or community sewerage system when such system is available as indicated below: 
(1)  Commercial development. A public or community sewerage system shall be considered available if it is within a specified distance of the nearest property line as indicated in Table A set out at the end of this chapter; such distance being measured along the appropriate natural drainage course (gravity flow) and based on the maximum anticipated daily sewage flow (see Tables D and E set out at the end of this chapter for flow determination). Mandatory connection to a public or community sewerage system shall be required for commercial developments regardless of distance if the health department denies approval for construction of an on-site sewage management system including reserve area for any reason. 
(2)  Exception. In the event that a change in use occurs in an existing structure which may or may not require a zoning change, the new owner may be allowed to utilize the existing on-site sewage management system provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Sewage flow. Change in use of the premises will not increase the anticipated maximum daily sewage flow that the existing on-site sewage management system is designed to handle as determined by the health department. 
b.  Proper operation. The existing system is properly operating, there are no signs of failure at the time of inspection by the health department and the system is in compliance with the regulations, or that any failure on record has had an approved repair. 
c.  Site changes. The owner or agent for the owner states in writing that no site changes will be made that would alter or affect the performance of the system (i.e., paving, parking or construction on top of the system). 
d.  Mandatory connection. The owner or agent for the owner agrees in writing to immediately connect to the public or community sewerage system, when available, should the on-site system fail. 
e.  Easement dedication. The owner or agent for the owner agrees in writing to provide all necessary easements at no cost for future public sewer at time of approval as required by the appropriate governmental jurisdiction. 
f.  Payment of fees. The owner or agent for the owner pays all necessary fees (including assessments and tap on) at the time of approval as required by the appropriate governmental jurisdiction. 
(3)  Residential development. A public or community sewerage system shall be considered available if it is within a specified distance of the nearest property line at the time of application. The distance indicated in Table B set out at the end of this chapter shall be measured along the appropriate natural drainage course (gravity flow) and based on the number of lots indicated on the preliminary plat. 
(4)  Abandonment of on-site sewage management system. When the use of an on-site sewage management system is discontinued following connection to a public or community sewerage system or the condemnation or demolition of a building or property, the system shall be abandoned and any further use shall be prohibited. The following actions shall be taken, in the order listed, to abandon an on-site sewage management system: 
a.  The tank shall be pumped out; 
b.  The bottom of the tank shall be opened or ruptured so as to prevent the tank from retaining water; and 
c.  The tank shall be filled with clean soil or other suitable material. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-4; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-30. - Sewers. 
(a)  Size of sewers. Sewers connecting component parts of on-site sewage management systems shall be of sufficient size to serve anticipated flow conditions. 
(b)  Materials. All pipe or tile and fittings used in sewers and absorption fields shall meet nationally recognized standards for their designated use, such as standards published by the American Society for Testing and Materials or the National Sanitation Foundation, and approved by the town or county board of health for use in on-site sewage management systems. Sewers under driveways or similar areas of load or impact shall be of material capable of withstanding anticipated loads or installed so as to provide protection from crushing. 
(c)  Construction. Sewers, other than perforated pipe or drain tile used in absorption fields, shall be laid with sealed, watertight, root-resistant joints. Such sewers shall be laid on a firm foundation, and shall not be subject to settling, and shall be installed on a grade (see page N-3 of the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems) that will ensure a self-cleaning velocity. Where on-site sewage management systems are used, and where installation of building drains and building sewers is not covered by duly adopted local plumbing codes, or in the absence of a local plumbing code and/or plumbing inspections, the town or county board of health shall verify the adequacy and acceptability of all or any portion of the building sewer or the building drain. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-5; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-31. - Septic tanks. 
(a)  Minimum design and construction. Septic tanks shall be designed and constructed to equal or exceed minimum design and construction criteria established by the town or county board of health as published in the current manual for on-site sewage management systems. Any person seeking approval of septic tanks to be used in on-site sewage management systems after the effective date of these rules, shall submit detailed plans and specifications for tank manufacture and such other information as may be required by the town or county board of health. Manufacturers and suppliers shall be subject to periodic inspection, and approved by the town or county board of health. 
(b)  Location. No septic tank shall be installed within the minimum separation distances indicated in Table C, set out at the end of this chapter, from the referenced items (existing or proposed), nor in areas with fill material, or in areas subject to local flooding and ponding of surface runoff. Septic tanks shall be installed so as to provide ready access for necessary maintenance. The health department, after site inspection, may stipulate greater separation than cited herein, due to adverse on-site conditions such as location of a well on-site or nearby; site configuration or structure placement; subsurface soil characteristics and/or groundwater interference. Minimum separation distances from items not listed in said Table C shall be determined by the health department. 
(c)  Capacity. Minimum capacity for any septic tank shall be 750 gallons. The minimum tank size required for single-family dwellings with one or two bedrooms shall be 750 gallons, dwellings with three and four bedrooms shall be 1,000 gallons and dwellings with five bedrooms shall be 1,500 gallons. Total tank capacity will be increased by 250-gallon increments for each additional bedroom over five. Use of garbage grinders is not recommended in conjunction with on-site sewage management systems. If a grinder is to be utilized, then an additional 50 percent tank storage capacity shall be required (i.e., 500 gallons more for a 1,000-gallon system). The maximum tank capacity for a nonresidential on-site sewage management system shall be 10,000 gallons. 
(d)  Compartmented tanks. Compartmented tanks are permissible upon approval by the town or county board of health. 
(e)  Tank in series. The town or county board of health may approve the installation of two septic tanks placed in series provided that the capacity of the first tank is at least 750 gallons and at least equal to the capacity of the second tank. When tanks in series are used, they shall be connected with a sealed sewer line, and all sewage shall initially enter the first tank. 
(f)  Foundation and backfill. Septic tanks shall be constructed or installed level on a foundation of solid unexcavated ground (no fill) that will prevent settling. Backfill shall be free of voids, stumps, broken masonry or other such materials. A minimum earth cover of six inches over the tank is required with a maximum cover of 24 inches to maintain serviceability unless otherwise approved by the health department. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-6; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-32. - Distribution boxes, dosing tanks and pumps. 
(a)  Distribution boxes. 
(1)  Minimum design and construction. Distribution boxes shall be designed and constructed in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established in the department's current manual and this section. (See pages N-3 and N-5 of the Manual.) Approval procedures shall follow the requirements as set forth under section 16-31. 
(2)  Foundation. The foundation for distribution boxes shall be a four-inch thick concrete pad at least 12 inches beyond the wall of the distribution box. 
(3)  Capacity. The box shall be of sufficient capacity to temporarily store the effluent from the dosing tanks or effluent pumps during redistribution to the absorption trenches. The maximum liquid level shall be no less than four inches below the top of the box (bottom of the lid). 
(b)  Dosing tank. Where required, dosing tanks shall be designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the department's current manual. 
(c)  Sewage effluent pump. In the event that the sewage generated from a building or residence cannot be plumbed to an absorption field by gravity, then an on-site sewage management system may be modified by installing a sewage effluent pump (includes a grinder pump, if they discharge to an approved septic tank) with the necessary appurtenances as determined by the health department. Included but not limited to the following appurtenances are: a separate pump chamber from the septic tank, pump controls, level control malfunction, manhole cover, emergency bypass plumbing with 50 feet of drainline trench (minimum 36 inches wide), piping, fittings, alarms and distribution box for pump discharge prior to entering absorption field. All wiring shall be installed underground meeting electrical codes. All material specifications, warranties and construction plans must be submitted by the owner or agent for the owner and reviewed and approved by the health department, prior to issuance of a permit to construct the on-site sewage management system. Design and construction shall be in accordance with the specifications and details in the current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management System. 
(d)  In the event that a sewage effluent pump is utilized in a residential or commercial on-site sewage management system, a minimum of 50 feet of drainline and 36 inches trench width shall be constructed and used for emergency overflow in case the pumps malfunction or electrical power is temporarily interrupted. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-7) 
Sec. 16-33. - Absorption field. 
(a)  Area computation. The determination of the absorption trench bottom area to be required shall be based upon both the maximum anticipated daily sewage flow from the proposed facility and upon the characteristics of the soil in which the absorption field is to be located. Soil characteristics shall include percolation rates determined by the Modified Taft Engineering Center method (or certified soil scientist's reports may be accepted in lieu of percolation tests) together with types of soil encountered, drainage conditions and other related data that may be required by the health department. 
(1)  Residential lots. 
a.  Trench bottom areas for residential on-site sewage management systems shall not be less than those shown below: 
Average Percolation 
Test Rate Absorption Trench 
Bottom Area Per Bedroom 
(Existing Proposed) in Square Feet 1-45 minutes per inch 300 46-65 minutes per inch 375 66-90 minutes per inch 450  
b.  Two or more systems serving the same residence or building may require additional absorption trench area compared to that required for a single system. 
(2)  Commercial development. Total absorption trench bottom are for nonresidential, on-site sewage management systems shall not be less than the area obtained by multiplying the maximum anticipated daily sewage flow (gallons) by the percolation coefficient i.e., (one-fifth of the square root of the average percolation rate) (e.g., one-fifth percolation rate X gal. = total absorption trench bottom area). The maximum anticipated daily sewage flow shall be determined in accordance with the sewage flow schedule, Table D in section 16-43, or if a commercial facility is not included on the schedules, then a study will be made to determine what similar commercial facilities have as daily sewage flow. The maximum total absorption trench bottom area for a nonresidential/commercial on-site sewage management system shall be 9,000 square feet. The minimum size nonresidential/commercial on-site sewage management system shall include at least a 750-gallon septic tank and 300 square feet of absorption trench bottom area. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  No absorption field shall be installed within the minimum separation distances indicated in Table C set out at the end of this chapter from the referenced items (existing or proposed), nor in areas with unsuitable fill material. 
(2)  Absorption fields shall not be installed where groundwater or adverse geological formations may interfere with the absorption of treated sewage or result in the contamination of groundwater. Absorption fields shall not be installed in areas subject to excessive surface water, ponding or runoff, including but not limited to stormwater and discharge from building gutters. Absorption fields shall not be installed where grade exceeds 20 percent. The health department, after site inspection, may require greater separation distances due to adverse conditions such as topography, subsurface soil characteristics, and/or groundwater sources. No part of the absorption field shall ever be covered by buildings, pavement or be used for vehicular traffic or parking. No absorption field shall be constructed less than 100 feet from existing or proposed wells; less than ten feet from water supply lines; less than ten feet from building foundations and property lines; less than 15 feet from an embankment nor less than 50 feet from the normal water level of any impoundment, tributary, stream or other body of water. If it becomes necessary for the absorption field to be within ten feet of a water supply line, the water supply line within ten feet of the absorption field shall be at least 12 inches above the top of the aggregate layer of the absorption line and shall be encased in a single length of water pipe. 
(c)  Minimum design and construction for conventional systems. Absorption trenches shall be on grade throughout, shall be no less than 25 inches, nor more than 48 inches in depth, shall be 36 inches in width (unless otherwise approved in writing by the health department prior to installation) and shall enable placement of at least 13 inches of backfill on top of gravel bed. If unfavorable soil conditions (i.e., high clay content) are encountered at normal installation depths, trenches may be installed at greater depths if approved by the health department, site modifications are performed, acceptable percolation test rates can be shown to exist at these depths, and the soil meets all requirements for installation of absorption fields with respect to work, groundwater elevations and other geological factors. Absorption trenches shall be spaced not less than seven feet apart between trench walls. Perforated pipe shall be laid in the center of the trench with perforations oriented toward the bottom of the trench and appropriate fittings used where needed. Pipe crossings under roadways or paved areas shall not be considered in determining the total absorption trench bottom area. If trash pits are encountered during construction, then an absorption trench bypass must be installed in accordance with Detail B meeting the approval of the health department. Aggregate shall be placed under the absorption line to a minimum depth of six inches and shall extend the full width of the trench and two inches of aggregate shall cover the absorption line (total depth of aggregate shall be a minimum of 12 inches). Excavation for absorption trenches in wet clay soils and smearing of trench walls and bottoms should be avoided so that permeability will not be reduced. Approvals may be withheld where such damage has occurred. Absorption fields shall not be installed in areas where percolation test rates exceed 90 minutes per inch. 
(d)  Field layout methods. Absorption fields shall be designed and installed in accordance with one of the following methods: 
(1)  Distribution box method. The distribution box method may be used on level or moderately sloping topography, and shall be required when dosing tanks are used. A concrete foundation for distribution boxes extending at least 12 inches beyond the walls of the box shall be provided to ensure against tilting of the distribution box. Extreme care should be exercised in backfilling around and over the distribution box. The top of the distribution box shall have a minimum earth cover of six inches, but not more than 24 inches unless provisions are made for ready access to the distribution box. Effluent lines from the septic tank, dosing tank or pump chamber shall terminate inside the distribution box via an elbow turned downward to form a submerged inlet of normal water level. Equal absorption trench lengths, not exceeding 100 linear feet shall be connected to distribution box outlets by independent sewers, consisting of schedule 40 PVC pipe. Absorption lines of equal lengths shall be connected to distribution box outlets by independent sewers. Absorption trenches may be installed at the same elevation or at different elevations, but all sewers leading from the distribution box outlet to the absorption lines shall be installed at the same elevation and shall be level on a solid bed of aggregate for two feet and shall be sealed watertight. Beginning two feet from the distribution box, the grade of such sealed lines shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot. Absorption lines shall be laid on a uniform grade of not less than two inches nor more than four inches per 100 feet with a minimum of two inches recommended. An increased number of shorter trenches is recommended rather than the use of fewer longer trenches. 
(2)  Level field method. On level topography, the level field method may be used. When this method is used, the absorption field shall be installed level, with all absorption lines interconnected to form a continuous system. A standard tee fitting or distribution box shall be used to interconnect the absorption lines. 
(3)  Serial distribution method. When the serial distribution method is used, level absorption trenches shall be constructed along land contours. The sewer from the septic tank shall enter the uppermost absorption line and terminate at any point in the line so that all sewage from the septic tank is discharged into the first line. Adjacent absorption lines shall be successively connected by means of overflow sewers constructed at any point along the line in such a manner that each trench is filled with effluent to the full depth of aggregate before the effluent flows through the overflow sewer to the next trench. The invert of the first overflow sewer must be at least four inches lower than the invert of the septic tank outlet. At the point where an overflow sewer leaves an absorption trench, the excavation for the overflow sewer shall be dug no deeper than the top of the aggregate in the absorption trench, so that an undisturbed block of earth will remain in place for the full depth of the aggregate. Overflow sewers connecting absorption trenches shall be laid on undisturbed earth. Overflow sewers shall be nonperforated. Overflow sewer connections will be necessary, only to maintain required trench depths. A minimum of 12 inches of earth cover will be required over overflow sewers. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-8; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-34. - Privies. 
    Privies shall be designed and constructed in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established by the current On-Site Sewage Management System Manual. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-9; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-35. - Alternative and experimental on-site sewage management systems and site modifications. 
(a)  Alternative systems will be considered for use when existing conventional systems have failed and cannot be repaired by conventional methods and public or private sewers are not available. The department recognizes that on-site sewage management systems employing solids retention and on-site soil absorption of sewage effluent, if designed properly and installed in suitable soil, are usually ecologically safe and do adequately protect the public health. 
(b)  The department further recognizes that substantial portions of the state's undeveloped land area are marginally suitable or totally unsuitable for conventional septic tank systems, and that continued installation of such systems will have a detrimental effect on public health. Where appropriate, and after thorough assessment of alternatives, the town or county board of health will consider alternative on-site sewage management systems and/or modifications for areas with soils which may have only marginal suitability in their present condition, including community-managed, on-site sewage management systems and combinations of public or community sewage treatment systems and on-site sewage management systems. 
(c)  When considering proposals for alternative on-site sewage management systems, priority shall be given to those situations where the alternative system will resolve an existing sewage management problem. Any person or community desiring to install an alternative on-site sewage management system shall submit the following information to the town or county board of health: 
(1)  Plans and specifications, along with any engineering, laboratory or field data required; 
(2)  Information as required on the application for an individual on-site sewage management system construction permit, and any additional information as may be required by the town or county board of health. If the proposal for the system is approved, the person making the application will be informed by the town or county board of health of any requirements for maintenance, and any monitoring procedures of water usage by the installation of water conserving fixtures and devices should be considered in overall strategy. 
(d)  Experimental on-site sewage management systems. The town or county board of health may consider proposals for the use of experimental on-site sewage management systems. Acceptance or denial of such proposals shall depend on many site- and system-specific factors, including a primary consideration that the remainder of the site is suitable for the conventional septic tank system in the event of failure of the experimental system. 
(e)  Site modifications. Approval of certain lots determined to be unsuitable for conventional septic tank systems, may be reconsidered if appropriate site modifications are carried out to eliminate or significantly ameliorate unfavorable site characteristics. Modifications may include surface or subsurface drainage system, filling, grading, etc. Any person desiring to modify a lot for the purpose of obtaining a construction permit for installation of an on-site sewage management system shall submit for approval detailed plans showing the type and extent of modifications. The town or county board of health may require any additional information or clarification needed for formulating a proper decision on the proposed modifications. No modifications shall be carried out prior to the approval and issuance of a construction permit. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-10; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-36. - Percolation tests and test borings. 
(a)  Percolation tests. 
(1)  If conducted, percolation tests shall not be considered presumptive or conclusive evidence as to the suitability of a given lot for the use of on-site sewage management systems. Such tests shall be considered and analyzed as one of many criteria in determining soil suitability. Acceptable data on soil characteristics, including the location of rock strata and water table evaluations, will be considered of primary importance. Percolation tests, if conducted, will be used to augment or supplement the soils data. It should be further understood that percolation tests conducted during dry weather periods in areas that commonly experience high seasonal water table elevations during wet periods of the year will often exhibit very good percolation rates, thus inaccurately portraying the absorptive capacity of the soil during wet periods. Percolation tests shall be run in accordance with the modified Taft Engineering Center method published in the department's current manual for on-site sewage management systems. 
(2)  Certified soil scientists' reports may be accepted in lieu of percolation tests, but for subdivisions, soil scientist's reports must be submitted at the preliminary stage of approval and noted on all subdivision plats. 
(b)  Location and number. 
(1)  Percolation test holes should be located in the area proposed for the installation of the absorption field. Data from test holes in areas outside of, or clearly uncharacteristic of, the proposed installation site will not be allowed. Percolation tests shall not be conducted in holes created by the deterioration of stumps and roots, or any other area which would render results that inaccurately portray the absorptive capacity of the soil in the absorption field area, such as in or near streams, floodplains, easements, embankments, gullies. All percolation test holes shall be flagged, staked and numbered in accordance with soil data record form. 
(2)  Percolation test holes shall be spaced at least 50 feet apart. (Spacing may be reduced if approved by the health department.) The number of tests shall be sufficient to obtain a proper appraisal of the absorptive capacity of the soil in the proposed absorption field area and shall be a minimum of three percolation tests performed for lots up to two acres, and two percolation tests for lots two acres and above. 
(3)  The number of tests required for preliminary appraisal of subdivisions may be specified in lesser numbers, provided a general overview of the soil characteristic of the total subdivision acreage is provided. Percolation test holes shall be located by number on a topographic map showing lot designations, boundaries, easements, etc., and the results shall be recorded on the map. 
(c)  Test boring for rock, shale, hardpan and water table. 
(1)  Where surface outcropping or subsurface formations raise reasonable doubt concerning the operational effectiveness of on-site sewage management systems, a sufficient number of test borings to an appropriate depth may be required by the town or county board of health to determine whether on-site sewage management systems can be expected to give satisfactory service (see section 16-28). Such borings and the results shall be located by number and recorded on the topographic map unless otherwise specified by the health department. Borings will be done to six-foot depth, and for water table evaluation should be examined after at least 12 hours. 
(2)  Borings shall not be located in easements, or other areas restricted by the regulation. 
(d)  Notification when conducting percolation tests and borings. Individuals conducting percolation tests and/or test borings shall notify the town or county board of health at least 24 hours prior to performing these procedures and, at the option of the department or town or county board of health, such procedures shall be performed in the presence of a department or town or county board of health representative. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-11; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-37. - Limited sewage capacity. 
(a)  Use of leased and/or easement property. The health department may waive the requirement that a property owner construct an on-site sewage management system to serve his proposed development only on his property. Easements on contiguous land may be considered for construction of an on-site sewage management system if suitable sufficient area on-site is not available and the easement is to be used exclusively for the on-site system. 
(b)  County agreement for conditional sewer capacity. Completion and execution of the current specified agreement by the owner, health department and appropriate governmental jurisdiction, including notarization and recording in the county superior court clerk's office (recording-microfilming), shall be required prior to issuance of a town or county health department permit to construct a temporary on-site sewage management system and issuance of appropriate land disturbance and building permits. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-12; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-38. - Septage removal and disposal. 
(a)  Septage and removal permit. No person shall engage in the removal or disposal of the contents of septic tanks, pit privies or other on-site sewage management or experimental systems without having first applied for and obtained from the town or county board of health a septage removal permit, renewed annually, for such activities. The application for such septage removal permit shall be submitted in writing on forms provided by the town or county board of health at least ten days prior to engaging in such activities. The application shall include but not be limited to: the business name and address, name and address of the applicant, the manner by which such contents are to be removed, transported and given final disposal and such other documentation as may be required by the town or county board of health, including evidence that septage removed and transported will be accepted at approved disposal sites. If surface spreading, subsurface land disposal or other method of treatment or disposal is to be used, additional information may be required. 
(b)  Disposal methods. Approved methods of disposal of septage from on-site sewage management systems shall be: 
(1)  Discharge to a public or community sewage treatment system for treatment in a wastewater treatment plant; 
(2)  Treatment at separate septage handling facilities; or 
(3)  Direct land application. 
Disposal by any of these methods shall require written permission from both the appropriate governing official, private septage handling facility owner or land owner and a representative of the town or county board of health. 
(c)  Disposal of sludge. 
(1)  Limitation on sludge disposal. Sludge disposal through land application is prohibited in the town unless conducted pursuant to and in full conformance with a full permit for the operation of a municipal solid waste disposal facility or municipal solid waste landfill issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-24. This prohibited use shall include both surface and subsurface application. 
(2)  Definition of sludge. 
a.  The term "sludge" means any solid, semi-solid or liquid waste generated from a public, municipal, commercial, private or industrial waste water treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, any pollution control facility or other waste generating facility, and includes treated sewage, stabilized sewage sludges and stabilized septage. 
b.  The term "sludge" does not include reclaimed wastewater which is being discharged as part of a reuse land application system pursuant to a fully authorized and operational permit from the state department of natural resources/environmental protection division. 
(d)  Vehicle identification. The name and address of the person or firm engaging in the removal of septage from on-site sewage management systems and the permit number shall be lettered on both sides of each vehicle used for septage removal purposes. Letters and numerals shall not be less than two inches in height and shall be readily visible. 
(e)  Vehicle maintenance. Every vehicle used for removal of septage from on-site sewage management systems shall be equipped with a watertight tank or body and properly maintained. Liquid wastes shall not be transported in open bodied vehicles. All pumps, hose lines, valves and fittings shall be maintained so as to prevent leakage. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-13; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993; Ord. No. 356, 6-4-1998) 
Sec. 16-39. - Grease traps. 
(a)  Required. Grease traps shall be required for commercial or industrial establishments with on-site sewage management systems where it is determined by the town or county board of health that grease may be introduced into the system in quantities that may adversely affect the operation of the system. 
(b)  Design. Plans and specifications for grease traps shall be submitted to the town or county board of health for approval. Grease traps shall be designed to provide a liquid capacity of not less than 125 gallons. Effluent from grease traps shall be disposed of in septic tank and not directly discharged to the absorption field. 
(c)  Construction. Grease traps shall be located, installed and constructed so that the temperature of the sewage will be reduced to permit congealing or separation of grease and easy access for cleaning is provided. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-14; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-40. - Sewage flow. 
    Where sizing of the on-site sewage management system is determined by sewage flow, estimates of the daily sewage flow shall not be less than the volume derived from the population to be served. Daily sewage flow shall be determined from the department's current manual; however, the flow for establishments not listed shall be determined by the town or county board of health after due consideration of data submitted by the owner or his agent on design criteria. Calculations will be made on the basis of peak flow loads and not on long term averages. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-15; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-41. - Subdivision and mobile home parks. 
(a)  Plans required. No person may sell, offer for sale, lease, rent, begin construction or otherwise begin the physical development of a subdivision or mobile home park where public or community sewage treatment systems are not available or contemplated to be available to service the proposed development until proposals and plans for the water supply and sewage disposal method to be provided or installed have been submitted to and written approval has been obtained from the town or county board of health. 
(b)  Predevelopment review advised. All developers considering subdivision or mobile home park development where public or community sewage treatment systems will not be available are strongly advised to seek a predevelopment review by the town or county board of health prior to purchasing property and/or making substantial monetary outlays for development improvements. Rejection or tentative approval may be obtained at this time by submitting the following information: 
(1)  A boundary plat, including: 
a.  A vicinity map; 
b.  A topographic map; 
c.  A soil map and soil descriptions. 
(2)  Complete subdivision analysis record on forms provided by the department; 
(3)  Additional information as required by the town or county board of health for complete understanding and clarification. 
(c)  Proposals and plans. Unless previously provided, subdivisions or mobile home park proposals shall be submitted on subdivision analysis forms provided by the department or the town or county board of health. Subdivisions or mobile home park plans shall be drawn to a reasonable scale, with topography depicted by two feet contour intervals; provided, however, that if ground slope is sufficiently steep for less frequent contour intervals to show the surface configurations, the town or county board of health may permit the use of lesser contour intervals. Plans shall illustrate the location of all present and proposed wells, watercourses, floodplains, water systems, sewage system, roads, structures, rights-of-way and easements on the property and within 100 feet outside the perimeter of the property. Subdivision or mobile home park plans shall also include, storm water drainage systems, elevations of seasonal high water table, location and results of test borings and percolation tests if applicable, lot identification, dimensions and building lines. The name and registration number of the preparing surveyor or engineer shall also be on the subdivision or mobile home park plans. 
(d)  Soil evaluation. Data used to develop soil maps and descriptions shall be obtained from reliable sources as set forth in section 16-28(i). Where reliable soil information or the services of a soil scientist are not available, percolation tests, soil borings and such other tests as the town or county board of health may require shall be conducted. 
(e)  Limits on use of on-site sewage management systems in subdivision and mobile home parks. Approval of subdivisions and mobile home parks for on-site sewage management systems shall not be granted when: 
(1)  An available sewer of a public or community sewage system is within 500 feet of the subdivision or mobile home park; 
(2)  Soil maps, descriptions and reports compiled by the Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, or a soil scientist indicate that soil conditions prohibit safe development with on-site sewage management system, or the average percolation rate for the subdivision or mobile home park is more than 90 minutes per inch. 
(f)  Drainage. (See pages H-1 through H-4 of the manual.) Where on-site sewage management systems are proposed for use, an adequate surface water drainage system shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Plans for drainage shall comply with local storm drainage plans and policies in effect in the town and/or county at the time of submission to the town or county board of health, and approval of drainage plans by the town council is a prerequisite to town or county board of health approval. Additionally, any changes or amendments to approved drainage plans must receive the concurrence of the governing agency, and the town or county board of health shall be provided with a written approval statement from the governing agency. In the absence of the local drainage policies, the department or town or county board of health will evaluate drainage plans and render decisions on their acceptability. Plans for internal drainage (subsurface drainage), if used, shall be submitted to the town or county board of health for consideration as to acceptability. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-16; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-42. - Subdivision, mobile home park water and sewage. 
(a)  Water supply. A public water supply shall be required if available within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision or mobile home park. 
(b)  Percolation tests. Where required for planning purposes and determination of the general absorptive capacity of soils, the number of percolation tests to be made shall be one per lot, in the area where absorption fields are to be located. Preparatory to construction of on-site sewage management systems, individual lots within the proposed development shall comply with section 16-28. 
(c)  Test borings. Where required for planning purposes, test borings to determine groundwater elevations and subsurface rock formations shall be made at locations in numbers and at depths to be determined by the department or town or county board of health. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-17; Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Sec. 16-43. - Tables. 
Table A. Mandatory Connection Criteria-Commercial Development 
Maximum Anticipated Average 
Daily Sewage Flow 
(gpd) Distance to Public or 
Community Sewerage System 
(feet) x < = 1,000 200 1,000 < x < = 3,000 1,000 3,000 < x < = 6,000 1,500 x > 6,000 2,000  
Table B. Mandatory Connection Criteria-Residential Development 
Number of Lots Distance to Public or 
Community Sewerage System 
(feet) x 6 200 6 < = x  < = 25 1,000 25 < x  < = 50 1,500 x > 50 2,000  
Table C. Separation Distance Requirements 
Reference Item Minimum 
Separation 
Septic Tank 
(feet) Minimum 
Separation 
Absorption Field 
(feet) Bored wells, springs (existing, proposed or abandoned) 50* 100* Drilled wells (existing, proposed or abandoned) 25 100* Suction water lines 50 100 Pressure water lines 10 10* Lakes, ponds, streams, waterways 25 50 Edge of drainage ditch (draw) 15 15 Edge of embankment 15 15 Retaining wall (uphill) 15 15 Retaining wall (downhill) 5 5 Building/structure 10 10 Pool wall 10 10 Edge of pavement 5 5 Property line (public water) 10 10 Property line (individual water supplies) 10 10 Retention, detention ponds (100-year pond elevation) 50 100 Trash pits*** 15 15  
*Minimum separation distances from the septic tank and absorption field and abandoned wells may be reduced to 25 feet if the abandoned well is filled and compacted (in three-foot layers maximum) with clay material approved by the health department. The top of the abandoned well shall also be sealed and capped as approved by the health department. 
**Pressure water lines may be allowed in the cover over the system if approved by the health department, but not in the absorption field trench. 
***No trash pits shall be allowed on lots (residential or commercial) where an on-site sewage management system is proposed unless approved by the health department and the appropriate governmental jurisdiction. Health department approval of any trash pit shall be limited only to its location relative to the proposed location of the on-site system. (See Detail B attached to Ord. 245 and on file in the town clerk's office.) 
Table D. Sewage Flow Schedule 
Type of Establishment Gallons Per Day 
(Unless Otherwise Noted) Assembly halls 3 per seat Boardinghouses 75 per person Roominghouses 60 per person Churches, not including assembly halls, classrooms, day-care centers, kindergarten, etc. 3 per seat Church classrooms 5 per person Church kitchen waste 3 per person (based on dining area) Day care centers and residence, including 20 per child kindergartens, no meals independent mobile homes and cottages Food service establishments 13 per customer Add for cocktail lounge 2 per customer Retail service 5 per customer Swimming pools, bathhouse 20 per bather based on bathing load Taverns, bars and cocktail 20 per customer lounges, meals Workers/employees including: factory, office, school, commercial and construction w/o showers and no industrial waste 25 per person Workers/employees including: factory, office, school, commercial and construction with showers and no industrial waste 35 per person  
Table E. Maximum Occupancy 
Type of Establishment Person(s)/Floor area 
(Sq. Ft.) Assembly halls No ratio - fixed seating - stated on plans (approved by fire dept.) or 1/15 - movable seating *Churches, not including assembly halls, day-care centers, kindergartens, etc. No ratio - fixed seating - stated on plans (approved by fire dept.) or 1/7 - movable seating Church classrooms 1/20Day care centers/kindergartens No ratio - number of children and employees - stated on plans (approved by DHR - Day Care Licensing Division) or 1/35 not including employees *Food service establishments No Ratio - fixed seating- stated on plans (approved by fire dept.) or 1/15 movable seating Office 1/100Retail service 1/1,000 - employees 1/30 - customers (1st floor/ground floor) 1/60 - customers (remaining floors) Warehouse/storage 1/300Maximum occupancies not listed in this table shall be determined in accordance with the Fayette County fire department regulations.  
* Does not include employees to be identified in the letter of intent and calculated based on the remaining total gross floor area (not deducted in Table E) at a ratio of 1:100. 
(Ord. No. 245, 2-17-1993) 
Secs. 16-44-16-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BODY ART STUDIOS 

Sec. 16-60. - Authority. 
    The legal authority for these rules is O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-71, 16-5-71.1, 16-12-5, 31-3-4, and Chapters 5 and 40 of Title 31. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-61. - Purpose. 
    The body art studios and body artist rules are adopted for the purpose of establishing reasonable standards for individuals performing body art procedures and the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards are designed to promote the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving body art services. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-62. - Exemptions. 
    These rules shall not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, or a technician acting under the direct on-site supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-63. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to these rules. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in these rules shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
    Antibacterial solution means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria which is approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by FDA. 
    Biohazard means any infectious agent(s) or parts thereof presenting a real or potential risk to the well-being of humans or other species, directly through infection or indirectly through disruption of the environment. 
    Body art means the practice of physical body alteration by permitted establishments and by licensed operators using techniques including, but not limited to, the following: body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. Body art does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by the Georgia State Medical Board, which shall not be performed in a body art studio. Body art does not include the painting of the skin with tempura or temporary, non-indelible inks, paints, or dyes. Body art does not include piercing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp ear piercing systems. 
    Body art studio means any permanent building or structure in a planned commercial center on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business permit or license, wherein a body artist performs body art. 
    Body art studio permit means the authorization granted by the Fayette County Board of Health to the owner to operate a body art studio. Such permit is the property of the Fayette County Board of Health. 
    Body artist means any person who performs body art. 
    Body piercing means puncturing or penetration of the skin or mucosa of a person with any sharp instrument and/or the insertion of jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening. 
    Cosmetic tattooing means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa. Cosmetic tattooing shall include permanent cosmetics, micro-pigmentation, permanent color technology, and micro-pigment implantation. 
    Board of health means the Fayette County Board of Health or its duly authorized representatives. 
    Currently licensed health care professional means those professionals licensed by the State of Georgia to perform health care services and includes, but is not limited to, licensed physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurse (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
    Department means the Department of Public Health of the State of Georgia. 
    Disinfection means a process that eliminates many or all pathogenic microorganisms, with the exception of bacterial spores, from inanimate objects. High level disinfection can be expected to destroy all microorganisms, with the exception of high numbers of bacterial spores. Intermediate level disinfection inactivates Mycobacterium tuberculosis, vegetative bacterial, most viruses, and most fungi. Low level disinfection can kill most bacteria, some viruses, and some fungi. Guideline for Environmental Infection Control in Healthcare Facilities: Recommendation of CDC and the Healthcare Injection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC); U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2003). 
    Easily cleanable means composed of readily accessible, non-absorbent material, and of such constitution, finish, and fabrication that residue may be completely removed by non-mechanical low friction methods. 
    EPA means the Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Instrument means any hand piece, needle, needle bar, sharp, device, or other object that is used or may come into contact with a client or may be exposed to bodily fluids during a body art procedure. 
    Owner means the person, partnership, corporation, association, or any other form of business organization that owns, maintains, or controls a body art studio and who is responsible for the operation of the studio. 
    Parlor means the actual room of the body art studio where the body artist performs procedures. 
    Sanitary means free of visible debris, residue, or contamination, and with reduced microbial contaminants. 
    Sanitized means an effective antimicrobial treatment by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals or other suitable method on surfaces for enough time to reduce the microbial count to a sanitary level. 
    Scarification means the act of creating designs out of scar tissue by cutting the skin or branding it with heated metal. 
    Sharps means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts to the skin or tissue. 
    Single-use means an instrument or article which is reasonably anticipated to come into direct contact with blood and compromised tissue surfaces during its intended use. Such articles are not to be used on more than one customer or client for any reason and must be disposed of after use as soon as possible, without posing risk of contamination or exposure to the body artist, the client, or the surrounding environment. 
    Standard precautions means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as "Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health Care and Public Safety Workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, Bi. S-6; "Recommendation for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures," in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8; and "Recommendations for Prevention and Control of HCV Infection and HCV Related Chronic Disease" in MMWR, October 16, 1998, Vol. 47, No. RR-19. These methods of infection control require the employer and the employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and other blood borne pathogens. Precautions include, but are not limited to, hand washing, gloving, masks, protective eye wear and/or other protective equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and disposal of needles and other sharp instruments when contact with blood or bodily fluids containing blood is anticipated. Standard precautions apply to blood, all body fluids, secretions, and excretions, excluding sweat, regardless of whether or not they contain visible blood, non-intact skin, and mucous membranes. Standard precautions include universal precautions. In the event that the CDC or other primary reference or regulatory authority publishes materials or amends regulations applicable to this definition, this definition shall be deemed amended to include the latest versions of these documents, regulations, and recommendations. 
    Sterilization means the reduction of microbial life at an order of 10 log 6 using equipment capable of delivering full efficacy to all surfaces within the unit chamber, including tubes, lumens, cracks, or other obscured surfaces, including those inside packaging. 
    Sterilizer means an autoclave certified to meet medical standards and which performs the act of sterilization as defined herein. 
    Sterilizer indicator means a device designed to give visual verification that sterilization temperature has been achieved during the sterilization process. 
    Suspension means the piercing of human tissue or skin with hooks or other piercing apparatuses for supporting or bearing weight, either human or object. 
    Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa and includes the definition of tattoo as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1(1) and as may hereafter be amended. The term "tattoo" also includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. 
    Wash means cleansing the skin with warm water and antibacterial soap and drying with single-use towels. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-64. - Scope of rules. 
(a)  All permits issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the board of health, the department, and state law. 
(b)  The requirements of these rules shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, and regulatory provisions of local, state, or federal law and shall not authorize violations of said other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-65. - Body art studio owner. 
(a)  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 40, along with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and along with the applicable rules of the Fayette County Board of Health, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes and rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(b)  Prior to being granted a body art studio permit, the body art studio owner shall adopt and submit to the local health authority a written statement of policies and procedures of the body art studio showing compliance with the following: 
(1)  No person under the age of 18 shall perform body art procedures on individuals unless under the direct on-site supervision of a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34. 
(2)  Body artists shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. 
(3)  No person shall perform body art procedures on an individual who is or reasonably appears to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or other stimulants or depressants, or is of unsound mind or body. 
(4)  No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art studio. 
(5)  No tattoo procedure shall be performed on a person under the age of 18 except by a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such physician or osteopath with the written consent of a parent or guardian. 
(6)  No body piercing procedure shall be performed on a person under the age of 18 without written consent and proof of valid state issued identification of a parent or guardian. A copy of the consent form and proof of identification shall be maintained in the client's record. The parent or guardian must be present when the piercing procedure is performed. 
(7)  No tattoo procedure shall be performed on any person within one inch of any part of the eye socket of such person. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-66. - Body art studio permit. 
(a)  The owner of each body art studio shall obtain a valid body art studio permit from the Fayette County Board of Health prior to beginning operation. Body art studios shall renew their permit annually in accordance with sections 16-67 and 16-68 herein. 
(b)  The permit is the property of the Fayette County Board of Health. 
(c)  To be eligible for a new body art studio permit or a renewal permit, a body art studio must be in compliance with all of the requirements of these rules. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to practice body art procedures unless such procedures are performed in a body art studio operating under a valid body art studio permit issued by the Fayette County Board of Health. 
(e)  The holder of a body art studio permit shall only hire, employ, or use individuals to perform body art who have complied with the applicable requirements of this article. 
(f)  The body art studio permit shall be displayed on the premises and conspicuously displayed in public view. Permits shall not be defaced or altered in any manner. A body art studio shall not post a reproduction of a permit unless the board of health has marked it "Duplicate." 
(g)  All body art studio permits issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable. 
(h)  The body art studio permit shall be returned to the Fayette County Board of Health Environmental Health Section if it is suspended or revoked within seven days. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-67. - Application for body art studio permit. 
(a)  The application for a body art studio permit or for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall be made on forms provided by the Fayette County Board of Health. 
(b)  Any application for a new body art studio permit or for the renewal of a body art studio permit shall be sworn to by the applicant as true and correct. 
(c)  At least 30 days prior to the anticipated date of opening, the owner of a new body art studio shall submit an application to the Fayette County Board of Health for a body art studio permit to operate under these rules. 
(d)  The application for a body art studio shall include: 
(1)  A scaled drawing of the studio, including the location of all furnishings and equipment; 
(2)  A zoning certification obtained from the appropriate jurisdiction (the applicant shall comply with all applicable zoning, building, safety, fire, and other local codes and requirements); 
(3)  A copy of the certificate of occupancy for the studio; 
(4)  A complete description of all body art services which will be provided in the body art studio; 
(5)  The full or legal name under which the body art studio is conducted; 
(6)  The address of the body art studio; 
(7)  If the owner leases the location, the name and current address of the landlord; 
(8)  The name and home address of the owner; if the owner of the body art studio is a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; if the owner is a corporation, the date and place of incorporation and the name and address of its registered agent in the state; or if the owner is any other type of association, the names of the principals of the association; 
(9)  A list containing the full names and home addresses of all employees and staff who will be working in the body art studio; 
(10)  A copy of the written statement and policies and procedures of the body art studio in accordance with section 16-65 of these rules; 
(11)  An acknowledgement signed by the owner acknowledging that the owner has read and understands these rules; and 
(12)  Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the board of health. 
(e)  The applicant shall submit a non-refundable plan review fee as set by the Fayette County Board of Health and approved by the mayor and council of the Town of Tyrone. The plan review fee shall be waived for any body art studio that is open for operation prior to the adoption of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-68. - Application for renewal. 
(a)  At least 30 days prior to the expiration of a body art studio permit, the owner shall submit an application to the Fayette County Board of Health Environmental Health Section for a renewal of the body art studio permit. 
(b)  The application shall include an updated drawing of the body art studio according to subsection 16-67(d)(1). 
(c)  The application shall also include all information as described in subsection 16-67(d)(5)-(12). 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-69. - Issuance of body art studio permits and fees. 
(a)  The Fayette County Board of Health may issue a body art studio permit to an owner after determining that the studio is in compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 40, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and with these rules. 
(b)  A body art studio shall submit an application for a new body art studio permit when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The studio is remodeled, renovated, or expanded; 
(2)  There is a change in the legal ownership of the body art studio; or 
(3)  An existing facility is moved or relocated. 
(c)  Body art studio permits shall automatically expire on December 31 of each year. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a body art studio permit, the owner must pay the applicable permit fee. Body art studio permit fees shall not be prorated. 
(e)  No permit shall be issued to any owner to perform body art procedures in any area of the town that is zoned for any type of residential use by the town's zoning ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-70. - Denial, suspension, or revocation of body art studio permit. 
(a)  Upon recommendation or official action of the board of health, a body art studio permit issued pursuant to any provision of this article may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the board of health, and considered null and void, if: 
(1)  The application for a body art studio permit contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)  The premises covered by the permit are found to be in violation of any applicable provision of this Code, or other state or federal law; 
(3)  The studio is determined to be a threat or nuisance to public health, safety, or welfare; 
(4)  The owner or body artist violated the provision of this Code; or 
(5)  Violations of the conditions of the permit are committed. 
(b)  After a body art studio permit has been revoked, a valid permit shall not be issued until all violations have ceased and all changes, alteration, additions, or improvements comply with all requirements of this Code as determined by the Fayette County Board of Health. 
(c)  No body art studio permit shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this article to any applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this article, the same applicant requesting a permit has been denied a permit based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material fact in any application. 
(d)  As required by O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 40, sec. 4, any person substantially affected by any final order of the board of health denying, suspending, revoking, or refusing to grant or renew any permit provided under this Code may secure review by appeal to the Fayette County Board of Health in accordance with the hearing requirements of O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 5, sec. I, and as may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-71. - Application to existing businesses. 
    The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all body art studios whether the studios were established before or after the effective date of these rules. Any body art studio in business on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six months of the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-72. - Body art not allowed in mobile, transitory facilities. 
    Body art shall not be allowed to occur in automobiles, mobile, transitory, or other non-fixed facilities. Such non-fixed facilities include mobile homes, tents, recreational vehicles, and trailers. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-73. - Body art studio minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)  The body art studio shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained so as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers and staff. 
(b)  The body art studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the procedure adequate privacy from observers. The parlor shall be separate from the waiting room. 
(c)  Insects, vermin, and/or rodents shall not be present in any part of the body art studio. Effective measures shall be taken by the body art studio owner to prevent the breeding or presence of insects, vermin, and/or rodents on the premises. 
(d)  The body art studio shall have adequate mechanical ventilation in compliance with current state and local building codes. 
(e)  Walls and ceilings of parlors and equipment storage rooms shall be painted or covered in a manner to ensure that the surface is easily cleanable. All paint and coverings shall be light in color. 
(f)  Parlor floors and equipment storage room floors shall be constructed of nonabsorbent material to ensure that the surface is easily cleanable. Floors in the parlor and equipment storage room shall not be covered by carpet or wood. 
(g)  A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility with a self-closing door and exhaust fan shall be made accessible to customers. Such facilities shall be separate from the parlor. 
(h)  The body art studio shall be equipped with facilities to enable effective hand hygiene. This sink or sinks must be easily accessible, at the discretion of the board of health, to all body artists and shall be separate from the restroom. It shall also provide hot and cold water under pressure through a mixing valve with no aerator, and with foot or wrist actuated controls. These facilities shall be for the use of the body artist for sanitizing his or her hands and preparing the customers for body art procedures. This area shall be supplied with dispensed soap, an antibacterial solution, single use towels, and a clean and maintained fingernail brush. 
(i)  An equipment washing sink shall be provided in the studio, distinct from the hand sinks and shall be located in the equipment handling and assembly area. This sink shall meet National Safety Foundation (NSF) standards. 
(j)  Parlors, equipment storage areas, and equipment handling and assembly areas shall have sufficient light to enable the body artist to properly do work and see all contamination. This shall be approved by the Fayette County Board of Health. 
(k)  Parlors shall not be used as corridors for access to other rooms. 
(l)  A water heater capable of heating water to 100° Fahrenheit shall be provided. The size and capacity of such water heater shall be approved by the Fayette County Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-74. - Body art studio furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishing of the body art studio shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and shall be intact and functional. The studio shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, single-use articles, carbon, stencils, jewelry, studs, and other supplies shall be provided for each body artist and shall be designed, manufactured, and maintained in a sanitary manner so as to protect contents from contamination, such as blood and bodily fluids. 
(c)  Appropriate furnishings shall be provided for each parlor. 
(d)  Surfaces of all worktables, chairs, and furnishings shall be constructed of material that is smooth, non-absorbent, easily cleanable, and corrosion resistant. 
(e)  Furnishings shall be sanitized with an anti-bacterial solution after each procedure. 
(f)  Eating or drinking by anyone is prohibited in the parlor where a body art procedure is performed, except as required to ensure the health and safety of the body artist and/or client. 
(g)  Smoking is prohibited in the body art studio. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-75. - Body art studio supplies. 
(a)  Single-use sterile supplies shall be in an uncompromised, sterilized condition at the time of their use, either by processing in a unit that meets the requirements for a sterilizer as defined herein, or be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These supplies shall be stored in an area separate from chemical supplies and toilet facilities. 
(b)  All materials applied to human skin including, but not limited to, ink, stencils, and single-use piercing needles shall be from single-use containers and shall be disposed of after each use, except those instruments approved for sterilization by the board of health. 
(c)  Jewelry supplies used in a body art studio shall consist of a material rated by the American Society for Testing Materials or the International Standards Organization as being suitable for permanent surgical implant, such as stainless steel, gold, platinum, titanium, niobium, or dense, low porosity plastic such as Tygon or PTFE. Copies of the jewelry manufacturer's documentation, which verify compliance with standards must be available for inspection on request of the board of health. The jewelry shall also be smooth surfaced and scratch free. 
(d)  Only single-use sterile gauze shall be used. 
(e)  Antibacterial ointment shall be dispensed in a manner that prevents contamination of the antibacterial ointment container. For example, a single use tongue depressor may be used to dispense the ointment and then discarded. 
(f)  Single-use articles shall not be used on more than one client or customer for any reason. These articles must be disposed of after use, or as soon as possible, without posing risk of contamination or exposure to the body artist, the client, or the surrounding environment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-76. - Dyes and pigments. 
(a)  Dyes and pigments shall be dispensed into single-use containers. 
(b)  All dyes and pigments shall be used according to the manufacturer's instructions. 
(c)  After tattooing each individual, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use container shall be discarded, along with the container, into a covered trash receptacle that can be operated without the use [of] hands. This container shall be lined with a bag that is leak resistant. 
(d)  In preparing dyes and pigments to be used by a body artist, only non-toxic sterile single-use materials shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-77. - Sterilization. 
(a)  Instrument cleaning. 
(1)  All non-disposable instruments shall be sterilized after each use according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(2)  Employees shall wear heavy-duty, multi-use, waterproof gloves while cleaning instruments. 
(3)  Used instruments shall be soaked in an EPA approved disinfectant until cleaning can be performed. The solution shall be changed as recommended by the solution manufacturer. 
(4)  Instruments shall be disassembled for cleaning. 
(5)  All instrument components shall be cleaned, either manually or in an ultrasonic cleaner, using the appropriate cleaning agent specific to the type of cleaning performed. 
(b)  Instrument packaging. 
(1)  Employees shall properly wash hands and don clean gloves before packaging or wrapping instruments. 
(2)  Instruments shall be wrapped or packaged with a sterilizer indicator on each package. 
(3)  All packages shall be labeled with the time and date of sterilization. Packages shall no longer be considered sterile if the integrity of the package is damaged or if the date of sterilization exceeds six months. 
(c)  Instrument sterilization. 
(1)  The sterilizer shall be designed and labeled as a medical instrument sterilizer. 
(2)  The operator's manual for the sterilizer shall be available on the premises and the sterilizer shall be operated according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(3)  The sterilizer shall be cleaned and maintained according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(4)  A sterilizer log shall be maintained for the studio and made available for inspection by the Fayette County Board of Health and the customer. The log shall be kept for a minimum of one year. The log shall contain the following documentation for each load: 
a.  A description of instruments contained in the load; 
b.  The date of sterilization and time, if more than one load is processed in a single day; 
c.  The sterilizer cycle time and temperature; 
d.  Indication of proper sterilization of instruments, as indicated by the appropriate color change of the sterilizer indicator on each package. The indicator used shall be compatible with the sterilization process being used; 
e.  Any action taken when appropriate color indicator change did not occur; and 
f.  Maintenance log, including: 
1.  Date of service; 
2.  Sterilizer model and serial number; 
3.  Sterilizer location; 
4.  Name of person requesting service; 
5.  Description of malfunctions; 
6.  Name of person performing maintenance; 
7.  Description of services and parts replaced; 
8.  Results of biologic validation and testing; and 
9.  Signature and title of person acknowledging completed work. 
(d)  Sterilization monitoring. 
(1)  Sterilizer monitoring shall be performed at least once a month, unless more frequent monitoring is specified by the manufacturer, or after 40 hours of usage, whichever comes first, by using a commercial biological monitoring (spore) system. 
(2)  All biological indicators shall be analyzed by a laboratory that operates under FDA guidelines and is independent of the studio, with reports sent to the studio. 
(3)  Biological indicator test results shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of one year and must be available for inspection by Fayette County Board of Health. Upon notification of a positive microbiological monitoring report, the sterilizer shall be immediately checked for proper use and function. The owner shall cease use of the sterilizer immediately upon receipt of the positive report and notify the Fayette County Board of Health with written documentation explaining corrective actions. If this sterilizer is the only means of sterilization of equipment, then the studio will cease operations immediately. The studio shall be allowed to re-open when a biological indicator test has three consecutive negative results. The studio shall have the option to purchase and install a new sterilizer in order to re-open prior to the receipt of the test results on the previous sterilizer or use all single-use items. 
(e)  Instrument storage. 
(1)  Hands shall be washed and gloved prior to handling sterilized instruments. 
(2)  After sterilization, the instruments shall be stored in a dry, clean area, reserved for storage of sterilized instruments. 
(f)  Single-use items. 
(1)  If the body art studio operates using only pre-sterilized, single-use instruments and supplies, a sterilizer is not required. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-78. - Disinfection of the body art studio. 
(a)  Each body art studio shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
(b)  The owner shall develop and implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination, plus any tasks or procedures to be performed daily. This written schedule shall be based on the types of surfaces to be cleaned, the types of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the body art studio. Adherence to the schedule must be documented on a weekly basis to be appended to a maintenance log. This log shall be available for review by the Fayette County Board of Health during normal hours of operation and to the general public upon request. Violation of proper maintenance and documentation thereof will be grounds for immediate closure or suspension of the owner's body art studio permit. 
(c)  All work surfaces shall be disinfected with an EPA approved disinfectant at the beginning of each work day, after completion of body art procedures on each individual, and at the end of each work day. 
(d)  All protective coverings such as plastic wrap, barrier films, and aluminum foil shall be removed after each body art procedure and shall be placed in a covered trash receptacle that can be operated without the use of hands. These barriers shall be replaced with unused protective coverings. These barriers shall also be considered single-use products. 
(e)  Reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have the likelihood of becoming contaminated shall be decontaminated on a daily basis with a current EPA approved disinfectant. When contamination is visible, receptacles shall be cleaned and decontaminated immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-79. - Disposal of wastes. 
(a)  All disposable instruments are considered bio-hazardous and must be disposed of as bio-hazardous material. All bio-hazardous waste must be disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and ordinances regarding bio-hazardous waste. Needles, razors, and other sharp instruments shall be placed in puncture resistant, closed containers immediately after use and shall be stored in closed cabinets or drawers at the end of each workday. 
(b)  Contaminated needles shall not be bent, broken, or their structure otherwise compromised. 
(c)  Sharps waste shall be safely discarded in a rigid and puncture resistant waste container that is leak proof on the sides and bottom with a self-closing lid. These containers shall be labeled with the international biohazard symbol and the word "BIOHAZARD." All sharps waste shall be removed and disposed of by a company that will dispose of it in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and ordinances regarding bio-hazardous waste. 
(d)  Bio-hazardous non-sharps waste shall be discarded in a biohazard bag. Waste shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and ordinances regarding bio-hazardous waste. 
(e)  All other non-hazardous disposable waste shall be placed in lined, easily cleanable containers with tight fitting lids to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(f)  All other non-hazardous disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of so as to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste material. 
(g)  Self-closing waste containers designed to be operated without the use of hands and lined with plastic bags manufactured specifically for waste containers shall be located within each parlor and restroom and shall be emptied at least once per day into a commercially approved dumpster. This dumpster must be picked up and emptied by a commercial contractor at least once per week. 
(h)  All sewage, including liquid waste, shall be disposed of by a public sewage system or by a sewage system constructed and operated according to the applicable provisions of the Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-80. - Client records. 
(a)  The owner shall maintain a written detailed client record that describes the body art procedure(s) administered on each client. These records shall be kept on file for three years after the procedure. Client records shall be immediately made available for inspection within seven days of request. 
(b)  The client records shall be created prior to any body art procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name, signature, address, proof of age, body art procedure performed, date, design, its precise location upon the body, and the name of the body artist(s) performing or assisting in the procedure. The client record shall also describe whether any complications or incidents arose during the procedure and detail what action was taken to resolve the incident. A copy of a valid state issued photo ID (a driver's license, U.S. Military ID card) must be obtained from the client and maintained with the client's record. 
(c)  Each client shall be provided with an informed consent statement that fully explains the procedure and each client shall be required to sign the informed consent statement prior to receiving any body art procedure. The informed consent statement signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client record, with a copy given to the customer. 
(d)  A "disclaimer of liability" form promulgated by the owner shall also be signed by the client prior to receiving any body art procedure. A copy of the "disclaimer of liability" signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client's record, with a copy given to the client. 
(e)  The client record shall contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs at the time the body art procedure is performed. 
(f)  The client record shall also contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she has received, read, and understood a copy of an after-care procedures form. 
(g)  The client has the right to request and receive their entire client record. If the client's record is available on the premises of the body art studio, then the record shall be made available immediately upon request. If the record is not available on the premises, then the client's request for the client record must be fulfilled within five business days. 
(h)  Client records shall not be accessible to anyone except authorized employees of the body art studio. 
(i)  Client records shall be disposed of in a manner that will not disclose any personal information of the client. For example, client records may be shredded then discarded in a waste receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-81. - Body art studio inspection. 
(a)  The premises of any body art studio and all records required to be maintained under these regulations shall be available for review and examination by the board of health and properly identified representatives of the town at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with these rules. 
(b)  The owner shall be responsible for having an employee with knowledge of the studio's records on duty at the body art studio during all hours of operation. 
(c)  Studio inspections shall be performed at least two times annually. Additional studio inspections shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of these rules. Each inspection will carry an inspection fee to be set by and approved by the Fayette County Board of Health. 
(d)  A copy of the most recent inspection report shall be posted in public view, in an unobscure manner, within 15 feet of the main door, five to seven feet off the floor, and shall be approachable within one foot. 
(e)  If an individual becomes aware of a licensed body art studio that is in violation of the Code, or other state or federal law, they may contact the Fayette County Board of Health. The alleged violation will be investigated at the discretion of the board. The name, address, telephone number, and all other identifying information of the reporting individual will remain confidential, unless required to be disclosed by law. 
(f)  If an individual becomes aware of an unlicensed individual or facility that performs, or has performed body art procedures, they may contact the board of health. The alleged unlicensed individual or facility will be investigated at the discretion of the board of health. The name, address, telephone number, and all other identifying information of the reporting individual will remain confidential, unless required to be disclosed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-82. - Access. 
(a)  Representatives of the board of health, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any body art studio at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections and review of pertinent records to determine compliance with this Code. 
(b)  If a person denies access to the board of health, the board of health shall: 
(1)  Inform the person that: 
a.  The permit holder is required to allow access to the board of health; 
b.  Access is a condition of the acceptance and retention of a body art studio permit to operate; and 
c.  If access is denied, an inspection warrant, issued by the appropriate authority to order access, may be obtained according to law; and 
(2)  Make a final request for access. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-83. - Body art studio personnel. 
(a)  All persons performing body art in the town shall only perform such body art procedures in a validly permitted body art studio. 
(b)  Body artist shall obtain and maintain current certifications in emergency first-aid, CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training except where the body artist is a currently licensed health care professional. All certifications must be renewed at a minimum of every two years unless a more frequent time period is specified by the licensing agencies. 
(c)  The above certifications must be obtained within 60 days of the body artist's employment. 
(d)  The body artist must obtain a physical examination by a licensed physician within 30 days prior to employment or the initial application for a body artist permit. Each body artist must obtain from the physician a certificate certifying that the body artist is free of any communicable disease. This examination must be conducted yearly. 
(e)  All body artists and any employee that has the potential to come in contact with any bodily fluids shall be required to obtain the Hepatitis B vaccination. 
(f)  The owner shall maintain a file on all employees who perform body art procedures. Such files shall be available for inspection by properly identified representatives of the board of health during normal hours of operation. The file shall contain: 
(1)  Report of physical examination; 
(2)  Evidence of current emergency first-aid; CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training; and 
(3)  The home address and home telephone number of each employee. 
(g)  The owner of a body art studio shall only hire, employ, or use individuals who have complied with these rules. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-84. - Body artist permit. 
(a)  No person may perform body art without first obtaining a body artist permit. Body artist shall renew their permit annually. 
(b)  A body artist permit shall not be eligible for renewal unless all requirements of these rules are met. 
(c)  The body artist permit shall be displayed in the body artist's parlor. 
(d)  All body artist permits issued pursuant to these rules are nontransferable. 
(e)  A body artist permit shall be returned to the board of health environmental health section if it is suspended or revoked. 
(f)  Proof of current certification in emergency first-aid, CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training shall be required within 60 days of issuance of a body artist permit. Otherwise, the body artist permit will be suspended until this training is completed, not to exceed 60 days. If the requirements are not met within this 60-day suspension, the body artist permit will be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-85. - Application for a body artist permit. 
(a)  Each body artist shall submit to the board of health environmental health section an application for a body artist permit. 
(b)  The application for a body artist permit shall be made on forms provided by the board of health and shall not be considered accepted unless complete in all respects, including the payment of any fees required. Application fees shall be set by the Fayette County Board of Health. 
(c)  Application for a body artist permit shall include the following information concerning the body artist: 
(1)  Full legal name; 
(2)  All aliases; 
(3)  Copy of a valid driver's license or valid state issued photo identification; 
(4)  Home address; 
(5)  Gender; 
(6)  Mailing address; 
(7)  Home phone number; 
(8)  Training and/or experience; 
(9)  Evidence of current certifications; and 
(10)  Physician report of physical examination and Hepatitis B Vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-86. - Issuance of body artist permit and fees. 
(a)  The Fayette County Board of Health Environmental Health Section may issue a body artist permit to an individual after determining that the individual is in compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 40, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and with these rules. 
(b)  Body artist permits shall automatically expire on December 31 of each year. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of a body artist permit, the body artist must pay the applicable permit fee. Body artist permit fees shall not be prorated. 
(d)  At least 30 days prior to the expiration of a body artist permit, the body artist shall submit an application for the renewal to the Fayette County Environmental Health Section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-87. - Application to existing body artist. 
    The provisions of these rules shall be applicable to all body artists, whether the body artist began performing body art before or after the effective date of these rules. Any body artist established on the effective date of these rules shall comply with all requirements of these rules within six months of the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-88. - Denial, suspension, or revocation of body artist permit. 
(a)  Upon recommendation or official action of the board of health, a body artist permit issued pursuant to any provision of this article may be denied, suspended, or revoked by the board of health, and considered null and void, if: 
(1)  The application for a body artist permit contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)  The body artist violated the conditions of the permit; or 
(3)  The body artist committed any violation of this article. 
(b)  After a body artist permit has been revoked, a valid permit shall not be issued until all violations have ceased and the body artist complies with all requirements of this article as determined by the board of health. 
(c)  No body artist permit shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this article to any applicant if within 12 months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this article, the same applicant requesting a permit has been denied a permit based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material fact in any application. 
(d)  As required by O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 40, sec. 4, any person substantially affected by any final order of the board of health denying, suspending, revoking, or refusing to grant or renew any permit provided under this Code may secure review by appeal to the Fayette County Board of Health in accordance with the hearing requirements of O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 5, sec. I, and as may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-89. - Body artist temporary permits. 
(a)  No person may perform body art without first obtaining a body artist permit. 
(b)  The body artist permit shall be displayed in the body artist's parlor or in public view. 
(c)  A body artist permit shall be returned to the board of health environmental health section if it is suspended or revoked. 
(d)  Proof of current certification in emergency first-aid, CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training shall be submitted in conjunction with a body artist temporary permit application. 
(e)  Application for a body artist temporary permit shall include the following information concerning the body artist: 
(1)  Full legal name; 
(2)  All aliases; 
(3)  Copy of a valid driver's license or valid state-issued photo identification; 
(4)  Home address; 
(5)  Gender; 
(6)  Mailing address; 
(7)  Home phone number; 
(8)  Training and/or experience; 
(9)  Evidence of current certifications; and 
(10)  Physician report of physical examination and Hepatitis B Vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-90. - Issuance of body artist temporary permit and fees. 
(a)  The Fayette County Board of Health Environmental Health Section may issue a body artist permit to an individual after determining that the individual is in compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 40, with any applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, and with these rules. 
(b)  Prior to the issuance of a body artist permit, the body artist must pay the applicable permit fee. 
(c)  A temporary permit for a body artist will be valid seven days from the issuance date. 
(d)  This permit is transferable, with the exception that, the body artist will notify the Fayette County Board of Health when a location change from one body art studio is made to another body art studio. 
(e)  A body artist that obtains a body artist temporary permit shall comply with sections 16-87 and 16-88 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-91. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall tattoo the body of an individual who is under 18 years of age, unless the person performing the tattoo procedure is a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath in compliance with O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 9. 
(b)  No person shall pierce the body, with the exception of ear lobes, of any person under the age of 18 for the purpose of allowing the insertion of earrings, jewelry, or similar objects into the body, unless the minor's legal parent, custodian, or guardian with proper identification is present and signs a written consent form provided by the body art studio. The consent form must indicate the methods and part(s) of the minor's body upon which the body art procedure is performed. 
(c)  No person shall tattoo the body of any person within one inch of the nearest part of the eye socket of such person. 
(d)  No person shall perform body art procedures on an individual who is, or reasonably appears to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or other stimulants or depressants, or is of unsound mind or body. 
(e)  No person shall obtain the services provided in a body art studio by misrepresentation of age in any place where body art procedures are performed. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any body artist to perform any acts of scarification and/or acts of suspension in the body art studio. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-92. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or entity to violate any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(b)  No person shall be allowed to perform body art procedures unless that person is employed by a body art studio and holds a current body artist permit. No person shall be allowed to perform body art procedures outside the confines of a validly permitted body art studio. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a body artist to be under the influence of any alcohol and/or drugs while performing body art procedures. 
(d)  Except as specified in paragraph (1) of this subsection, no animals of any kind shall be allowed inside a body art studio. 
(1)  Live animals may be allowed in the following situations if the contamination of clean equipment, parlors, single-use articles, or any other items that may be used in a body art procedure cannot result: 
a.  Decorative fish in aquariums; 
b.  Patrol dogs accompanying police or security officers; 
c.  In areas that are not used for any equipment storage or equipment cleaning and preparing areas; 
d.  Service animals that are controlled by the disabled employee, person, or trainer of such animal, if a health or safety hazard will not result from the presence or activities of the service animal. 
(e)  An owner of a body art studio shall be deemed responsible for any act, omission, or violation of this article committed by any body artist in said studio, working upon studio premises, or performing body art procedures for the owner as an independent contractor. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-93. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Body artists shall follow standard precautions. 
(b)  All hand and/or arm jewelry worn by a body artist that may impede in the procedure or have sharp edges that may compromise the integrity of the gloves shall be removed prior to the start of the body art procedure. 
(c)  Prior to performing body art on each client, the body artist shall ensure that his/her fingernails are closely trimmed and shall perform proper hand washing. This includes thoroughly washing and scrubbing hands with warm water and antibacterial soap, using an individual hand brush that is clean and in good repair. The hands shall then be dried by single-use towels. 
(d)  Prior to the start of the body art procedure, the body artist shall inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Single-use medical gloves shall be worn during the body art procedure. They shall be donned in such a fashion that their integrity is not compromised. The gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the procedure, if the gloves become soiled, torn, punctured, or the integrity of the glove is compromised. The body artist shall perform hand hygiene before donning and after removing each set of gloves. 
(e)  Each body artist shall wear a clean outer garment, apron, or smock. 
(f)  Body artists who are experiencing symptoms of illness including, but not limited to, diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, or skin infections shall refrain from performing body art procedures. 
(g)  Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each body artist for the entire day and/or night operation. 
(h)  Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the area of the body where the body art procedure will be performed. 
(i)  All items that come in contact with a client's skin shall be single-use and disposed of after the procedure. 
(j)  All sharps used in body art procedures shall be sterile at the time of the procedure. 
(k)  All fixtures and equipment contaminated with blood shall be cleaned with an approved sanitizer, for example, a ten percent bleach solution made fresh daily or as often as needed to maintain appropriate sanitizer concentration. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-94. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)  Prior to placing a tattoo design on the client's skin, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede the body art procedure shall be removed. 
(b)  The body artist shall apply an antibacterial solution to the skin in the involved area. 
(c)  If a paper stencil is used by a body artist for transferring the design to the skin, the stencil shall be single-use and disposable. 
(d)  If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single-use sterile instrument only. 
(e)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. 
(f)  After the area has dried, a layer of antibacterial ointment from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied. 
(g)  After the application of the antibacterial ointment, a bandage or other protective barrier shall be applied to the tattoo. 
(h)  The client shall be given written and oral instructions on how to care for the tattoo during the healing process. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-95. - Procedures specific to body piercing. 
(a)  Before piercing the skin of a client, any jewelry worn by the client that might impede the procedure shall be removed. 
(b)  The body artist shall apply an antibacterial solution to the skin in the involved area prior to the procedure being performed. 
(c)  The client shall then be given both written and oral instructions on how to care for the piercing during the healing process. 
(d)  A facility that limits its piercing practice to the piercing of the lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp piercing systems shall be exempt from regulatory requirements of this article. Compliance with the requirements for this exemption may be verified by inspection at the option of the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-96. - Compliance. 
(a)  A body art studio shall operate in compliance with these rules and with a valid body art studio permit issued by the Fayette County Board of Health. 
(b)  A body artist shall perform body art procedures in compliance with these rules and with a valid body artist permit issued by the Fayette County Board of Health. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Sec. 16-97. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 5. 
(b)  The board of health may refuse to grant a permit for the operation of any body art studio which does not fulfill the minimum requirements of the rules and regulations and may revoke a permit which has been issued and invoke other sanctions if a studio violates any of these rules and regulations. Before any order is entered refusing a permit applied for or revoking a permit, the applicant or permit holder shall be offered an opportunity for a hearing before the county board of health as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 5, art. 1. The notice of refusal or revocation shall contain directions on how a hearing may be requested. 
(c)  The board of health is empowered to institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining violations of an applicable provision of O.C.G.A. tit. 31 or of these rules and regulations. 
(d)  Any person or entity violating any provision of this regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, or upon entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere thereto, shall be punished by a fine, not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a term not more than 60 days, or by both fine and imprisonment. 
(e)  Owners shall be responsible for ensuring agents and employees fully comply with the provisions of these regulations and shall be liable for any violation hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2013-15, § 1(Exh. A), 6-6-2013) 
Chapter 18 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-19. - Composition of the police department. 
    The police department shall consist of those officers and employees of those ranks and positions as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 3-1-2) 
Sec. 18-20. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  General. The department shall be responsible for patrol, traffic control, investigation of accidents, investigation of crimes, apprehension of offenders, court appearances, security of business establishments and for any other matters of public safety and law enforcement as directed by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Code enforcement. The town manager or his designee is the chief code enforcement officer for the town. In addition to the responsibilities set forth herein, officers of the department shall have the same authority as the designee of the code enforcement officer in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the property or the permit holder or any other person violating any provision of this Code, if such notice is required by ordinance, issue a citation for violation of the provisions of this Code and the zoning ordinance of the town and any other ordinance or regulation of the town in the same manner as the designee of the code enforcement officer and require the presence of the violator in the municipal court. 
(Code 1984, § 3-1-3; Ord. No. 501, § 1, 5-17-2007) 
Sec. 18-21. - Chief of police. 
(a)  The chief of the police department shall be appointed by the mayor and council based upon recommendations received by the town manager. The chief of police shall serve without reappointment until terminated according to town policies or otherwise resigns. 
(b)  All other police department personnel shall be accountable to the chief of police. 
(c)  The chief of police shall have jurisdiction over the entire operation of the police department. He shall keep such records and make such reports of the activities of the police department as may be required by the town manager, town council or the mayor. The chief of police shall be responsible for the operation of the police department and all of its functions. All persons employed by the police department shall serve subject to the orders and direction of the chief of police. 
(Code 1984, §§ 3-1-4, 3-1-5) 
Sec. 18-22. - Qualifications of police officers. 
    Each person employed as a police officer shall possess the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be a person of good moral character and at least 20 years of age on the date of employment; 
(2)  Be a graduate of an accredited high school or have obtained a GED; 
(3)  Be in excellent physical condition; and 
(4)  Have completed a course of study offered by the state police academy and be certified as a police officer. 
(Code 1984, § 3-1-6) 
State Law reference- Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 18-23. - Oath of office. 
    All police officers shall, before entering upon the performance of their duties, subscribe to an oath to be administered by the municipal judge. A copy of the oath shall be entered into the officer's permanent personnel file and in the permanent records of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 3-1-7) 
Sec. 18-24. - Official bond. 
    All members of the police department may be bonded for the faithful performance of their duties as police officers. The bonding fee shall be paid from the general funds of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 3-1-8) 
Sec. 18-25. - Promulgation of rules and regulations. 
    The chief of police may formulate and prescribe such rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the operation of the police department. 
(Code 1984, § 3-1-9) 
Sec. 18-26. - Custodian of lost, abandoned or stolen property; service of process. 
    The chief of police shall be the custodian of all lost, abandoned or recovered stolen property in the town, and shall dispose of such property as provided by state law or town ordinance. The chief of police shall have authority to serve all writs, warrants, summons and other processes duly issued as provided by law or the ordinances of the town. The officers and patrolmen employed by the police department shall likewise have the authority to serve writs, warrants, summons and other processes by direct order of the chief of police. 
(Code 1984, § 3-1-10) 
Sec. 18-27. - Conduct of members. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of every member of the police department to conduct himself in a proper and law-abiding manner. All police officers in the performance of their duties shall avoid the use of unnecessary force. 
(Code 1984, § 3-1-11) 
Sec. 18-28. - Police as witnesses. 
    Every member of the police department shall appear as a witness in the courts of the town and the state and the federal courts when their appearance is necessary in the administration of justice. 
(Code 1984, § 3-1-12) 
Chapter 20 - LIBRARY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal libraries, O.C.G.A. § 20-5-20 et seq. 

Sec. 20-1. - Establishment of a public library department for the town. 
    There is created a public library department for the town. This department shall fall under the operational and administrative control of the town manager. 
(Code 1984, § 2-7-26) 
Sec. 20-2. - Responsibilities of library director. 
    The supervision and operation of the Tyrone Public Library shall be vested in the library director under the general guidance and oversight of the town manager. 
(Code 1984, § 2-7-27) 
Sec. 20-3. - Composition of staff. 
    The staffing of the Tyrone Public Library shall consist of a library director and other such employees or consultants. Staffing level recommendations are to be made by the library director, through the town manager, and changes made as the mayor and town council may approve. 
(Code 1984, § 2-7-28) 
Sec. 20-4. - Accountability. 
    The library director shall be responsible to the town manager. 
(Code 1984, § 2-7-29) 
Sec. 20-5. - Library board. 
(a)  Established. A library board is established for the purpose of: 
(1)  Making inputs and recommendations that are seen to improve the operation of the library and services provided; 
(2)  Soliciting and/or receiving gifts, personal property and or donations for the benefit of the town library; and 
(3)  Listening to the citizens and promoting and supporting the library services that are, or are desired to be, available. 
(b)  Composition. The library commission shall consist of three members selected from citizens of the town serving without compensation. The terms of office shall be for three years, except for the initial appointments. The initial commission appointments shall be made by the mayor and council for one-, two-, and three-year terms. Each member shall serve for his designated term or until his successor is appointed, whichever shall occur last. All vacancies in membership shall be filled by the mayor and town council. 
(c)  Terms. Each appointed member shall serve for his designated term until reappointed or a successor is appointed. Appointments required to fill vacancies on the library board will be made by the mayor with the approval of council. 
(d)  Duties and recommendations. The library board shall review all matters outside of routine daily operations of the library. Recommendations from the library board shall be coordinated with the town manager for presentation and consideration by the mayor and council. 
(e)  Receipts of gifts, etc. The library board is authorized to solicit or receive gifts, personal property or any donation for the benefit of the town library. Such funds received for the benefit of the town library will be maintained in a separate town account so designated as a library board account. 
(f)  Annual report to mayor and council. Annually, for presentation at the first council meeting of each calendar year, the library board will prepare and present a report to the mayor and council outlining activities, receipt of gifts, etc. The library board may be asked to prepare additional reports as necessary and/or requested. 
(Code 1984, §§ 2-7-30-2-7-34; Ord. No. 2009-002, § 1, 2-5-2009) 
Sec. 20-6. - Library use policy. 
(a)  The library is available to any individual whose conduct or activities do not intrude on the customary usage of the library by other patrons or the staff. The library is free and open to the public for use to obtain information and resources to advance a person's, family's, or group's educational, informational, and recreational needs. 
(b)  The Story Time room is to be used for library sponsored activities only. All library sponsored activities are free of charge and open to the public. Individuals, families, businesses, companies, nonprofit organizations, and/or religious affiliated organizations are not allowed to fund-raise on library property. 
(c)  Children under the age of 12 are not permitted to be left alone without adult supervision. The library does not accept responsibility for any child left unattended regardless of age. 
(Ord. No. 2009-09, 12-3-2009) 
Chapter 22 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Booth, stall, similar structure obstructing street, highway or sidewalk. 
    No person shall be authorized to engage in any business or engage in any business in the town that is conducted wholly or in part from a stand, stall, booth, box or other structure located, situated or placed in or on, or that in any way encroaches upon or extends into any street, highway or sidewalk of the town, or whose business, as conducted or carried on, obstructs in whole or in part any street, highway or sidewalk of the town. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-8-1), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-2. - Closing-out and similar sales. 
(a)  Advertising. It shall be unlawful for any person in the town to advertise by newspaper, radio, poster signs, or otherwise, and thereby represent that he is operating, offering or maintaining in the town fire sales, wreck sales, bankrupt sales, closing-out or going-out-of-business sales, whereby the public or the customers of any such person are led to believe that they are being offered merchandise at reduced rates on account of fire, wreck, bankruptcy, receivership, closing-out or going-out-of-business, when in fact the sales are not bona fide fire sales, wreck sales, bankrupt sales, receivership sales, closing-out or going-out-of-business sales. It shall be unlawful for any person now or hereafter engaged in business in the town to falsely represent by advertisement, or otherwise, that the goods, wares or merchandise which the person offers for sale are being sold at a certain percentage of their cost price or value and then to sell goods, wares or merchandise of a brand or quality inferior to that or those represented or advertised, or to sell such goods, wares or merchandise at a higher percent of their cost value than represented or advertised. 
(b)  Sales. It shall be unlawful for any person represented by advertisement or otherwise that he is conducting in the town a sale of any goods, wares or merchandise, which are or have been, or which are claimed to be or have been, in or damaged by fire, or sold or purchased on account of fire, or which is property of any bankrupt or person who has failed in business, or has made a general assignment, or is or has been in voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy, or which are being sold or offered for sale in any other way than through the usual channels of sales, to sell or offer for sale in the town any goods, wares or merchandise not so circumstanced or affected or damaged, or to add to or replenish any such goods, wares of merchandise with goods, wares or merchandise not so circumstanced or affected. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-8-2), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-3. - Trimming trees and shrubs, landscaping, agreement to remove debris prerequisite to certificate. 
(a)  Agreement required. No person shall be issued a permit from the town clerk to trim trees or shrubs or to perform landscaping in the town unless said person agrees that he will remove the cut limbs and trash from the premises upon which the trees or shrubs are trimmed. 
(b)  Applicability. This section shall not apply to persons who trim trees or shrubs or perform landscaping on such person's own property. 
(c)  Violations. Any person who is issued a permit to trim trees or shrubs within the town, conditioned upon his agreement to remove the debris and trash, and who fails or refuses to remove such debris or trash shall be deemed as violating the terms of this section. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-8-3), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-4. - Restaurants, fast food establishments. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a restaurant, fast food establishment, or other food service establishment in the town without first having obtained a certificate from the county health department, which certificate shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-8-4), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-5. - Revocation or suspension of licenses or permits. 
(a)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license, the town permit or license to deal in that service or product shall, thereupon, be automatically revoked without any action by the mayor and council or any municipal officer. 
(b)  Whenever a holder of a permit or license granted in this article by the mayor and council shall fail to open for business the establishment referred to in the permit or license and begin providing the service or the sale of products authorized by the permit or license within six months from the date of issuance of the permit or license, or whenever a holder of a permit or license shall begin the operation of a business and the service or sale of the products authorized in the permit or license but shall fail to operate the business for a period of six consecutive months, the holder shall automatically forfeit the holder's permit or license. The holder shall receive notice, a hearing and all other due process as required in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  No permit or license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the town to any person under this article shall be revoked, except for due cause as defined in this section and after a hearing and upon the prior seven-day written notice to the holder of the permit or license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(d)  When circumstances warrant the immediate cessation of any business activity, the town manager shall have the authority to summarily and immediately suspend the activity upon written notice to the holder of the permit or license for the activity. A suspension shall be valid, until a revocation proceeding may be held, up to a maximum of 30 days. 
(e)  Due cause for the revocation of a permit or license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating the businesses, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating the businesses, or for the violation of any state or federal law, or for the violation of or conflict with any town ordinance other than traffic ordinances. 
(f)  The hearing shall be conducted before the mayor and council by the town manager or the town attorney. 
(g)  The mayor and council may, if it finds this Code to have been violated by the permittee or licensee, the permittee's or licensee's agent, or employee, or a permit or license to have been issued in conflict with state law or this Code, revoke the permit or license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the permittee/licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the mayor and council may deem necessary. 
Secs. 22-6-22-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-27-22-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AD VALOREM TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-56. - Time of issuance of executions for delinquent ad valorem taxes. 
    If any person shall refuse or neglect to pay his town taxes on or before the date established by law for payment, execution shall issue and be enforced therefor as herein provided. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-17) 
Sec. 22-57. - Tax collections generally. 
    Executions for nonpayment of taxes, licenses, fees, and assessment due the town, shall be issued by the tax commissioner of the county, after the last day for payment, and shall be signed by him officially, bear teste in the name of the town council, and be directed to the sheriff of the county or the tax commissioner of the county as ex officio sheriff for said officer to proceed promptly to enforce by levies and sale the collection of the same. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-18) 
Sec. 22-58. - Revocation; license, privilege or permit. 
    Any license, privilege or permit granted by the town shall be revoked by the town clerk for the failure to pay any money due the town for taxes, fees, penalties, interests, fines or other revenue, within three calendar months and ten days after any payment is due; provided, that any person aggrieved by the order may, within ten days thereof, appeal to the mayor and council, who, after a hearing thereon, may approve or modify the order or restore the license privilege or permit by adopting a motion to that effect but only upon finding that the town clerk's action was not factually or legally correct. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-19) 
Secs. 22-59-22-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS TAX 

Sec. 22-90. - Tax. 
    There is hereby levied an annual tax upon depository financial institutions located in the town at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. The minimum annual amount of such levy upon any depository financial institution shall be $1,000.00. Such tax shall be calculated in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 48, ch. 6, art. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 48-6-90 et seq.). 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-60) 
Sec. 22-91. - Gross receipts. 
(a)  For purposes of this article, the term "gross receipts" means gross receipts as determined under subsection (b) of this section, unless the taxpayer conducts business both within and outside this state in which case the term "gross receipts" means gross receipts as determined under subsection (b) of this section multiplied by the taxpayer's state gross receipts factor determined under O.C.G.A. § 48-7-31(d)(2) for the year in which such gross receipts are measured. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "gross receipts" means the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized in this subsection and in subsection (c) of this section during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax authorized by this article on shall be due. Before determining gross receipts, there shall be deducted: 
(1)  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; 
(2)  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to the Domestic International Banking Facility Act (O.C.G.A. § 7-1-730 et seq.); 
(3)  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories, or possessions; and 
(4)  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section, any deductions taken under subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (b)(1)-(b)(3) of this section. 
(c)  The items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: 
(1)  Interest and fees on loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
(2)  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions; 
(3)  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreement to resell; 
(4)  Interest on other bonds, notes, and debentures, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
(5)  Dividends on stock; 
(6)  Income from direct lease financing; 
(7)  Income from fiduciary activities; 
(8)  Service charges on deposit accounts; 
(9)  Other service charges, commissions, and fees; and 
(10)  Other income. 
(d)  The items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
(1)  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
(2)  Interest on mortgages, participations, or mortgage backed securities; 
(3)  Interest on real estate sold on contract; 
(4)  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; 
(5)  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
(6)  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; 
(7)  Loan fees; 
(8)  Loan servicing fees; 
(9)  Other fees and charges; 
(10)  Gross income from real estate owned operations; 
(11)  Net income from office building operations; 
(12)  Gross income from real estate held for investment; 
(13)  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; 
(14)  Miscellaneous operating income; 
(15)  Profit on sale of real estate owned operations, investment securities, loans, and other assets; and 
(16)  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-6-95, 48-6-96. 
Sec. 22-92. - Filing return; due date. 
    Each depository financial institution within the town shall file a return of its gross receipts with the town on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. The due date of taxes levied by this division shall be April 30 of each year. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-62) 
Secs. 22-93-22-112. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 22-113. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax program that approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    Employee means: 
(1)  An individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
(2)  An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2. 
    Location or office means and includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
    Person means and includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit or any other form of business organization. 
    Practitioner of profession or occupation. 
(1)  The term "practitioner of profession or occupation" means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
(2)  The term "practitioner of profession or occupation" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
    Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the town as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the town. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. A regulatory fee cannot be used as a means of raising revenue. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. Imposing or collecting differential regulatory fees on the basis of whether a business, occupation, or practitioner is located within the town limits is prohibited. 
    Revenue collection officer means the finance manager or his or her designee. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-22; Ord. No. 2014-04, §§ 1, 2, 2-20-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 22-114. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this division shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-30) 
Sec. 22-115. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
    This division does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the non-payment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-26) 
Sec. 22-116. - Enforcement of provisions. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the finance manager to see that the provisions of this division relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear in municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the finance manager or designees to inspect all registrations issued by the town, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted there under. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-27) 
Sec. 22-117. - Finance manager charged with collecting; subpoena powers. 
    The finance manager or any duly designated officer and inspectors or their successors shall have full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violations pertaining to this division. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-29) 
Sec. 22-118. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the town. 
    Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the town, whether with a location in the town or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the town. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the town, such business tax registration shall be shown to the town clerk or designee or to any police officer of said town, upon request. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-21) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy occupation tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 
Sec. 22-119. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in state. 
    Registration and assessment of an occupation tax for businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state is required if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the town, and the business or business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the town for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. 
Sec. 22-120. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
(a)  The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations that are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5-48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the town pursuant to the pertinent town ordinances, as provided by law. 
(b)  The town shall not impose any occupation tax, regulatory fee, or administrative fee on any state or local or nonprofit organization. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-31) 
Sec. 22-121. - Occupation tax structure and tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the town and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7. The occupational tax rate is based on the tax rate determined by the number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation. These tax rates may be updated from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(b)  An annual occupation tax of $105.00 is established for businesses with zero to seven employees. 
(c)  An increase in the occupation tax of $15.00 for each additional employee over seven employees with a maximum occupation tax $1500.00 will be levied, subject to change as determined by the mayor and council by way of change to this division. 
(d)  The number of employees of the business or practitioner shall be computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that, for the purposes of this computation, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a fulltime employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. 
(e)  A separate occupation tax is to be levied against each individual business, trade, profession or occupation operating multiple locations in the town. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-32) 
State Law reference- Criteria for classification for taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
Sec. 22-122. - Administrative fee structure. 
    A nonprorated, nonrefundable $25.00 administrative fee is required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts as set forth in the town's fee schedule. The administrative fee shall be due and payable at the time of registration pursuant to section 22-128. The administrative fee shall be in addition to any occupational tax due for the year of registration. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-34; Ord. No. 522, § 1, 10-16-2008) 
State Law reference- Administrative fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(e). 
Sec. 22-123. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
    Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A § 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees; 
(2)  A fee of $150.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 15 of each year. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-35) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(g). 
Sec. 22-124. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
(a)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed exclusively by the United States, the state, county or municipality of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, county or a municipality of the state shall not be required to obtain an occupation tax certificate or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(b)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, an instrumentality of the United States, the state or municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupational tax for that practice. 
(Code 1984, §§ 2-5-36, 2-5-42) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13(3). 
Sec. 22-125. - Businesses not covered by this division. 
    The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this division but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by town ordinance: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission; 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.); 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness; 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. §§ 33-8-8-33-8-8.6; 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15; 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356; 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55; 
(11)  Persons providing educational or recreational services or activities outside of their normal business, if any, sponsored by the recreation or library departments of the town; 
(12)  The following classes of persons may peddle, conduct business, or practice the professions and/or semi-professions without paying an occupation tax or administrative fee for the privilege of so doing: 
a.  Any disabled veteran of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise; 
b.  Any blind person; or 
c.  Any veteran of peace-time service in the Unites States armed forces who has a physical disability incurred during the period of such service; provided such person receives a certificate of exemption issued by the state commissioner of veterans service, has furnished proof of disability, and provides documentation that the person making application is a resident of this state and that the income of such person is such that he is not liable for the payment of state income taxes, subject to O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-37) 
State Law reference- Exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 49-13-16. 
Sec. 22-126. - When tax due and payable; delinquency of tax. 
(a)  The amount of occupational tax shall be payable to the town, at the office of the town manager, on or before January 1 of each year and delinquent if not paid on or before February 1 of each year. In the event that any person commences business on any date after January 1, the tax shall be due and payable upon the commencement of the business and shall become delinquent if not paid within 30 days of the commencement of the business. If the tax remains delinquent for 90 days from the due date described above, the person or business liable for the tax shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the initial fee with an additional 1.5 percent for each month until paid. 
(b)  In the event that any person commences business on or after July I in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year, except that: 
(1)  The administrative fee described in section 22-122 shall not be reduced; and 
(2)  A practitioner of a profession or occupation who elects as his or her occupation the tax the amount described in subsection 22-123(2) shall receive no reduction in such amount. 
(c)  The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the town manager or designee. If any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain registration, after said offer to transact business in the town any kind of profession, trade or calling in this article specified without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense. Notwithstanding the criminal provisions contained herein, such criminal provisions shall not apply to those professions for which a state license or registration is required by state law, unless otherwise specifically allowed for by state law. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-38; Ord. No. 2014-04, § 3, 2-20-2014) 
State Law reference- Payment due date, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20; penalty and interest for late payment, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
Sec. 22-127. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
    All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this division shall be required to pay the tax for said business as described in this division, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-39; Ord. No. 522, § 2, 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 22-128. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
    Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before May 1 of each year. Every person commencing business in the town after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business within 30 days of commencing such business, and there is hereby imposed a penalty upon each such business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all taxes and fees as provided herein within 90 days of commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the town any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-40; Ord. No. 2014-04, § 4, 2-20-2014) 
State Law reference- Payment due date, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20; penalty and interest for late payment, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
Sec. 22-129. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
    The business registration of each business operated in the town shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts, and shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. Each business shall register its line of business with the town clerk or his designee, and have that line of business noted upon the occupational tax certificate within 90 days of the commencement of such business within the town. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-41) 
Sec. 22-130. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the town registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-44) 
Sec. 22-131. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
    Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a town business registration, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-45) 
Sec. 22-132. - Execution for delinquent occupation tax. 
(a)  In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the town manager, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue an execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property (in the town) of the person, partnership or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the town and the laws of the state. The lien of said occupational tax shall become fixed on and dated from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the town manager upon the property of the obligor located in the town, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as are provided by ordinances and Charter of the town and the laws of the state. The obligor in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the Charter of the town and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. 
(b)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the town manager against any person defaulting on the occupational tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-48; Ord. No. 2014-04, § 5, 2-20-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-04, § 5, adopted Feb. 20-2014, deleted § 22-132 which pertained to occupation registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books and derived from Code 1984, § 2-5-47. Section 5 of said ordinance also renumbered § 22-133 as § 22-132 to read as set out herein. 
Secs. 22-133, 22-134. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - INSURERS LICENSE FEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 2014, amended Div. 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 5, §§ 22-135, 22-136, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2013-22, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 2013. 

Sec. 22-135. - Insurers license fees. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2015 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the Town of Tyrone, Georgia in the amount of $50.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 22-136, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the Town of Tyrone, Georgia, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $50.00. For the purposes of this division, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-136. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
    For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $17.50 per location for the year 2015 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-137. - Gross premiums tax imposed in life insurers. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2015 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-135 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-138. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2015 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in Section 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-135 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
Sec. 22-139. - Due date for license fees. 
    License fees imposed in sections 22-135 and 22-136 of this division shall be due and payable on the first day of 2015 and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 2014-08, § 1, 10-2-2014) 
Secs. 22-140-22-164. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRIC UTILITY FEE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Public utility franchise fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7). 

Sec. 22-165. - Gross receipts business tax established; verified statement of revenues to be filed. 
    Each electric supplier (including specifically electric membership corporations whether or not operated for profit), within the meaning of the Georgia Territorial Electric Service Act (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.), distributing and selling power within the town which is not otherwise paying a franchise fee pursuant to a franchise agreement, and whether or not said electric supplier has, operates and maintains offices within the town shall pay a gross receipts tax at the rate of four percent on any and all gross revenue derived from distribution and sale of electric power to his customers, members, or purchasers within the town, according to the verified statement of said gross revenues which shall be submitted by said electric supplier at the time said taxes are paid. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-80) 
Sec. 22-166. - Taxes payable monthly; taxes to be in lieu of certain other taxes. 
    The taxes hereinbefore set out in this article, shall be due and payable to the town on the 20th day of each month, calculated on gross revenues billed for the immediately preceding month; also, the percentage of said gross revenues herein before prescribed to be collected shall be in lieu of all other license and business or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with, or in any way prevent, the collection of ad valorem taxes upon the property of said electric supplier in the same manner as all other property, real and personal, in the town is taxed. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-81) 
Sec. 22-167. - Electric service within the town. 
    Electric suppliers distributing and selling electric power within the town, and which do not have a franchise agreement with the town, do not acquire any additional rights by the payment of the tax herein levied under this article other than those rights granted under the Georgia Territorial Electric Service Act (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-82) 
Sec. 22-168. - Enforcement and administration. 
(a)  The finance manager shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article, and shall have the power to prepare and provide the necessary forms and for the collection of the tax herein levied. 
(b)  The finance manager shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes and assessed by this article. The unpaid taxes and executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due the town. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-83) 
Secs. 22-169-22-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH COMPANY FEE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Public utility franchise fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7). 

Sec. 22-190. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the town. 
(a)  The town hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (b)(9); provided however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement of December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the town's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to the town in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the state department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-84) 
Sec. 22-191. - Authorized designee. 
    The town clerk shall, on behalf of the town, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the town under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telegraph or telephone company to the town, and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice application deficiencies. 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the town council within 60 days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)  Review payment of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 and this article. 
(4)  Coordinate between a telegraph or telephone company and all town departments on any matter relating to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 or this article. 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its right-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-85) 
Secs. 22-192-22-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE YARDS 

Sec. 22-221. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, the term "automobile salvage yard" shall mean any lot or place that is exposed to the weather upon which more than two motor vehicles of any kind, incapable of being operated, are placed. This definition shall include lots used for the actual salvage of motor vehicles or for the temporary storage of vehicles when the storage shall be for a period of more than two days. An automobile salvage yard may be operated or placed in the town only as allowed pursuant to the town zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-5-1), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-222. - Fence required. 
(a)  An automobile salvage yard shall be entirely enclosed by a fence eight feet in height, which shall be kept neatly painted and in good repair at all times, and which shall be constructed of material which cannot be seen through and built so as to exclude such yard from public view. 
(b)  Fences enclosing automobile salvage yards shall not be used for bill posting or other advertising purposes. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-5-2), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-223. - Stacking of contents. 
    The contents of an automobile salvage yard shall not be placed or deposited to a height greater than the height of the fence surrounding it. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-5-3), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-224. - Cleanliness requirements. 
    An automobile salvage yard shall as far as practicable be kept clear and clean of all waste matter. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-5-4), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-225. - Draining of gasoline. 
    All tanks and engines of vehicles parked in an automobile salvage yard shall be thoroughly drained of gasoline. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-5-5), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-226. - Time limits, number of vehicles. 
    At no time shall there be more than eight motor vehicles stored on the lot. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-5-6), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-227. - Duration of storage. 
    No one motor vehicle shall remain on the lot for a period in excess of 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-5-7), 11-18-2004) 
Secs. 22-228-22-247. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CANVASSERS, SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-248. - Scope of provisions. 
(a)  Any person soliciting funds, contributions, donations or information or selling items or taking orders door to door, either at businesses or residences, shall be deemed to be canvassing, soliciting or peddling and shall register and obtain the permits required by this article. 
(b)  Any person who does not have a permanent place of business in the town, and who displays and/or sells goods, foods, meats, wares or merchandise out of any mobile vehicle or from any temporary location shall be deemed a transient or itinerant merchant and shall be subject to obtaining the permit and registering as required by this article; provided, however, a transient or itinerant merchant shall not include: 
(1)  A person who sells home-raised agricultural products; 
(2)  A traveling salesperson representing a business located in the state, taking orders for future delivery; 
(3)  A resident of the town holding a garage, rummage, antique or similar sale; 
(4)  Any officer or employee of any town, city, county, state or federal government of the school system or any subdivision thereof, and on official business, nor any local nonprofit organization such as boy scouts, civic clubs, or school organizations, when the membership of the local nonprofit organization does the soliciting itself, but it shall apply when the soliciting is done by a paid solicitor with only a percentage or portion of any sales or collections to go to the benefit of such local nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1(7-7-1), 5-5-2011) 
Sec. 22-249. - Applicability of provisions; exceptions. 
    Nothing in this article shall apply to officers or employees in the town, county, state or federal governments or the school system, or any subdivisions thereof, when an official business; nor shall it apply to any person holding a regular business license in the town; nor to any local nonprofit organization such as boy scouts, civic clubs, school organizations and the like, when the membership of such local nonprofit organization does the soliciting itself; but it shall apply when the soliciting is done by a paid solicitor with only a percentage or portion of any sales or collections to go to the benefit of such local nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1(7-7-5), 5-5-2011) 
Sec. 22-250. - Applicability of provisions to farm products. 
    The legal right of the local farmer and producer to sell the products of the local farmer's and producer's own farm, orchard, poultry yard, etc., is recognized, but any other person or persons in the town offering for sale such articles as eggs, chickens, butter, milk, fruits, vegetables, or any other articles not specifically covered in this article, shall be deemed a peddler, canvasser, solicitor or transient or itinerant merchant, and every such peddler, canvasser, solicitor or transient or itinerant merchant selling directly to the consumer, even though the delivery may be on orders previously taken, shall be required to obtain a permit from the chief of police. No permit shall be required from any bona fide farmer who is selling the products of the farmer's own farm, orchard, poultry yard, etc. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1(7-7-8), 5-5-2011) 
Sec. 22-251. - Exemption of disabled or indigent veterans of armed forces. 
(a)  Scope of exemption. It shall be lawful for any disabled or indigent veteran of the armed forces, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1, to peddle, canvass, solicit or to set up a temporary location as a transient or itinerant merchant without obtaining a permit for the privilege of so doing, and a certificate from the probate court of the county stating the fact of the merchant being such disabled or indigent veteran shall be sufficient proof thereof; provided that this section shall not authorize peddling, canvassing, soliciting or setting up a temporary location as a transient or itinerant merchant selling ardent spirits. The privileges hereby granted shall not be transferred to or used by another person. 
(b)  Effect of exemption. All such persons are authorized to peddle, canvass, solicit or set up a temporary location as a transient or itinerant merchant in the town without first obtaining a license therefor from the town and without being subject to any tax therefor. 
(c)  Affidavit required. Before any such person shall avail himself of the privilege conferred by this section, the person shall go before the judge of the probate court of the county and make oath, in writing, that such person served as a soldier and that the business which the person proposes to carry on (stating what the person proposes to sell) is the person's own and that the person will not sell or offer to sell any article for another directly or indirectly. 
(d)  Issuance of certificate. Upon making and filing the affidavit provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the judge of the probate court of the county shall issue a certificate stating that such person has taken the oath prescribed, which certificate shall authorize such person making such affidavit and holding such certificate to peddle, canvass, solicit or set up a temporary location as a transient or itinerant merchant in the town without procuring a license or being subject to any tax therefor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1(7-7-9), 5-5-2011) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-12-1-4-12-3, 4-12-8. 
Sec. 22-252. - Transient or itinerant merchant operating from vehicle; tax on sales. 
(a)  A transient or itinerant merchant shall not locate and conduct a business from a mobile vehicle or upon the public sidewalks, streets, alleys, walkways, parks, parking lots or other public lands of the town without first obtaining the consent of the town clerk and/or the chief of police after furnishing proof satisfactory to the town clerk and/or the chief of police that the locations, conduct and operation of such business will not obstruct such public ways and places. All transient or itinerant merchants shall be subject to the restrictions and requirements set forth in the town's zoning ordinance. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each transient or itinerant merchant, after having engaged in business in the town, to report to the town clerk the amount of gross sales made within the town during the period that such transient or itinerant merchant was licensed and permitted to do business in the town, and to pay to the town clerk such taxes as are required for similar businesses by the town. Proof shall further be furnished to the town clerk at such time that all sales taxes due to the commissioner of the department of revenue of the state upon such sales, including the local option sales tax, have been filed and remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue as required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1(7-7-7), 5-5-2011) 
Sec. 22-253. - Obstruction of street, highway or sidewalk prohibited. 
    No canvasser, solicitor, peddler, transient or itinerant merchant authorized to engage in any business in the town shall, in carrying on such business, obstruct the whole or any part of any sidewalk, street or highway of the town. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1(7-7-10), 5-5-2011) 
Sec. 22-254. - Use of tent as temporary location. 
    Any person is allowed the use of a tent as a temporary location only under the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  No tent shall be erected unless a paved parking area is provided at the site. The site must comply with chapter 113, zoning, and all rules and regulations therefor; 
(2)  The maximum size allowance for such tents shall not exceed 60 feet by 120 feet; 
(3)  The maximum number of tent permits as temporary locations to be issued to a single business shall be limited to two per year for a period of time not to exceed 16 days for each issuance; 
(4)  All tents as temporary locations must be approved by the county fire marshal; and 
(5)  Permit fees. No permit shall be issued until the exact dimensions and area and location of the tent have been filed with the zoning administrator and fees have been paid. Said fees are listed on a schedule maintained by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1(7-7-11), 5-5-2011) 
Secs. 22-255-22-284. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 22-285. - Registration, sales tax number required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a canvasser, solicitor, peddler, or transient or itinerant merchant without first having registered with the town clerk. Each registrant shall be required to fill out a registration form giving complete identification, signature, name of employer (if applicable), products sold, name of manufacturer of products, name of organization the person is representing, time of operation and proposed method of operation, and to provide such other identification or information as may be required. 
(b)  Any canvasser, solicitor, peddler, or transient or itinerant merchant shall, before being issued a permit, file with the police chief proof that the applicant or the business proposed to be conducted pursuant to the license or permit possesses a valid state sales tax number issued by the commissioner of the department of revenue of the state and file with the town clerk an occupation tax return and pay such tax as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1(7-7-2), 5-5-2011) 
Sec. 22-286. - Registration fee prescribed; application for identification or registration badge. 
    Each canvasser, solicitor and peddler shall pay to the town clerk a registration fee of $25.00 per person per month. Each transient or itinerant merchant shall pay to the town clerk a registration fee of $25.00 per person per month. Each registrant shall make application with the chief of police for an identification badge. Said registration shall be effective for 30 days from the date of the approval of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1(7-7-3), 5-5-2011; Ord. No. 2013-14, § 1, 6-20-2013) 
Sec. 22-287. - Evidence of good character; issuance of identification badge; possession, display. 
(a)  Each applicant shall show evidence of good character as required by the chief of police, who is hereby directed to require photographs and fingerprints of each applicant. If, after proper inquiry and investigation, the chief of police shall determine that the applicant is of good character and that the safety of the citizens and property of the town are protected, each applicant shall be issued an identification badge with the applicant's photograph thereon indicating that the registration fee has been paid in full, that the applicant has been duly registered, the applicant's name, the organization which the applicant represents, and showing thereon the days for which the applicant has registered. 
(b)  The identification badge shall be worn on the applicant's person in a prominent place, or, if a transient or itinerant merchant, displayed in a prominent place within the temporary location so as to be visible and legible. Possession of this identification badge shall not in any way represent an endorsement or approval of any product or project by the town. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, canvass or solicit or occupy a temporary location as a transient or itinerant merchant without having registered with the town clerk in accordance with section 22-285 and this section or to peddle, solicit or canvass without wearing the identification badge in accordance with this section. Any person violating this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1(7-7-4), 5-5-2011) 
Sec. 22-288. - Revocation of identification badge, permit. 
    Any identification badge or permit may be revoked by the town clerk or the town clerk's designated representative because of any violation by the registrant (or any one of a group of registrants) of this article, or of any ordinance of the town, or of any state or federal law, or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and good character required in this article for the original registration. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1(7-7-6), 5-5-2011) 
Secs. 22-289-22-309. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES IN AMUSEMENT CENTERS 

Sec. 22-310. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement center means any establishment where any coin-operated amusement machine is provided for play to the public and more than 50 percent of the total gross revenue of the establishment is generated from coin-operated amusement machines. 
    Amusement center proprietor means any proprietor of an amusement center as both terms are defined herein. 
    Coin-operated amusement machine. 
(1)  The term "coin-operated amusement machine" means every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket or similar object and the result of whose operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b)-(f), and which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
a.  Pinball machines; 
b.  Console machines; 
c.  Video games; 
d.  Crane machines; 
e.  Claw machines; 
f.  Pusher machines; 
g.  Bowling machines; 
h.  Novelty arcade games; 
i.  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
j.  Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
k.  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
l.  Basketball machines; 
m.  Shuffleboard machines; 
n.  Kiddie ride games; 
o.  Skeeball machines; 
p.  Air hockey machines; 
q.  Roll down machines; and 
r.  Any other similar amusement machine that can be legally operated in the state. 
(2)  The term "coin-operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
a.  Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; 
b.  Vending machines which for payment of money dispenses products or services; 
c.  Gas and electric meters; 
d.  Pay telephones; 
e.  Pay toilets; 
f.  Cigarette vending machines; 
g.  Coin-operated vending machines; 
h.  Coin-operated scales; 
i.  Coin-operated gumball machines; 
j.  Coin-operated television sets that provide cable or network programming; 
k.  Coin-operated massage beds; 
l.  Coin-operated pool table or coin-operated billiard table as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1(3); 
m.  Machines that are not legally permitted to be operated in the state; 
n.  Every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide music whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket or similar object such as jukeboxes or other similar types of music machines. 
    Operator means any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who sets up for operation by another and leases or rents for the purpose of operation by another any machine as herein regulated, whether such leasing or renting be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such device, or otherwise. 
    Proprietor means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club who, as the owner or lessee, has under his or its control any establishment, place or premises in or at which a coin-operated amusement machine is placed or kept for use or play, or an exhibition for the purpose of use or play by the general public. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-9-1), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-311. - Occupational tax. 
(a)  Required. No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an operator or proprietor of coin-operated amusement machines, as the terms are herein defined, without first having paid the required occupational tax as set forth in article II, division 4 of this chapter and without first having obtained the license required under this article. 
(b)  Application. Application for tax certificate and license hereunder shall be fined in writing with the town clerk, on a form to be provided by the town, and shall specify: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses. 
(2)  Proprietors shall list the address of the premises where the licensed machines are to be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such place. 
(3)  Proprietors shall list the number of machines to be maintained on the premises. 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the machines, if other than the proprietor. This information shall not be released to the general public without the consent of the licensee. 
(5)  Whether or not the person or persons having management of or supervision over the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefor. 
(c)  Fee. The proper tax fee shall accompany such application. Such tax shall be non-assignable and non-transferable, and, in the case of a proprietor, shall apply only to the premises for which such tax has been paid. 
(d)  Character qualifications. No person shall be permitted to operate an amusement center who has or employs a person who has, within five years of issuance or renewal, been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, any felony involving any federal or state offense or any federal or state misdemeanor involving drug-related offenses or offenses involving moral turpitude. 
(e)  Revocation of license. In the event that it comes to the attention of the mayor and town council that an amusement center has created a nuisance to the surrounding community or the operator or proprietor has violated any provision of this section, the following procedure will be followed: 
(1)  The town clerk shall issue a notice of objection that shall include the address of the location and the specific reasons why the amusement center in question is alleged to be a nuisance or alleged to be in violation of any provision of this section. The town clerk will then notify the proprietor that a notice of objection has been filed and will set a date for a hearing before the mayor and council. Extensions and necessary investigations will be granted and conducted at the discretion of the town clerk. 
(2)  At the time of the hearing, any resident, the operator, the proprietor and the town clerk or other witnesses may be heard. Thereafter, the mayor and council shall issue a notice of decision that will call for the dismissal of the objection, removal of the machines or such other remedy as they deem appropriate under the circumstances that are consistent with the purpose of this section. 
(3)  The decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for their decision and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(4)  The decision of the mayor and council shall be binding upon the proprietor and operator of the amusement center under consideration, subject to appeal to the proper court. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-9-2)-(7-9-5), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-312. - Operating regulations. 
    All businesses operating as an amusement center hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Devises to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)  Inspection. The chief of police shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such machines are operated or set up for operating, and shall inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(3)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(4)  Loitering. As used in this section, the term "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licenses to operate an amusement center to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
a.  Created or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
b.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and response of any person; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. 
(5)  Shirt and shoes required. All proprietors shall require shorts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their premises. 
(6)  Operating hours. Operating hours for the operation of coin-operated amusement machines shall be between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(7)  License. No separate license fee for such an establishment shall be required except as set forth in article 2, division 4 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-9-6), 11-18-2004) 
Secs. 22-313-22-344. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MASSAGE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq.; local regulation of massage, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-22. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-345. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric or electronic device or instrument, or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power, which is utilized by a massage technician, as herein defined, for the purpose of administering massage therapy, as herein defined. 
    Massage establishment means any business established for profit which employs one or more massage technicians, as herein defined, or owns and operates or maintains for profit one or more massage apparatus, as herein defined to include, and which, for a good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of massage therapy, as herein defined. 
    Massage technician means a person who administers massage or massage therapy for compensation. 
    Massage therapy means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term includes complementary methods, including without limitation the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands; the term also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. Massage therapy shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-12-1), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-346. - Administering of massages. 
    In administering massages under this article, the conditions of the massage room shall meet the standards set forth in section 22-368. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-12-6), 11-18-2004) 
Secs. 22-347-22-365. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE 

Sec. 22-366. - License required; fee. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity to operate a massage establishment without first having obtained the license required by this division. 
(b)  The license fee for a massage establishment shall be $100.00 per year. 
(c)  In addition to the license required under this article, the licensee shall also obtain an occupation tax certificate as required under article 2, division 4 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-12-2), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-367. - Written application-Required information. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage establishment shall make application to the town clerk. Such application shall be in writing and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names currently or heretofore used by the applicant; 
(2)  The current and all previous business and residence addresses of the applicant within the two years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(3)  Sworn affidavits of at least three bona fide residents of the county that the applicant is a person of good moral character; 
(4)  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair; 
(6)  Two current photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  Any massage or similar business license history of the applicant, including whether such person, in any previous operation in any jurisdiction, has had such a license revoked, denied, or suspended, the reason therefor, and any business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension, revocation, or denial; and 
(9)  All convictions, including pleas of guilty and/or nolo contendere, of violations of any law and the grounds therefor. 
(b)  The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the town and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as an exhibit to the application. 
(c)  If the applicant is a partnership, such partnership shall submit the foregoing information and exhibits with regard to each employee, agent, general partner, or limited partner. If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall submit the foregoing information and exhibits with regard to each officer and employee and shall also submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-12-3), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-368. - Same-Massage establishment. 
(a)  A corporate applicant must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in the state. The applicant shall be the owner or legal agent of the establishment. Applications shall be submitted to the town clerk on forms provided by the town. A massage technician who is a sole proprietor shall not be required to obtain a massage establishment license. 
(b)  No license shall be issued unless the application required herein, and all the attached documentation and exhibits so required, shall have been filed by the applicant and in no case shall the license be issued where it appears that the application has been materially falsified or where the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify any information contained therein. 
(c)  No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection discloses that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided also that all such signs shall otherwise comply with the general sign requirements of this Code; 
(2)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the International Building Code, and, additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth; 
(3)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the International Building Code; 
(4)  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing any instruments used for massage shall be provided; 
(5)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided; 
(6)  Closed cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen; 
(7)  Adequate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for customers; 
(8)  All walls, ceilings, floors, steam or vapor rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition; 
(9)  Clean and sanitary towels and linen shall be provided for customers receiving massage services; no common use of towels or lines shall be permitted; and 
(10)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of any license hereunder, must be in complete compliance with the town fire code, the town electrical code, the town plumbing code, and with all other requirements of federal, state, county and municipal law designed to protect the health, welfare and safety of the persons who come into contact with said establishment. 
(d)  No licensee hereunder shall permit any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within a massage establishment where massages are given to be fitted with a door capable of being locked. Exterior doors may have locks, but such exterior doors shall not be locked while the massage establishment is open for business or while any massage is being performed therein. Any massage establishment operating within a hotel or motel shall provide an area for massages to be administered, and in no event shall a massage be performed within a hotel or motel room. 
(e)  The storing, serving, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within massage establishments is expressly prohibited. 
(f)  No licensee hereunder shall permit any massage to be given to a patron whose genitals are exposed during massage treatment; and no patron of a massage establishment shall knowingly expose his genitals during a massage. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-12-5), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-369. - Refusal to grant or restore licenses; discipline of licensees; suspension, revocation, or restriction of licenses. 
(a)  The town clerk shall refuse to grant a license to an applicant or suspend or revoke a license under this article upon a finding that the licensee or applicant has: 
(1)  Displayed an inability or has become unable to work as an operator of a massage establishment, as the case may be, with reasonable skill and safety to clientele by reason of illness, use of alcohol, drugs, narcotics, chemicals, or any other type of substance, or as a result of any mental or physical condition. In enforcing this subsection, the town clerk may, upon reasonable grounds, require the licensee or applicant to submit to a mental or physical examination by an appropriate licensed practitioner of the healing arts. The expense of such examination shall be borne by such licensee or applicant. The results of such examination shall be admissible in any hearing before the town or a court of competent jurisdiction in the event of an appeal. If a licensee or applicant fails to submit to such an examination when properly directed to do so by the town, unless such failure was due to circumstances beyond the licensee's or applicant's control, the town may enter a final order upon proper notice, hearing, and proof of such refusal; 
(2)  Been convicted in the last five years of the following offenses: sodomy, aggravated sodomy, or solicitation of sodomy; masturbation for hire; public indecency; prostitution; solicitation of prostitution; pimping; pandering or pandering by compulsion; distribution of materials that are obscene or depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law; any offense involving the use or threat of force or violence upon the person of another; any offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons; or any felony involving moral turpitude. For purposes of this section, a conviction shall include a finding or verdict of guilty, plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere in a criminal proceeding; 
(3)  Knowingly made a misleading, deceptive, untrue or fraudulent representation to a client, customer, or other person or entity in connection with the provisions of massage services or any document connected therewith; or committed an act of fraud or deceit or made any false statement in obtaining or attempting to obtain a license provided for in this article; 
(4)  Performed massage services contrary to this article; or knowingly aided, assisted, procured, or advised any person to perform massage services contrary to this article; or knowingly performed any act which in any way aids, assists, procures, advises, or encourages any unlicensed person to perform massage services; 
(5)  Engaged in any unprofessional, unethical, deceptive, or deleterious practice harmful to the public, which conduct or practice need not have resulted in actual injury to any person. For purposes of this section, unprofessional conduct shall also include any departure from or failure to conform to the acceptable minimum standards applicable to massage technicians or operators of massage establishments; or 
(6)  Failed to report to the town any act or omission of a licensee or applicant or any other person who violates the provisions of this article. 
(b)  In the event the town clerk denies an application for a license or finds that a license should be revoked or suspended pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, notice of such denial, suspension, or revocation shall be transmitted to the applicant or licensee, in writing, with the reasons for that action specified. The applicant or licensee shall have the right to appeal such denial, suspension, or revocation to the town clerk. Such appeal shall be filed in writing no later than ten days from the date of the town clerk's decision. A hearing shall be held within 30 days from the date of the written notice of appeal. Within 30 days from the date of the conclusion of the hearing, the town clerk shall notify the applicant or licensee, in writing, of his recommendation and the reason therefor. The decision of the town clerk shall be final. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a licensee or applicant, whether the same is a person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity, and all persons having a beneficial interest in the operation of a massage establishment (except stockholders owning less that five percent of the stock in a corporation) shall be subject to the provisions of this section and be treated as if they were the licensee or applicant. 
(d)  Where the town refuses to grant a license to an applicant or has revoked a license under this article, the affected licensee or applicant shall be disqualified from reapplying for such license for 12 months immediately following such action taken by the town. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-12-8), 11-18-2004) 
Secs. 22-370-22-396. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PAWNSHOPS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; local regulation of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-397. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means an individual registering a business authorized herein. 
    Application means a form supplied by the town for the purpose of registering a business authorized herein. 
    Business means the business of operating or owning a pawnshop or pawnbroker business. 
    Church means a permanent building and grounds where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
    Closely held corporation means a corporation not traded or listed on any stock exchange and which has fewer than 25 shareholders. 
    Convicted or conviction shall include a plea of nolo contendere. 
    Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
    Goods. Wherever used herein, the term "goods" shall carry its normal meaning, and further, it should be construed in the broadest sense allowable and should include all forms of the personal property. 
    Individual means a natural person. 
    Interest in a business means an interest held by an owner or co-owner of a registered business; by a partner of a general or limited partnership which owns or co-owns a registered business; a stockholder of five percent or more shares in any closely held corporation which owns or co-owns a registered business; an owner, co-owner, lessor, sublessor, partner in a partnership, stockholder of five percent or more stock of a closely held corporation, or stockholder of 50 percent or more of any corporation owning or leasing any real estate upon which is located a registered business; or anyone sharing in the income or corpus of any trust or estate having such an interest; or a person having subscriptions, options, and/or warranty for purchase of five percent or more of a closely held corporation's stock or 50 percent or more of any corporation's stock. 
    Owner means a person having an interest in a license or in a business holding a license, including a stockholder. 
    Pawnbroker means any person engaging in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers. 
    Pawnshop. See Pawnbroker. 
    Private residence means a house, dwelling, condominium, duplex, boardinghouse or roominghouse or apartment building. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-1), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-398. - Penalties. 
    Any person with an interest in the business, or his employee or agent, who shall: 
(1)  Fail to make any entry of any required item in the permanent record book; 
(2)  Make any false entry therein; 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate, record illegible information, destroy, or remove from the place of business such permanent record book; 
(4)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such business at any reasonable time, or refuse to allow any member of the general public to inspect goods in his possession being held under pawn or purchase (within the 15-day purchase and 30-day pawn dates), pursuant to this article, during ordinary hours of business; 
(5)  Fail to maintain a record of each pawn or purchase transaction for at least four years; 
(6)  Violate any other provision of this article; 
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon being found guilty, fined up to $1,000.00 per offense and the approval to conduct business granted hereunder shall be revoked. Operation of any business hereunder in violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense for each day of operation. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-5), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-399. - Exclusions/exceptions. 
    Businesses which limit the purchase of used valuables to the acceptance of trade-ins for credit for new goods or the dispensing of refunds in regard to valuables previously purchased from said business shall not be regulated or covered under this article. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-4), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-400. - Adoption of state and federal laws. 
    All laws of the state and the United States of America, including the rules and regulations of any agency thereof, pertaining to the regulation of pawnshops, pawnbrokers, and pawning are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-3), 11-18-2004) 
Secs. 22-401-22-428. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 22-429. - Registration required; limitations. 
(a)  Every person doing business in the town, as a pawnbroker, as defined herein, prior to commencing business shall make proper application to the town and shall pay the occupational taxes and administration fees as set out in article 2, division 4 of this chapter. 
(b)  Every person who applies to do business in the town, as a pawnbroker as defined herein, prior to commencing business shall pay a regulatory fee to the town to cover the costs of regulation of the pawn business in the amount of $2,500.00 per year, or fraction of year; plus one percent of all gross sales, due and payable on the 15th day of each month for the preceding month. 
(c)  No application to do business as a pawnbroker shall be considered or approved where the number of such registered pawnshops and pawnbrokers which are conducting business at the time of such application numbers one for each 5,000 residents according to the latest decennial census figures available. In making this computation, fractions of population shall not be considered. 
(d)  No person shall have an interest in more than one pawnshop or pawnbroker's business within the town. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-11), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-430. - Review of applications. 
(a)  The town clerk or designee shall review all applications for compliance with these regulations. All applicants shall furnish upon request all data, information, and records necessary for a complete background investigation. 
(b)  The town clerk or designee shall also have authority to prescribe such forms as it deems necessary for the proper administration of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-12), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-431. - Applicant. 
    The applicant shall be the owner of the proposed business, if the business is solely owned, or a general partner, if a partnership. If a proposed business is a corporation, the applicant must be the president. Otherwise, no other individual may qualify as an applicant. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-13), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-432. - Qualifications. 
(a)  The applicant and each individual with an interest in the business shall be a citizen of the United States or a resident legal alien. 
(b)  The applicant must be a resident of the county for a period of one year preceding the date of filing application. The time requirement as to residency shall not apply to honorably discharged members of the nation's armed forces who have returned to the town to reside. 
(c)  Corporations must either be incorporated in the state or must have registered to do business in this state, and only the applying officer must meet the residency requirements. 
(d)  No applicant, general manager, or person having an interest in the business shall have been convicted nor entered a plea of nolo contendere in any state, the United States, or any other country, within ten years immediately preceding the date of application for any felony, or crime involving moral turpitude, or any violation of the laws of any state, county, or municipality relating to the sale, manufacture, or distribution of alcoholic beverages, or soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegal dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, any theft or burglary offense, receiving or possession of stolen property, or any statute or ordinance regulating the business of pawnbroker. In those instances involving corporations, this prohibition shall also apply to the corporation's president, vice-president, secretary, and treasurer. In those instances involving corporations, this prohibition shall also apply to: 
(1)  Any closely held corporation's president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, and all stockholders owning five percent or more of the corporation's stock, or a person having subscriptions, options, and/or warrants for purchase of a closely held corporation's stock that when fully executed would give that person five percent or more of the corporation's stock; and 
(2)  Any shareholder owning 50 percent or more of any corporation, whether closely held or not, or a person having subscriptions, options and/or warrants for purchase of a corporation's (whether closely held or not) stock that when fully executed would give that person 50 percent or more of the corporation's stock. 
(e)  Applicants shall be the owners of the business premises or the holder of any lease thereon or the general agent of the owner. 
(f)  The applicant (individual in case of proprietorship, applying officer in case of corporation, and one of the partners in case of partnership) shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business if approval is granted. 
(g)  The applicant shall make a sworn statement of the qualifications to the above and shall place same on file with the town before approval of the business is granted. 
(h)  If the applicant is a partnership, all members of the partnership must approve of this application but only one member must meet the requirements for residency. However, all members of the partnership must meet the other qualifications. If approval of the business is granted, the approval shall apply to the partners in the name of the partnership. 
(i)  No person shall be granted approval to engage in the business of pawning unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the governing body that the person is of good moral character. 
(j)  An application shall not be granted, or if granted shall be revoked, should the town clerk or his designee find any of the following: 
(1)  The applicant and/or person with an interest in the business has conducted any business within the town which has required the necessity for unusual police observation or inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance by the applicant or person with an interest in the business, or it was necessary for the town to take action to compel the adherence to any law, regulation, or ordinance; 
(2)  The location for which the business is proposed will create or add to existing traffic congestion which would be detrimental to the public safety or will adversely impact the general residential character of the neighborhood; or 
(3)  The applicant and/or person with an interest in the business has ever had a pawn business suspended or closed by any governing entity. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-14), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-433. - Inspection. 
    As a condition to the granting of the approval to operate a pawnshop business in the town, every person with an interest in the business and every employee or agent of such person agrees to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer, pursuant to his official duties, to be and remain on or about his premises without the formality of a warrant, provided said officer does not unduly interfere in the business's operation. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-6), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-434. - Application contents and investigation. 
(a)  Background investigations shall be made on the applicant and any other person with an interest in the business, and applicant must remit the fees established by the town for such investigations. 
(b)  The application shall list the following. If the business is approved, the applicant shall immediately inform the town in writing of any changes in the following information. The applicant shall state the following information under oath on the application: 
(1)  The business operation. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner, if the business is solely owned. 
(3)  Name and address of each applicant and each person who would have an interest in the business as defined in this article. In the case of a corporation, this list would include only those stockholders owning five percent or more of a closely held corporation's stock or a person having subscriptions, options, and/or warrants for purchase of a closely held corporation's stock that when fully executed would give that person five percent or more of the corporation's stock. In the case of a corporation that is not closely held, this list would include only stockholders owning 50 percent or more of a corporation's stock, or a person having subscriptions, options, and/or warrants for purchase of a corporation's (that is not closely held) stock that where fully executed would give that person 50 percent or more of the corporation's stock. In the case of a partnership, each general and limited partner would be included. The capacity in which each person will act (as proprietor, agent, employee, or otherwise) shall also be listed. 
(4)  The name and address of the general manager of the particular business location. 
(5)  If any person listed in subsections (b)(2)-(4) of this section has lived at his current address for less than ten years, previous addresses for the last ten years must also be listed. 
(6)  The name, address and date of birth of each employee working at the business location. 
(7)  Description of the business operation, location, facilities, zoning district of proposed business, and time at which proposed business will begin. 
(8)  Blueprint or scale drawing of the business facilities. 
(9)  Plat of survey drawn to scale and prepared by a state-licensed land surveyor indicating the location of the business and the distance to the nearest facilities and activities as measured by a straight line. 
(10)  Complete sets of fingerprints for the applicant and any other person with an interest in the business listed in subsections (b)(2)-(4) of this section shall be taken by the town police department to be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which shall search the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for any instances of criminal activity. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation may also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. 
(11)  Proof of payment of investigation fees and/or background check fees as established by the town must be established at the time of application. 
(12)  The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant within the six months next preceding the date of said application conducted business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which such business was conducted. 
(13)  Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative. 
(14)  Such other information as to the identity or character of the owner or person or persons having an interest in, or the management or supervision of, the applicant's business, or the method or plan of doing such business as the town clerk or town council may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public good. 
(15)  Whether or not the applicant, any person having an interest in the proposed business or license, any owner, principal, agent or employee of applicant or any person having the management or supervision responsibilities of the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor (excluding traffic violations), or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefor. 
(16)  Such other information and documents as may be required by the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-15), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-435. - Bond. 
(a)  Every applicant shall post with the town a surety bond in favor of the town, in the amount of $35,000.00, which bond shall not be accepted unless with a corporate surety licensed to do business in the state, and unless it is conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all applicable provisions of federal, state, and local laws, regulations and town ordinances concerning the operation of a pawnbroker business, and all criminal laws regarding theft, burglary and receiving or possession of stolen property, and that the property purchased is guaranteed to be in accordance with the specifications, standards, and conditions represented to the purchaser by the applicant. 
(b)  If any person shall be aggrieved by the conduct of any applicant or person with interest in the business, and shall recover judgment against him therefor, such aggrieved person may, after the return unsatisfied, either in whole or in part, of any execution issued upon said judgment, maintain an action in his own name upon the bond or letter of credit of said licensee in any court having jurisdiction of the amount of said judgment remaining unsatisfied. 
(c)  In lieu of posting said bond, the applicant may post cash or a letter of credit from a recognized state financial institution, the terms of which are satisfactory to the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-16), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-436. - Notice in newspaper. 
    The town clerk shall publish for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper with general circulation in the town, notice of the date, place and time of a public hearing on the application. The notice shall contain the names of the applicant, all persons having an interest in the proposed business and all managers of the proposed business. The public hearing shall be held within 45 days of the application being deemed complete by the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-17), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-437. - Misleading, omitted or obsolete information. 
(a)  Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission left out of an original or renewal application shall be cause sufficient for the denial thereof. 
(b)  Any information that changes or otherwise becomes obsolete shall be reported to the town clerk immediately. 
(c)  When any approval of an application is granted on the basis of an application containing misleading or untrue information or omitted or unreported changed material information, such circumstances shall be cause for revocation of approval. 
(d)  Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for false swearing under the law of the state and may be prosecuted as an offense against the town as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-18), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-438. - Renewal of license. 
(a)  The renewal of an approved application is required annually. Such renewal shall be dependent upon proof that the renewal applicant meets all requirements upon which the original application was granted. 
(b)  The applicant must provide at the time of application for renewal an affidavit substantiating compliance with the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-19), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-439. - Transfers. 
(a)  When approval of a pawn business is granted pursuant to an application to the town, that approval shall not be transferable, either by location or among persons, except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  In the case of a death of any person having an interest in a business, approval of the business may be transferred to the estate of the deceased person; however, the duly appointed administrator or executor of the estate shall be named as responsible for such interest and said individual shall be subject to the qualifications of an applicant. 
(c)  One or more partners in a partnership having an approved pawn business may withdraw in favor of one or more of the existing partners. In addition, partners or additional stockholders may be added where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be exclusively for additional inventory or the expansion of facilities and that the original partners are receiving none of the additional capital invested. All such additional partners or new principal stockholders must be approved by the town, and shall be subject to the qualifications of an applicant. Otherwise, no new ownership may be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-20), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-440. - Revocation of license. 
    An approval to operate a pawn business under this article or employee permit issued hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of any provision of this article, regardless of the outcome of any criminal prosecution associated with violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-7), 11-18-2004) 
Secs. 22-441-22-459. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 22-460. - Employee permit. 
    Each person authorized or allowed to conduct any phase of business covered under this article shall be considered an employee and must have an approved employee permit, and this permit must be visibly displayed on the employee at all times such employee is on the business premises. An investigation fee of $25.00 shall be paid by all pawn businesses for each employee. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-31), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-461. - Employment of certain persons prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful in any premises to employ any person in any capacity whatsoever who has ever been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere within the past ten years, by this or any other state or by the United States or any other country, of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, of any offense relating to the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages, receiving or possession of stolen property, theft or burglary related offense, or any statute or ordinance regulating the business of pawnbroker. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-32), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-462. - Employees' list. 
    It shall be the duty of all businesses to file with the police chief of the town the names of all employees with their home addresses, home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees, with the names of new employees must be filed with the police department within three days from the date of any such change. All employees shall be subject to such investigation rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary from time to time by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-33), 11-18-2004) 
Secs. 22-463-22-492. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 22-493. - Hours of operation. 
    All pawn businesses shall close their establishments and cease transacting business no later than 7:00 p.m. each day and begin their operation and commence transacting business at no time before 9:00 a.m. each day. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-41), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-494. - Location of businesses. 
(a)  All businesses under this article shall be located in strict compliance with the town's zoning ordinance and at a location with an identifiable street address, which shall be stated on the application along with other required information; and no business under this article shall change its address without obtaining approval from the town clerk and police chief. No business under this article shall be operated in or from a motel or hotel. All pawn shops shall only be located on lots that are zoned C-3 under the town's zoning ordinance. 
(b)  No pawn business shall operate his business within: 
(1)  100 yards of any public library; 
(2)  200 yards of any church, church grounds, school building, educational building, school grounds, college campus, or licensed day care center; 
(3)  200 yards of any public or town-owned recreation center, auditorium, stadium, ballpark, or youth athletic facilities; 
(4)  200 yards of any private residence. 
All measurements, for purposes of this section, shall be from lot line to lot line. 
(c)  The school building or education building referred to herein shall apply only to state, county, town or church facilities and to such buildings at such other public and private schools in which subjects commonly taught in the schools and colleges of this state are taught, not including schools or colleges wherein only specialized subjects are taught, such as law, medicine, dentistry, business, music, art, stenography, vocational occupations, and other special subjects. 
(d)  Applications will not be considered for a proposed pawn business when there is a previously granted and current application for a place of business for a pawnbroker within 500 yards of the applicant's proposed site. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-43), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-495. - Separate business establishment. 
    No business under this article shall be designed or operated so as to allow access to said business immediately from any other business without first exiting the other business into a common or open area to which the public at large has access. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-44), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-496. - Business entrance. 
    The front entrance of all pawn businesses shall be clearly visible from a public street. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-45), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-497. - Prohibited activities. 
    No pawn business shall permit on its premises any slot machines, pinball machines, video games, electronic games of any kind or character for use by the public, or any coin-operated machines operated for amusement purposes. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-46), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-498. - Interior visibility. 
    No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior, shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any pawnbroker's store. Each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-47), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-499. - Records to be kept. 
(a)  All pawnbrokers shall, in addition to other records, keep books wherein shall be entered in permanent ink an accurate description of all property received by or pledged or sold to them. Such description shall include the brand name of the article, any identifying mark, manufacturers, identification, serial numbers, any numbers, any initials or name of any person or company, and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. 
(b)  In such books there shall be entered also the name, age, address, signature and identification number from a driver's license of the person by whom same was delivered, deposited, or sold, the name of the broker, agent or employee receiving the item, the date and time when such transaction occurred, the price paid for the goods purchased and the check number issued, if applicable. 
(c)  There shall be attached at all times to each item of personal property pawned or purchased by the pawn business an identification tag bearing a number corresponding to the number on the pawn or purchase tickets and book entry required herein. 
(d)  These entries shall be made simultaneously with the transaction. 
(e)  A permanent bound set of the pawn ticket shall constitute the book required by this article. 
(f)  All books and records required by this article and articles pledged or sold hereunder shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by any law enforcement officer of the town, the county sheriff's department, any incorporated municipality in the county, or the state. 
(g)  Any person engaged in any business under this article who shall fail or refuse to keep the records as provided in this article, or who shall make false entries concerning the transaction, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection by any said law enforcement officer of said records and of the property pledged with or sold to him shall be guilty of a violation of this article and the business's bond shall be forfeited to the town and the approval to operate the business shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-48), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-500. - Records maintained for four years. 
    The record of such pawn or purchase transaction regulated by this article shall be maintained for a period of not less than four years from the date of transaction. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-49), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-501. - Standard forms required. 
    All businesses under this article shall use a standard form for pawn and a standard form for purchase; and no ticket may be used for a dual purpose. The design of this form shall be approved by the town police department and the forms shall be numbered and chronologically used and sent to the town police department as required in this article. Each number missing from the chronological sequence shall be considered a separate violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-50), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-502. - Daily report to town police. 
    Every business under this article shall make a daily report in writing to the town police department of all property pledged or purchased during the 24-hour period ending at 7:00 p.m. on the date of the report. Such reports shall be legibly written or typed in English and shall show the name and address of the business; time of transaction; sequel number of the pawn or purchase tickets; amount paid or advanced; full description of articles, including kind, style material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry and all identifying names, marks, numbers, initials; and a description of the person selling or pawning said item including name, address, race, weight, height, hair color, driver's license number, and social security number. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-51), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-503. - Identification required. 
    All businesses under this article, when receiving in pawn or in purchasing goods, shall require a driver's license or military I.D. card containing a picture showing positive identification of the person who is pawning, selling, or bartering, and shall verify the identification. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-52), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-504. - Fingerprint required. 
    All businesses under this article shall require every person from whom it accepts goods on pawn or purchase to place the fingerprint of his right index finger (if right index finger is missing, the next finger in line will be used) in ink on the front of the copy of the pawn or purchase ticket which is to be sent to the town police department. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-53), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-505. - Photograph required. 
    All businesses under this article shall require every person from whom it accepts goods on pawn or purchase to submit to his photograph being taken by the employee who handles the transaction. The photograph shall be of the face, shall be four inches by five inches in size, and shall be delivered to the town police department with the pawn or purchase ticket. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-54), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-506. - Purchased articles not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition. 
    Every business under this article shall hold, on the premises designated in the application for doing business, every purchase required to be listed in its records for at least 30 days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, or shipment. The provisions of this section shall not apply to purchases from licensed wholesalers in the normal course of business. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-55), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-507. - Pawned articles not to be disposed of for 30 days after acquisition. 
    Every business under this article which takes goods on pawn shall hold such goods for at least 30 days unless redeemed by the owner or on authority of the owner before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-56), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-508. - Display of goods pledged or purchased. 
    For a period of 30 days from the date of purchase and 30 days from the date of pledge (unless redeemed by or with authority of the person who pledged the goods), all goods purchased or pawned and required to be listed in the records shall be kept on the premises designated in the application for doing business. Every item required to be kept on the premises hereunder shall have attached to it either a copy of the standard ticket form required in this article or the number of said form. Any person desiring to examine any merchandise shall first obtain a copy of a police department incident or stolen property report. Upon presentation of a copy of such report to any dealer or employee and upon giving in writing to such a dealer or employee a full description of the stolen items sought, including all identifying characteristics, his name, address, signature, identification, and incident or stolen property report number and issuing department, such individual shall be allowed to examine any merchandise of the type described on the premises. Such written information shall be kept in sequential, dated order in a permanent file or book. This record shall be kept in addition to all other records required herein. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-57), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-509. - Alteration. 
    Any item required to be kept or displayed under the provisions of this division shall be so kept in their original form as they existed when first purchased; and their physical characteristics shall not be altered in any material or immaterial manner. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-58), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-510. - Erasures, obliterations, write-overs, or typeovers are not allowed. 
    No person with an interest in a business or any employee shall erase, obliterate, type over, write over, or in any way cause the original entry on the records required hereunder to become illegible. All pawn or purchase tickets filled out in error shall be sent to the town police department in their numbered order along with daily reports and shall have the word "void" typed or written across the front, but such entry shall not be used to cause the original entry to be illegible. If an error is made, and the ticket is still to be used, then a single line shall be drawn through the incorrect entry. This line shall not cause the original entry to be illegible, and the correct information entry shall be made on the next available area. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-59), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-511. - Verification of age. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of ordinances of the town for any agent, officer, or employee to receive in pawn or in purchase any good from the person without properly checking the identification of any person who is pawning or selling, which failure results in an underage person being allowed to pawn or sell any property. An underage person shall be a person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "identification" means any document issued by any governmental agency containing a description of the person so identified, such person's photograph, and such person's date of birth. As used herein, the term "identification" shall include a passport, a military identification card, a driver's license, or a state department of public safety identification card. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense and upon conviction thereof shall be assessed a fine of up to $1,000.00 for each offense. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any criminal prosecution which may result from a violation of this section, and notwithstanding the results or outcome of any criminal prosecution for violation of this section, any pawn business which employs any officer, agent, or employee who fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, which failure results in an underage person being allowed to pawn or sell any property, shall have its approval to conduct a pawn business in the town revoked. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-61), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-512. - Business transactions conducted outside the building normally used for business transaction, parking lots or rear lot area, etc. 
    No business transactions shall be conducted outside the building designated as the normal place to conduct transactions. The term "business transaction" means any aspect of business, including inspection or appraisal of any goods when it is possible for such goods to be taken inside the building where transactions normally are made (the term "possible" being here used in the broadest sense); and no person other than those possessing an employee permit or having an interest in the business as defined in this article shall be allowed to conduct any form of business transaction either inside the establishment or on any part of outside land area covered under address of the application. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-62), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-513. - Articles that have had serial numbers removed or altered or obliterated or have no serial number shall not be accepted. 
    No business under this article shall accept any articles which have had the serial number altered, obliterated, or removed from such article or which the person who is making the business transaction knows should have a serial number upon it, unless such person immediately notifies the police department and obtains the approval of a town police officer, after giving the police officer opportunity to inspect the article and interview the customer. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-63), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-514. - No article will be accepted unless the recording provisions of this article are followed. 
    No business under this article shall take any item in pawn or purchase, taking full or possession title thereto, without entering each transaction of such goods on its books. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-64), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-515. - Nonformed precious metal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or business under this article to purchase precious metals in a melted, smelted, or nonformed state, or to melt, smelt, or cause to be placed in a nonformed state any precious metals taken to pawn or purchase. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-65), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-516. - Stolen items. 
    Every business under this article and every employee and agent of the business shall immediately upon request turn over to the town police department every item believed by the police department to be a stolen item. The police department shall furnish a property receipt, including a case number of recovery, to the dealer surrendering such items. Said item shall be returned to the business only after it has been determined that such item is not stolen. If it is determined that such item is stolen, it shall be returned to its lawful owner. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-2-66), 11-18-2004) 
Secs. 22-517-22-540. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD HALLS 

Sec. 22-541. - Scope of provisions. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall apply to any billiard or pool table kept for amusement at private residences. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-6-1), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-542. - Windows not to be obscured. 
    Windows of pool or billiard parlors shall not be covered or painted to obstruct the view from the street. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-6-2), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-543. - Hours of operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard room between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., or to permit any person to remain in such billiard room between such prohibited hours, except regular employees performing necessary labor on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-6-3), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-544. - Admission of persons under 18 years of age. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to play billiards in, or for any other purpose to enter or remain in, a billiard room or any establishment in which billiard tables are located and in which beer, wine or alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for consumption on the premises. This section shall not apply to a person under 18 years of age who is accompanied by a parent or guardian or who possess a written permit from a parent or guardian, which permit is witnessed by a notary public with seal, and the billiard room or the establishment in which the billiard tables are located derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or serves other than alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of a billiard room or any establishment in which billiard tables are located in which beer, wine or alcoholic beverages are offered for consumption on the premises to permit any person under the age of 18 years to play billiards in, or for any purpose to enter or remain in such room or establishment unless the person under 18 is accompanied by a parent or guardian or who possess a written permit from a parent or guardian, which permit is witnessed by a notary public with seal, and the billiard room or the establishment in which the billiard tables are located derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross revenues from the sale of products or serves other than alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-6-4), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-545. - Disorderly conduct to be reported. 
    It shall be the duty of every person owning or managing a pool or billiard room in the town to report to the police of the town each and every person guilty of disorderly conduct in the pool or billiard room immediately after the same comes to the knowledge of such owner or manager. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-6-5), 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 22-546. - Miniature pool or billiard tables. 
    Miniature pool tables or pocket billiard tables shall be operated subject to all of the provisions governing pool or billiard tables. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 1(7-6-6), 11-18-2004) 
Secs. 22-547-22-580. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-581. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the town and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the town. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or the effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor the effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the mayor and council, and on studies in other communities, including but not limited to the experience of the cities of College Park, Forest Park, Marietta, and Smyrna, the mayor and council finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary, unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is no mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. The commercial exploitation of human sexuality, in all forms in which such exploitation may be manifested has a deleterious effect on the community where it takes place as heretofore mentioned and that such effects are intensified and exacerbated when such is provided in conjunction with the service or consumption of alcohol. There is a correlation between sexually oriented businesses and an increase in criminal behavior in nearby areas, including but not limited to disorderly conduct, prostitution, solicitation, drug trafficking, drug use and corruption of public officials. 
(2)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
(3)  Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which create unhealthy conditions. Further, such establishments escalate undesirable community conditions, including blight, diminished property values, and cause increases in the need for law enforcement and emergency medical response resources, increases in the burden on the judicial system as a result of the criminal behavior which the mayor and council finds such business establishments bring to a community. The negative effects such businesses cause are not limited to such facilities that offer live or recorded performances with human nudity or the depiction of sexual acts but that other forms of sexually oriented businesses also have deleterious effect on nearby neighborhoods, commercial districts and on urban life in general. These other types of such businesses include, but are not limited to, adult bookstores, peep shows, massage parlors, bathhouses, adult gift and novelty shops, and lingerie or nude modeling studios. 
(4)  Communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses. AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug use, exposure to infected blood and blood components. 
(5)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities there are unhealthy, and in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(6)  The findings noted in subsections (b)(1) through (5) of this section raise substantial governmental concerns. Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(7)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented businesses are run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the town. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(8)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult entertainment establishments. 
(9)  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(10)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(11)  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the town will be promoted by the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-1, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-582. - Punishment for violation; abatement of nuisance; jurisdiction; injunction. 
(a)  The violation of any of the provisions of this article and upon an adjudication of guilt of a violation, the municipal court may impose sentences and fines thereupon as provided in section 1-7. 
(b)  The violation of any of the provisions of this article shall raise a rebuttable presumption that such conduct constitutes a nuisance and an action for abatement thereof may be brought by the town in the municipal court. 
(c)  The town, in its sole discretion, may also pursue an action for an injunction in a court of competent jurisdiction for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-22, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-583. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration an electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machine, projector, video or laser disc player, or other image-producing device is maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the image is so displayed or distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be characterized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration as specified materials which are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear live in a state of nudity or seminudity; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activity; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  a.  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; 
b.  Provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and 
c.  Has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this type of photographic reproduction; 
(2)  Regularly offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Regularly allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are consistently distinguished or characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear live in a state of nudity or seminudity, or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
    Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a strip tease for another person. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association, who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
    Nude modeling studio means any place where a person who appears seminude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude modeling studios shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in such junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure: 
(1)  That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for viewing; 
(2)  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
(3)  Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at any one time. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)  The showing of the human male or female genitals, attached pubic area, vulva, anus, cleft of the anal cavity or anal cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering; 
(2)  The showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or 
(3)  The showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    Seminude or in a seminude condition means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
    Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminudity. 
    Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude modeling studio, sexual encounter center, or massage parlor. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or 
(2)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, attached pubic hair, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
    Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses: 
(1)  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution or possession of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of the state or other states or countries; 
(2)  For which: 
a.  Less than seven years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than 15 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
c.  Less than 15 years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. 
    Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or 
(3)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsection (1) or (2) of this definition. 
    Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-2, 2-17-2011) 
Secs. 22-584-22-605. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 22-606. - Required; application. 
(a)  It is unlawful: 
(1)  For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the town pursuant to this section; 
(2)  For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the town pursuant to this section; and 
(3)  For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this article. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the town. 
(c)  All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information, including fingerprints, as to enable the town to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this article. 
(d)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the person must sign the application for a license as the applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has any interest in the business must sign the application for a license as the applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 22-607 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state the individual's legal name and any alias and submit proof that the individual is 18 years of age or older; 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any; 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name and address of the entire registered corporate agent for service of process. 
(2)  If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant must state: 
a.  The sexually oriented businesses' fictitious name; and 
b.  Submit the required registration documents. 
(3)  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been charged with or convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and the jurisdiction of each charge or conviction. 
(4)  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another town, city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended, revoked, or other disposition as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this article whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension, revocation or the disposition. 
(5)  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, holds any other licenses under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another town, city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses. 
(6)  The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing. 
(7)  The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, if any. 
(8)  The applicant's mailing address and residential address. 
(9)  A recent photograph of the applicant. 
(10)  The applicant's driver's license number, social security number and/or state or federally issued tax identification number. 
(11)  A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
(12)  A current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within 1,500 feet of the property to be certified; and the property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted. 
(13)  If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space, films, video cassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth in section 22-607. 
(f)  Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on the form to be provided by the town the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name or any other name (including "stage" names) or alias used by the individual; 
(2)  Age, date and place of birth; 
(3)  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(4)  Present residence address and telephone number; 
(5)  Present business address and telephone number; 
(6)  Date, issuing state and number of driver's permit or other identification card information; 
(7)  Social security number; 
(8)  Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age; 
(9)  A complete background check, to include all addresses where the applicant has resided over the last five years. The applicant is responsible for providing a sealed background history from all residences outside the state; 
(10)  Position to be held; 
(11)  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been charged with or convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and the jurisdiction of each charge or conviction; 
(12)  Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another town, city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended, revoked, or other disposition as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this article whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension, revocation or the disposition; and 
(13)  Where the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, holds any licenses under this article or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another town, city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses. 
(g)  Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee license as provided in subsection (f) of this section, shall be the following: 
(1)  A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the department of public safety. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. 
(2)  A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operated, or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, town, state, or country, a sexually oriented business; has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended; or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application. 
(3)  A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined herein and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and adjudication of each. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-3, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-607. - Issuance. 
(a)  Upon the filing of the application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the town shall issue a temporary license to said applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate town departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained on the application. After the investigation, the town shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under the age of 18 years; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in section 22-583; 
(4)  The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this article; or 
(5)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the town within five years of the date of the current application. If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in section 22-5. 
(b)  A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the town that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in this ordinance or committed any act during the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in section 22-608. Said renewal shall occur prior to March 31 of each calendar year. 
(c)  Within 45 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business application, the town shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant. The approval mechanism shall be upon presentation of findings of the various departments involved and review and subsequent prompt action by the town council. The town shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is determined by the preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true: 
(1)  An applicant is under the age of 18 years; 
(2)  An applicant is overdue in payment to the town of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation to any business; 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form; 
(4)  An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is residing, has been denied a license by the town or another governmental body to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months; 
(5)  An applicant, or a person with whom the applicant is residing, has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in section 22-583; 
(6)  The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not been approved by the health department, fire department, and the building official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances; 
(7)  The license fee required by this article has not been paid; or 
(8)  An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business and the classification for which the license is issued pursuant to section 22-583. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time. 
(e)  A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification as found in section 22-583. 
(f)  The town shall issue identification cards for all employees which shall be continuously and openly displayed while employees are on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-4, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-608. - Fees. 
(a)  Every application for a sexually oriented business license, whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license, shall be accompanied by an administrative fee as provided in the town schedule of fees. 
(b)  In addition to the application and investigation fee required in subsection (a) of this section, every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the town an annual nonrefundable regulatory fee as provided in the town schedule of fees. 
(c)  Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license, whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license, shall be accompanied by an investigative fee as provided in the town schedule of fees. 
(d)  All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the finance manager of the town. 
(e)  In addition to the fees mentioned in this section, a sexually oriented business licensee shall be required to pay an occupation tax pursuant to the requirements of article II, division 4 of this chapter. Any independent contractor working for a licensee shall be deemed a separate business and must pay an occupation tax pursuant to article II, division 4 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-5, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-609. - Inspections. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the department of public safety, the department of planning, building and zoning, the county health department, or other town departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates the sexually oriented business or its agent or employee commits a violation of this article if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-6, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-610. - Transferability. 
    A licensee shall not transfer a license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-10, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-611. - Expiration. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance but no later than December 31 of the year of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 22-606. Application for renewal shall be made prior to January 1 of the subsequent calendar year. 
(b)  When the town denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the town finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-7, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-612. - Suspension. 
    The suspension of a license hereunder shall be pursuant to the procedures set out in section 22-5. The town may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-8, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-613. - Revocation. 
(a)  The revocation of a license shall be pursuant to the procedures set out in section 22-5. The town may revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 22-612 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The town may revoke a license if it determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the materials submitted during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee has knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises; or 
(6)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the town, county, or state for any taxes or fees past due. 
(c)  When the town revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the town finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
(d)  After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-9, 2-17-2011) 
Secs. 22-614-22-635. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 22-636. - Location and placement limitations. 
(a)  A person commits a violation of this section if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)  A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
(2)  A public or private educational facility, including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities. The term "school" includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district as defined in chapter 113, zoning; 
(4)  A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities included but not limited to a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the Town which is under the control, operation, or management of the Town parks and recreation authorities; 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in chapter 113, zoning; 
(6)  An entertainment business which is oriented primarily toward children or family entertainment; or 
(7)  A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage regulations of the state. 
(b)  A person commits a violation of this section if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,500 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits a violation of this section if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from property line where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of a use listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-11, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-637. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been regularly rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits a violation of this section if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment does not have a sexually oriented business license, the person regularly rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term "rent" or "subrent" means the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-12, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-638. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live entertainment and viewing rooms. 
    A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space a film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction, which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The town may waive the foregoing diagram for a renewal application if the applicant adopts the diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager station may be made without the prior approval of the town. 
(4)  It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. 
(7)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
(8)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles as measured at the floor level. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (8) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(10)  No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
(11)  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
(12)  The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
(13)  The licensee shall cause all floor coverings and viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(14)  The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces, ceiling surfaces and viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. 
(15)  A person having a duty under subsections (1) through (14) of this section commits a violation of this section if such person knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-13, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-639. - Regulations related to massage parlors. 
    The specific regulation of such parlors is contained in article VIII of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-14, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-640. - Additional regulations for escort agencies; exemptions. 
(a)  Prohibition of persons under age 18 years. 
(1)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(2)  A person commits a violation of this section if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  Exemptions. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school, licensed by the state, a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, §§ 7-4-15, 7-4-21, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-641. - Additional regulations for nude modeling studios. 
(a)  A nude modeling studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits a violation of this section if the person appears seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude modeling studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years of age was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any other person. 
(c)  A person commits a violation of this section if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude modeling studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude modeling studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises; except that a sofa may be placed in reception rooms open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-16, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-642. - Additional regulations regarding nudity and specified sexual activity within a sexually oriented business. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or depicts specified sexual activities. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person who knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appears in a seminude condition unless the person is an employee who, while seminude, shall be at least ten feet from any patron or customer and on a stage of at least two feet from the floor. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article for an employee, while seminude in a sexually oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee while said employee is seminude in a sexually oriented business. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this article for an employee, while seminude, to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-17, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-643. - Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business. 
    A person commits a violation of this article if the person knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-18, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-644. - Hours of operation. 
    No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-19, 2-17-2011) 
Sec. 22-645. - Alcohol prohibited. 
(a)  No person, association, partnership or corporation licensed under this article shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any liquor, beer, wine, or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. 
(b)  This section shall not apply or prohibit the live performance of legitimate plays, operas, ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums or educational institutions holding a license for alcohol which derives less than 20 percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 7-4-20, 2-17-2011) 
Chapter 24 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a court to be known as the "Municipal Court of the Town of Tyrone," which shall have the powers and duties provided by the Charter and state law. 
(Code 1984, § 2-3-1) 
Sec. 24-2. - Prosecution of non-traffic ordinances by citation. 
    Prosecution of non-traffic ordinance violations in the municipal court may be instituted by citation, without the necessity of a warrant, where the officer issuing the citation deems it unnecessary to make an arrest or require an appearance bond to be made by the defendant against whom the charge is directed in either of the following instances: 
(1)  Where the violation occurs in the presence of a police officer of the town or other official or other person otherwise authorized by ordinance to issue citations; or 
(2)  Upon written complaint of a citizen setting forth the details of the alleged violation. 
(Code 1984, § 2-3-6) 
State Law reference- Trial of ordinance violations upon citation, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10.2. 
Sec. 24-3. - Contents of citation. 
    The citation so issued shall bear teste in the name of the judge of the municipal court, and shall contain the signature of the clerk of the court and the police officer or other official or person issuing the citation. It shall command the presence of the person to whom it is directed to be and appear in the municipal court on a date not less than seven days after the date of issuance and service, and shall specifically allege the violation charged by specifying the offense, the date and time of its commission as near as practicable, the ordinance number alleged to have been violated, and the identity of the person making the complaint if other than the officer, official or person issuing the citation. The citation shall bear a distinctive number corresponding to the docket number of the case. It shall be issued in triplicate with the original or white-colored citation filed with the court clerk, the yellow-colored copy being handed to and served upon the person to whom the citation is directed, and the blue-colored copy being retained by the issuing officer, official or other person authorized by ordinance to issue such citation. The person to whom such citation is directed shall personally acknowledge service thereon. 
(Code 1984, § 2-3-7) 
Sec. 24-4. - Form of citation. 
    The citation shall be in substantially the following form: 
Town of Tyrone, County of Fayette, State of Georgia: 
Number ____________ / ____________ / ____________ To: Defendant. 
You are hereby commanded, laying all other business aside, to be and appear in the Municipal Court of the Town of Tyrone on the ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ at ____________ o'clock ____________ .m. to answer the charge of the violation of Town ordinance number ____________ , alleged to have been committed by you on the ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ at ____________ o'clock ____________ .m. at said offense being more particularly described as follows ____________ / ____________ / ____________ : 
The above violation was committed in the presence of the undersigned officer, official or other person (or) the name of the person making the complaint upon which this citation is issued is ____________ / ____________ / ____________ . 
Herein fail not, under penalty of $200.00 fine and/or ten days in jail. 
Witness the Hon. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ Judge of said Court, this day ____________ of 20 ____________ 
_____
Court Clerk, Police Officer, Official or other authorized Person  
Service of the foregoing citation is hereby acknowledged. 
This ____________ day of ____________ 20 ____________ 
Defendant ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
(Code 1984, § 2-3-8) 
Sec. 24-5. - Interpretation of other authority. 
    Whenever an ordinance of the town directs, authorizes or requires in non-traffic cases the issuance of a summons or citation, it shall be deemed and interpreted to be in compliance therewith to proceed as authorized by sections 24-2, 24-3, 24-4 and 24-6. 
(Code 1984, § 2-3-9) 
Sec. 24-6. - Penalty for failure to appear. 
    The failure of a defendant to appear in court as directed by a citation issued under the provisions of sections 24-2 through 24-5 may be treated by the judge of the municipal court as contempt and punishable as provided by the Charter of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 2-3-10) 
Sec. 24-7. - Cumulative procedure. 
    Sections 24-2 through 24-5 shall in no way be interpreted as prohibiting the application for or the issuance of a town warrant in any instance where the officer deems such course to be appropriate, and should be interpreted as constituting cumulative procedures insofar as the prosecution and disposition of non-traffic ordinance violations are concerned. 
(Code 1984, § 2-3-11) 
Secs. 24-8-24-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICE OF THE PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 

Sec. 24-11. - Intent. 
    In enacting this article, it is the intent of the town to comply with Georgia law, particularly O.C.G.A. tit. 15, ch. 18, art. 5. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08-A, § 2, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 24-12. - Establishment of office. 
    The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the Town of Tyrone in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the town and state offenses enforceable in the municipal courts as allowed by Georgia law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part time position. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08-A, § 2, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 24-13. - Qualifications. 
    Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court of the Town of Tyrone shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this article shall prevent the town from appointing the town attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08-A, § 2, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 24-14. - Oath. 
    The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court of the Town of Tyrone shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the Town of Tyrone." 
(Ord. No. 2012-08-A, § 2, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 24-15. - Term of office. 
    Unless otherwise provided by the Charter for the Town of Tyrone, the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall serve a term of office of one year. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08-A, § 2, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 24-16. - Jurisdiction, duties, and authority. 
    The office of the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court of the Town of Tyrone shall have the duty and authority to represent the town as defined by the Town Charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08-A, § 2, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 24-17. - Assistant prosecuting attorney. 
    The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court may appoint one or more assistant prosecuting attorneys whose appointment shall be ratified by the town council before becoming an assistant prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. Such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia or satisfy the provisions of the Third Year Practice Act, found in the O.C.G.A. § 15-18-22. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08-A, § 2, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 24-18. - Ratification. 
    This article shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the office of the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court to date as authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-08-A, § 2, 7-19-2012) 
Chapter 26 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Abandoned, junked or inoperative items. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or person in possession of any lot or parcel of land in the town, to keep or permit to be kept or stored on said land any abandoned, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative furniture, appliance, machinery or equipment or parts of same, which are not completely enclosed within a building. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "abandoned, junked or inoperative furniture, appliances, machinery or equipment" shall be items incapable of and not being used for the purpose for which they were intended. 
(c)  Any items covered by this section which are in the process of being repaired or restored may be kept on the property provided they are covered or otherwise effectively screened and provided that there are no more than five such items being repaired or restored on the property at any one time. 
(d)  Should any person fail to comply with this section upon five days' written notice from the town clerk, said person shall be charged as for the violation of any other town ordinance. Each day shall be deemed a separate offense, and upon conviction, he shall be punished as provided by section 1-7. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-6; Ord. No. 61, 1-21-1982; Ord. No. 262, 3-16-1994) 
State Law reference- Authority to require removal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 
Sec. 26-2. - Abandoned or junked motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant, lessee, occupant or person in possession of any lot or parcel in the town to keep or permit to be kept or stored on said land any abandoned, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative motor vehicle which is not completely enclosed within a building. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, an "abandoned or junked motor vehicle" is defined as one that is in such a state of disrepair as to be incapable of operating under its own power, or which does not have a current license plate or tag. 
(c)  Any such vehicle covered by this section which is in the process of being repaired and/or restored and is on property zoned as residential (R), may be kept on the property, exterior to a residential garage for a period of 90 days, provided it is covered with an opaque motor vehicle tarpaulin, and/or otherwise effectively screened from view from adjoining, and/or abutting streets and properties; and further provided that there are no more than two such vehicles being repaired and/or restored on the property at any time. 
(d)  Any violation of this section and/or request to investigate possible violations may be reported to the proper authority by the following: 
(1)  Any person having attained the age of majority and residing within the corporate limits of the town; 
(2)  Any police officer employed by the town; or 
(3)  The building inspector for the town. 
(e)  After ten days' legal notice, all violations shall be cited by an officer of the police department. 
(f)  Any notice of violation shall state specifically which type and/or color of motor vehicle, and the general location of such vehicle on the person's property. 
(g)  Any person and/or entity failing to comply with this chapter shall, ten days after receipt of legal notice, be charged as for the violation of any other town ordinance, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided by section 1-7. 
(h)  Ten days after legal notice is given, each day thereafter shall be deemed a separate offense until such situation is rectified by the noticed party. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-7; Ord. No. 90, 6-21-1984; Ord. No. 261, 3-16-1994) 
State Law reference- Abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Secs. 26-3-26-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisance abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-23. - Definition. 
    The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises, which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the town; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the town; 
(4)  The pollution of public water; 
(5)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(6)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(7)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(8)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(9)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like, unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(10)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the town; and 
(11)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Code 1984, § 9-2-1) 
Sec. 26-24. - Complaint of nuisance; hearing. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the town may direct a complaint of nuisance to the town police department, who shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal court, after a ten-day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding that a nuisance does exist shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)  Animal control officers and license and building inspectors shall and may also receive complaints, investigate the same and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
(Code 1984, § 9-2-3) 
Sec. 26-25. - Abatement by town. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the judge that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police in such case shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating the same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for town revenues. 
(b)  Other town departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
(Code 1984, § 9-2-4) 
Sec. 26-26. - Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Code 1984, § 9-2-5) 
Sec. 26-27. - Prohibited. 
    It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1984, § 9-2-6) 
State Law reference- Failure to abate nuisance after order to do so, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6. 
Secs. 26-28-26-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REMOVAL OF UNSAFE OR DANGEROUS STRUCTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Unfit building or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 et seq.; status of prior ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-17. 

Sec. 26-58. - Purpose. 
    It is found that there exists in the town dwellings, buildings, or structures: 
(1)  Which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(3)  Which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or 
(4)  Where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the town, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-1) 
Sec. 26-59. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building official means the building inspector or his authorized representative. 
    Structure means and includes any building, wall, superstructure or other structure which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-2) 
Sec. 26-60. - Scope of article. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts of or of any department of the town to enforce any provisions of its Charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by the constitution, and any other law or ordinance. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise or to exercise those powers granted specifically by the state statutes. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-14) 
Sec. 26-61. - Building official; powers and duties. 
    The building official is hereby authorized to exercise such power as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, including the following: 
(1)  Inspect any structure which appears to be unsafe, dangerous or unfit for human habitation; 
(2)  Have authority to enter upon premises at reasonable hours for the purpose of making such inspections. Entry shall be made so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to any person in possession of the structure. If entry is denied, the building official may seek an order for this purpose from any court of competent jurisdiction; 
(3)  Report all structures which he believes to be dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human habitation to the governing body; and 
(4)  Receive petitions as provided in this article. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-3) 
Sec. 26-62. - Procedures to declare a structure unsafe or dangerous; petition. 
    Whenever a petition is filed with the building official by at least five residents charging that any structure is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the building official on his own motion that any structure is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human habitation, he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, report such findings to the governing body. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-4) 
Sec. 26-63. - Resolution required for hearing. 
    The governing body, upon receiving a report as provided in section 26-62, shall, by resolution, fix a time and place at which the owner, the owner's agent, any lienholders of record and any occupant of the structure may appear and show cause why the structure should not be condemned and ordered repaired or demolished. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-5) 
Sec. 26-64. - Publication and mailing of resolution. 
(a)  The resolution shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks on the same day of each week. At least 30 days shall elapse between the last publication and the date set for the hearing. 
(b)  A copy of the resolution shall be mailed by certified mail within three days after its first publication to each owner, agent, lienholder and occupant at the last known place of residence and shall be marked "Deliver to addressee only." 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-6) 
Sec. 26-65. - Hearing on repair or demolition; action required for compliance. 
(a)  If, after notice and hearing, the governing body determines that the structure under consideration is dangerous, unsafe or unfit for human use or habitation, it shall state in a resolution its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall cause the resolution to be published once in an official county newspaper and a copy mailed to the owners, agents, lienholders of record and occupants in the same manner provided for the notice of hearing. The resolution shall fix a reasonable time to be determined at the hearing, within which the repair or removal of such structure shall be commenced and a statement that if the owner of such structure fails to commence the repair or removal of such structure within the time stated or fails to diligently prosecute the same until the work is completed, the governing body will cause the structure to be razed and removed. 
(b)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure can be made at a cost which shall not exceed 50 percent of the fair market value of the structure, as determined by an independent appraisal when contested, the owner of the property shall, within the time specified in the order, repair, alter or improve the structure to render it safe and fit for human use or habitation, or shall vacate and close the structure until such time as he has complied with the order. 
(c)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure cannot be made at a cost of 50 percent or less of its fair market value, the owner shall, within the time specified in the order, remove or demolish the structure. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-7) 
Sec. 26-66. - Appeals from order to demolish. 
    Any person affected by an order issued by the governing body under this article may, within 30 days following service of the order, petition the district court of the county in which the structure is located for an injunction restraining the building official from carrying out the provisions of the order pending final disposition of the case. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-8) 
Sec. 26-67. - Duty of owner. 
    Whenever any structure within the town shall be found to be dangerous unsafe or unfit for human use or habitation, it shall be the duty and obligation of the owner of the property to render the same secure and safe or to remove same. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-9) 
Sec. 26-68. - Failure to comply; work performed by town. 
(a)  If, within the time specified in the order, the owners fail to comply with the order to repair, alter or improve or vacate the structure, the building official may cause the structure to be repaired, altered, improved or to be vacated and closed. 
(b)  If, within the time specified in the order, the owner fails to comply with the order to remove or demolish the structure, the building official may cause the structure to be removed and demolished. All rubble must be removed from the site. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-10) 
Sec. 26-69. - After removal or demolition; premises to be left in safe condition. 
    Upon removal of any structure, the owner shall fill any basement, well and/or septic tank, if appropriate or other excavation located upon the premises and take any other action necessary to leave the premises in a safe condition. If the owner fails to take such action, the town's building authority may proceed to make the site safe. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-11) 
Sec. 26-70. - Assessment of costs. 
(a)  The cost to the town of any repairs, alterations, improvements, vacating, removal or demolition by the building official, including making the site safe, shall be documented and reported to the town. 
(b)  The town shall give notice to the owner of the structure by registered mail of the cost of removing the structure and making the premises safe and secure. The notice shall also state that payment of the cost is due and payable within 30 days following receipt of the notice to include cost for any advertising legal and/or appraisal expenses incurred by the town. 
(c)  If the costs remain unpaid after 30 days following receipt of notice, the town may sell any salvage from the structure and apply the proceeds or any necessary portion thereof to pay the cost of removing the structure and making the site safe. Any proceeds in excess of that required to recover the costs shall be paid to the owner of the premises upon which the structure was located. 
(d)  If the proceeds of the sale of salvage are insufficient to recover the cost, or there is no salvage, the town shall certify the unpaid portion of the costs to the county clerk who shall extend the same on the tax roll of the county. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-12) 
Sec. 26-71. - Immediate hazard; actions may be taken without prior notice. 
    When, in the opinion of the governing body, any structure is in such condition as to constitute an immediate hazard requiring immediate action to protect the public, the governing body may direct the building official to erect barricades or cause the property to be vacated, taken down, repaired, shored or otherwise made safe without delay. Such action may be taken without prior notice to or hearing of the owners, agents, lienholders and occupants. The cost of any action under this section shall be assessed against the property as provided in section 26-70. 
(Code 1984, § 3-4-13) 
Chapter 28 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 28-1. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstance make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-10; Ord. No. 100, 6-27-1985) 
Secs. 28-2-28-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses involving damage to and intrusion upon property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-1 et seq.; offenses involving theft, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 28-21. - Damaging property. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to alter, damage, deface or destroy any public property. The term "public property" means any property belonging to the town, regardless of its nature. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-5) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq. 
Sec. 28-22. - Posting signs on poles without consent. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post or display in or upon any bridge any sign or advertisement, or to post or display upon any telegraph, telephone or electric company's pole, or upon any public property or the private property of any person any bills, signs or advertisements without the consent in writing of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-8) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58. 
Sec. 28-23. - Shoplifting. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted in O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-9 and 16-8-14, such sections are referred to and incorporated herein by reference. Any person convicted of violation thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-12; Ord. No. 180, 11-2-1990) 
Secs. 28-24-28-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses involving dangerous instrumentalities and practices, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-100 et seq. 

Sec. 28-50. - Weapons; discharge in town. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm, including pistol, rifle and shotgun, or to shoot an air gun, including BB gun and pellet gun, within the town, except by law enforcement officers in the line of duty, and the military when on drill or parade, or at a funeral in honor of the dead; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful for any person to shoot a BB gun upon private property if that person shall have first obtained the express permission of the owner of that property to do so. 
(b)  An exception to this section shall be the allowing of turkey shoots, shooting galleries, and other similar shooting events; provided that the chief of police approves and authorizes such ranges and inspects or causes to be inspected every such range at all such times as may be necessary to insure proper supervision, orderliness, use of only authorized weapons, and freedom from loud and unnecessary noises. 
(c)  Nothing in this section abridges the right of self-defense or defense of others. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-9; Ord. No. 123, 8-27-1986) 
State Law reference- Local regulation of firearms, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-173; firearms generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-125.1 et seq. 
Secs. 28-51-28-73. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, adopted June 18, 2015, deleted § 28-51, which pertained to fireworks and derived from Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, adopted Feb. 17, 2011. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses involving public order, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 28-74. - Disorderly conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the corporate limits of the town to engage in any conduct described in the following subsections; provided, however, that no person shall be convicted of any of the following subsections upon a showing that the predominant intent of said conduct was to exercise a constitutional right: 
(1)  To act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of the safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  To act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  To cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  To assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of, or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(5)  To be in or about any place, alone or with another or others with the purpose of or intent to engage in any fraudulent scheme, trick or device to obtain any money or valuable things; or to aid or abet any person or persons in doing so; 
(6)  To be in or about any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or products or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated, for the purposes of or intent to engage in gaming or the purchase, use, possession or consumption of said illegal drugs, narcotics or alcoholic beverages; 
(7)  To direct fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their very nature tend to incite a breach of the peace; 
(8)  To interfere, by acts of physical obstruction, with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(9)  To congregate with another or others in or on a public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and to fail to clear the public way after being ordered to do so by a police officer or other lawful authority; 
(10)  To disrupt by actions which tend to incite a breach of the peace the undisturbed activities of any house of worship, hospital or home for the elderly; or 
(11)  To throw bottles, paper, cans, glass, sticks, stones, missiles or any other debris on public property. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-1; Ord. No. 48, 7-17-1980; Ord. No. 75, 8-18-1983) 
Sec. 28-75. - Public drunkenness. 
    It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in section 1-7 for any person to appear on the streets of the town, or in an automobile, or in any public place or place of business patronized by the public in an intoxicated condition. The term "intoxicated condition" as used in this section shall be interpreted to mean that said person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, beer, wine or drugs to such a degree as to cause him to act in an unruly, boisterous, indecent or profane manner, or which renders him in a condition which is hazardous to himself or to others. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-2; Ord. No. 80, 10-20-1983; Ord. No. 99, 6-27-1985) 
Sec. 28-76. - Noise. 
(a)  Noises enumerated. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, excessive, unnecessary or unusual noise. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, excessive, unnecessary or unusual noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely the following: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle on any street or public place of the town, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, televisions, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Animals, birds, etc. The noise of any animal or bird which causes, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., frequent or long continued noise which is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building or structure in which the animal or bird is located. 
(4)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(b)  Exception. Requirements of this section are not applicable to noises emanating from town property or town sanctioned functions. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-4; Ord. No. 73, 7-21-1983) 
Secs. 28-77-28-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Offenses involving public morals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-1 et seq. 

Sec. 28-96. - Possession of marijuana in quantity less than one ounce. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted in O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-6 and 16-13-2, such sections are referred to and incorporated herein by reference. Any person convicted of violation thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-11; Ord. No. 180, 11-2-1990) 
Sec. 28-97. - Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession of alcoholic beverages by persons less than 19 years of age. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted in O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-10 and 3-3-23, such sections are referred to and incorporated herein by reference. Any person convicted of violation thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-13; Ord. No. 180, 11-2-1990) 
Secs. 28-98-28-122. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRAINS 

Sec. 28-123. - Jumping off trains prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to jump off or on a moving train within the town; provided, this section shall not apply to railway employees working on or with such train. 
(Code 1984, § 8-4-3; Ord. No. 70, 3-17-1983) 
Chapter 30 - PARKS AND RECREATION 

Sec. 30-1. - Establishment; purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish a formal ordinance concerning the use of the parks, recreational areas, recreational facilities, and other town facilities in the town. Facilities owned by or under the control of the town shall be made available to the citizens of the county for their use. 
(Code 1984, § 2-6-1) 
Sec. 30-2. - Control of parks. 
    Those facilities located at recreation areas shall be under the control of the town manager or his designee. 
(Code 1984, § 2-6-2) 
Sec. 30-3. - General powers and duties. 
    The town manager or his designee shall establish a calendar for facility reservations. Town-sponsored events shall have priority for the use of these facilities. The town manager or his designee shall also enforce the rules and regulation governing the use of the parks, recreational areas and recreational facilities. 
(Code 1984, § 2-6-3) 
Sec. 30-4. - Fee schedules; facility use agreements. 
(a)  The town manager or his designee with the concurrence of the town council may establish fee schedules and/or facility use agreements for parks, recreational areas, recreational facilities and other town facilities as deemed necessary. Applications for facility use agreements shall be made at the Tyrone Recreation Center. 
(b)  The facility use agreement shall provide for the rental/lease of certain facilities and include, but not necessarily be limited to: 
(1)  The rules, regulations and operating procedures for the facility to be used; 
(2)  The fees and deposits for rental/lease, security and cleanup; 
(3)  The name, address and phone number of the person responsible for the lease; 
(4)  The dates, times, and purpose for the rental/lease including the name of any group using the facility; and 
(5)  A statement by the person responsible for the rental/lease that no activity shall be permitted which can be deemed illegal, immoral or otherwise contrary to the public good. 
(Code 1984, § 2-6-4) 
Sec. 30-5. - Hours of operation. 
    No town facility shall be open for use before 7:00 a.m. or remain open after 11:00 p.m. without prior approval of the town council. The hours of operation for each facility shall be posted in a conspicuous location. The town manager or his designee may close town facilities when in his opinion the use of these facilities would be unsafe, would result in extraordinary damage to the facilities, or during inclement weather. 
(Code 1984, § 2-6-5) 
Sec. 30-6. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Permits are issued to organizations or individuals to reserve facilities for stipulated times. When the permit is not in effect the facility will be open for public use. 
(b)  Town programs and activities will have first priority at all facilities. 
(c)  Facilities may be reserved for town-sponsored clinics and classes, tournaments, leagues, private activities or parties where there is no charge for admission; and school sponsored classes and teams. 
(d)  Any sponsoring team must be predominately (50 percent or more) made up of county residents, unless approved by the town council. 
(e)  The using organization shall be responsible for field preparations such as lining the field, dragging the field, and other related activities. The town may provide other major maintenance to facilities on request by contacting the town manager or his designee. Special maintenance requests shall be submitted in written form to the town manager or his designee at least three working days prior to date needed. 
(f)  No one will be allowed to construct any new facility, paint any facility or make changes in present facilities without written approval of the town. To obtain approval, a written request should be submitted to the town manager or his designee. 
(g)  All damages to any facility should be reported to the town manager or his designee, such as light failure, bleacher damage, facility damage, field damage, etc. Also, any injuries to players, coaches, or spectators must be reported within three working days from date of the injury. 
(h)  The organization using the park shall be responsible for the conduct of its program participants including coaches, players, and spectators. 
(i)  Burning of trash is prohibited in town parks. 
(j)  Alcoholic beverages are prohibited at all town facilities. 
(k)  The use of tobacco products is prohibited, except in designated areas, at all town facilities. 
(l)  Fireworks are strictly prohibited. 
(m)  Organizations are responsible for policing litter before, during, and after each event and is responsible for disposing of it properly. 
(n)  With the exception of designated parking areas, only official vehicles are authorized unless specifically authorized by the town manager or his designee. Violations may result in impounding of vehicles. 
(o)  Only vehicles with visible handicap stickers are permitted to park in designated handicap areas. Violations may result in the impounding of vehicle. 
(p)  No parking on the side of the road. Violations may result in a parking ticket or cars may be towed. 
(q)  Utility fees may be charged for use of lights or water. 
(r)  All lights will be turned off by 11:00 p.m. 
(s)  Any town employee, elected official or authorized agent has the authority to require individuals or groups to leave for violations of expressed or implied rules. 
(t)  The town has the right to revoke the permit of any organization violating these policies if the organizations or individuals fail to provide and conduct a program beneficial to the town or if in violation of these rules. 
(u)  No facility may be reserved more than six months in advance. 
(v)  Reservations will be on a first paid basis and the town cannot hold an unpaid reservation. 
(w)  Organizations or individuals can call the Tyrone Recreation Center and check for availability before physically appearing to reserve the facility. 
(x)  Any requests to waive the fees must be approved by the mayor and council. Requests to waive the fees must be submitted in written form at least three weeks before reservation. 
(y)  A deposit will be required for all facilities for which fees are charged. 
(z)  Organizations or individuals will have five working days after the event in which to retrieve any required deposit or it may be forfeited. 
(aa)  Organizations or individuals are required to pay the fees that apply for each facility before use. 
(bb)  Pavilion rental is limited to the number of people that it can safely hold according to the number of parking spaces provided. 
(cc)  The amplification of music is prohibited unless prior approval by the town manager or his designee is obtained. 
(dd)  Picnic pavilions at town parks are available for public use. This shall include use by groups such as scouts, athletic associations, church groups, school groups, and political parties, as well as use for birthday parties and family reunions. 
(ee)  The facility must be left in a clean and orderly condition. The area must be policed for any trash and disposed of properly in order to have the deposit returned. 
(ff)  Any governmental organization, including public schools, are allowed to reserve the town's parks at no charge; however the town requires these entities to call in advance to reserve these facilities. 
(gg)  The town sports fields may be reserved when not in use by the youth associations holding current facility use agreements with the town. 
(hh)  Organizations or individuals must have a permit displayed that has been issued by the town. 
(Code 1984, § 2-6-6; Ord. No. 473, § 1, 7-21-2005; Ord. No. 2010-01, §§ 2-5, 1-21-2010) 
Chapter 32 - SOLID WASTE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush means other vegetation detached from the land resulting from land clearing operations, routine maintenance or other causes that is not included in the definition of garden trash. 
    Construction site means any residential, commercial, industrial, or other area, lot, or site which construction or demolition of any type is conducted including roads at buildings, and at all other places actively being constructed, demolished, renovated, or repaired. 
    Construction waste means solid waste that is produced or generated during construction, demolition, remodeling, or repair or pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. 
    Discard means to abandon, dispose of, burn, incinerate, accumulate, store or treat before or instead of being abandoned, disposed of, burned or incinerated. 
    Discard material means a material that is abandoned, disposed of, burned, incinerated, accumulated, stored or treated before or instead of being abandoned, disposed of, burned or incinerated. 
    Dispose means to discharge, deposit, inject, dump, spill, leak or placement of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that such solid waste or any constituent of it may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters. 
    Garbage means refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables and any other matter of any nature whatsoever that is subject to decay, putrefaction and the generating of noxious gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding or feeding materials for flies or other germ carrying insects; and any bottles, cans, boxes, cartons or other containers. 
    Garden trash means accumulations of grass, leaves, needles or shrubbery cuttings, tree cuttings and tree limbs or other rubbish attending the care of land. 
    Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description that are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
    Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body or water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
    Receptacle means a container that is specifically designed, constructed, and placed for use as a depository for litter or solid waste. 
    Refuse means all solid waste products having the character of solids rather than liquids and that are composed wholly or partially of materials such as garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, residues from clean up of spills or contamination, or other discarded materials. 
    Rubbish means accumulations of paper, packing materials, rags, wooden or paper boxes or containers, sweepings and all other accumulations of a nature other than garbage as herein defined which are usual to housekeeping and to the operations of stores, offices, commercial or industrial enterprises or other business places, and materials such as metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, auto bodies or parts, including automobile tires or tubes and wrecked or abandoned automobiles, and building material and rubble resulting from the construction or alteration of structures or parts of structures, including but not limited to cement blocks, lumber, drywall or sheet rock, stumps and any abandoned appliances, including but not limited to washers, dryers, refrigerators and stoves and other such materials or refuse. 
    Sanitary waste or domestic waste means water borne, human or animal excreta or body wastes and normal culinary, laundry, and washing wastes. 
    Solid waste means any garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash or other discarded material, but does not include solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage, solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows, industrial discharges, or special nuclear or by-product materials. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-2) 
Sec. 32-2. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as follows: 
(1)  Penalties for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be imposed at the discretion of the judge of the municipal court, up to the maximum penalties in section 1-7, provided, however, that no fine shall be less than $25.00 for a first offense, less than $50.00 for a second offense within a 12-month period, and less than $100.00 for a third offense within a 12-month period; 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) of this section, the violator shall reimburse the town for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the town; and 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
(4)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
(5)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-21; Ord. No. 2014-11, § 1, 11-6-2014) 
Sec. 32-3. - Evidence. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter is discovered to contain any article, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-20) 
Sec. 32-4. - Violations. 
(a)  Notification of owner and/or tenant. Whenever it appears that any provision of this chapter is being violated, the town manager or his designee shall notify, in writing, the owner or occupant if different from the owner, or both, of the alleged violation. Such notice shall specify the violation involved, the corrective action needed, and shall state that if such corrective action is not completed within ten days, or such other time as the town may establish, a citation will be issued for violation of the chapter. Notice shall be by personal service or by certified mail. Any time periods provided in this chapter shall be deemed to commence on the date of the receipt of the certified mail or on the date of personal service. If the current whereabouts of the owner or occupant are unknown, or if service by certified mail cannot be effected, notice shall be mailed by first class mail to such person's last known address, if any, and a copy of the notice shall be posted on the premises. 
(b)  Recovery of town expenses. 
(1)  Upon conviction for a violation of this chapter, or upon the entering of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, the town manager or his designee may, in addition to any other remedies that may be available, cause the violation to be corrected by use of town equipment and employees. In the event the town does not have sufficient equipment and/or employees to perform the removal, the town manager, with approval of the mayor, may contract with outside forces for the removal of said violation. The cost to the town of removing any such violation shall be a lien against the property, and shall be placed on the tax records of the town and county, as provided herein. 
(2)  If any of the conditions specified in this chapter are abated at town expense, the town shall assess a lien against the property for the cost hereinafter described. 
(3)  A letter shall be mailed by the town to the owner of record by certified mail, return receipt requested, that states the town's intention to file a lien and states that the owner has 20 days from receipt of the letter to either reimburse the town the expense of abatement or file written objections to the reasonableness of the assessed cost. Should there be any objections to the reasonableness of the cost, the mayor shall hear and determine the validity of such objections. The decision of the mayor shall be final. 
(4)  Upon final determination of the validity of the costs or on failure to file objections within 20 days, a lien shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court and recorded as other liens are recorded. A copy of the lien shall be kept in the office of the town clerk, and a copy shall also be filed with the tax commissioner of the county. 
(5)  The actual direct cost of abating the conditions, together with the necessary expenses for preparing, filing, and recording the lien, including any legal expenses, shall be assessed against the property and shall be collected by the town clerk, and, if not collected, shall thereafter be subject to the penalties and interest to which ad valorem taxes would be subject, and collection thereof may be enforced as allowed by law. 
(c)  Owner and occupant liable. Both the occupant and the owner of the premises shall be independently liable for compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and shall be independently responsible for violations thereof. Lease of the property of an owner which purports to transfer responsibility for this provision shall be ineffective in shielding the owner from responsibility under this provision, and such owner shall remain independently liable along with the occupant of the leased premises. 
(d)  Failure to abate violation. The failure to abate the alleged violation as set forth in the written notice within the ten-day period or such other time as provided by the town manager or his designee, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The town shall issue a citation for such violation commanding the person to appear before the municipal court to answer said charge. 
(Code 1984, §§ 4-2-16-4-2-19; Ord. No. 2014-011, § 2, 11-6-2014) 
Sec. 32-5. - Policy. 
    It is the declared policy of the town that the discarding of garden trash, garbage, rubbish or brush on the lands or waters within the town or the failure to maintain a neat orderly appearance of lawns, yards or other landscaping is a menace to the welfare and comfort of the people of the town and a cause of extensive damage to health and property, and requires legislative intervention by the enactment of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-1) 
Sec. 32-6. - Enforcement. 
    All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-22) 
Sec. 32-7. - Violations deemed public nuisances and prohibited. 
    The following conditions are hereby determined to be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town and are therefore determined to be a public nuisance and are prohibited: 
(1)  Any portion of a lot or parcel of land on which the grass is in excess of 12 inches in height, except those portions that are set aside for landscape buffers or screening as required by the town's land development ordinance or any other ordinance of the town; or 
(2)  Except as legally permitted in an industrial zoning district, or except as temporarily located for regular removal by a garbage removal company, any portion of a lot or parcel of land upon which is located an accumulation of garbage, garden trash or rubbish. 
(Code 1984, §§ 4-2-12, 4-2-13; Ord. No. 2011-07, § 1, 4-7-2011) 
Sec. 32-8. - Duty of owners and occupants. 
(a)  General requirement. It shall be the responsibility of each owner, agent, occupant, or lessee to keep his property free of litter. 
(b)  Litter prohibited. No owner, agent, occupant, or lessee of any property shall allow the storage or accumulation of litter on the exterior of said property outside of a receptacle that is covered, secured, and maintained so as to prevent blowing, spilling, scattering, or leaking of the litter and waste contained therein, except that this requirement shall not apply to an area designated and approved by the county as a permitted disposal site. 
(c)  Adjacent and surrounding areas. It shall be the responsibility of each proprietor and each operator of any business, industry, or institution to keep the adjacent and surrounding areas free of litter. These areas include, but are not limited to public and private sidewalks, roads, and alleys; grounds; parking lots; loading and unloading areas; and all vacant lots that are owned or leased by such establishment or institution. Removal of any litter shall be performed in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-3) 
Sec. 32-9. - Dumping and littering prohibited. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the town of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the town and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  This section shall apply at all public and private property within the town. This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, and/or annual any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this section should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-4) 
Sec. 32-10. - Littering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the town or any waters in this town unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Code 1984, §§ 4-2-5, 4-2-6) 
State Law reference- Littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; waste control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-50 et seq. 
Sec. 32-11. - Unauthorized accumulation of solid waste. 
(a)  Methods of disposal. 
(1)  All waste and related materials described in section 32-1 shall be discarded in containers, landfills and/or sanitary dumps. 
(2)  Residential garbage and trash accumulated in the town shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of in manners described in this chapter. 
(3)  All such persons shall conduct their activities in full compliance with state laws and regulations and the town ordinances detailing the solid waste management plan regulating the collection, transportation and/or disposal of such waste. 
(b)  Cleanliness of premises; generally. For the purpose of promoting the health, safety and welfare of the people of the town, every owner or occupant of a lot or parcel of land, any portion of which lies within 40 feet of any dwelling, house or place of business, is required to keep such portion of such land within 40 feet of any such dwelling, house or place of business cleared of all brush, garbage, garden trash, rubbish or noxious material of any kind which tends to be a breeding place for mosquitoes, or tends to be a breeding place or haven for snakes or vermin of any kind or character, or which tends to create a fire hazard or which endangers the lives and property of the citizens of the town, or which tends to create a nuisance or other unsightly or unsanitary condition. The owner or occupant shall be required to keep such land cleared whether or not such land lies within a public right-of-way. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-7) 
Sec. 32-12. - Bulk containers. 
(a)  Owners and occupants of commercial, industrial and multifamily property serviced by bulk containers or dumpsters shall maintain the area immediately surrounding the container free of unsightly refuse at all times. Such owner or manager shall be responsible for instructing all employees in the proper method for use of the container and shall ensure that all refuse is placed completely within the container, with all doors and lids to be closed at all times the container is not being loaded or emptied. 
(b)  All commercial, industrial and multifamily properties utilizing bulk containers or dumpsters shall provide upon the premises an accessible hard-surfaced space of sufficient size to accommodate the container. There shall be sufficient driving area to permit reasonable ingress and egress by collection vehicle. No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector for new construction unless appropriate plans and specifications are submitted setting forth and meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-8) 
Sec. 32-13. - Use of town compactors/dumpsters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person residing outside of the corporate limits of the town (nonresident) to utilize the public garbage compactors and/or dumpsters of the town. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any waste or materials, other than household garbage properly sealed and bagged (plastic garbage bags), in the public garbage compactors and/or dumpsters of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-9) 
Sec. 32-14. - Dumping in refuse containers regulated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than a resident of the town or a representative of a business located within the town to dump garbage, trash, refuse or waste matter in containers placed about the town for the collection of garbage, trash, refuse or other waste matter of those residences and businesses. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump refuse, garbage, trash or any type of waste material in a container placed or located for the collection of refuse, garbage, trash or any other waste material when the container belongs to another person, unless the person dumping such refuse, garbage or waste shall have the written permission of the person or authorized representative of the person owning the container or paying for it or on whose property it is located. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-10) 
Sec. 32-15. - Scavenging. 
    No person other than the owner thereof shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any container from the location where the container has been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-11) 
Sec. 32-16. - Construction sites. 
(a)  Litter prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of a construction site, or any contractor on a construction site, to cause, permit, or allow the presence of litter on such site outside of a proper receptacle or to cause, permit, or allow litter or waste to be spilled, discharged, or blown by wind or water. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or agent of the property and each contractor performing work on the site to keep the property free of litter. 
(b)  Receptacles required. The owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a construction site shall furnish on such site receptacles sufficient to contain worker's litter and receptacles sufficient to contain all construction waste. All receptacles shall be conveniently available and maintained and secured or covered so as to prevent litter and waste from being spilled, discharged, or blown by wind or water. The primary contractor should determine the number and capacity of receptacles, but no less than one receptacle for worker's litter and no less than one receptacle for construction waste shall be placed at each construction site. Receptacles required under this subsection shall be not less than ten gallons capacity. All receptacles shall be emptied as necessary, but not less frequently than weekly, except that receptacles used exclusively to contain construction waste shall be serviced with sufficient frequency to prevent spillage from overflow and to prevent offensive odors. All receptacles required under this subsection shall remain conveniently available on the site from the time construction activity commences until the construction activity ceases. 
(c)  Exclusion. The requirement for receptacles in this section shall not apply to any construction site on which only repair or renovation of a building is taking place, provided that no litter or construction waste is placed, stored, or otherwise accumulated on the exterior of the property outside of a proper receptacle and any such receptacle is maintained in accordance with this chapter. 
(d)  Portable toilets required. The owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction site shall furnish no less than one portable toilet facility on such site but in any event such number sufficient to service the sanitary waste needs for the site. It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction site to cause, permit or allow such facility to spill or discharge on the site or into waters located on the site. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction site to have such facility emptied, serviced and maintained on an "as needed" basis. 
(e)  Concrete truck washout. It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction site to permit the driver, operator or other employee on a concrete truck to wash or discharge excess concrete from the chute, pump, drum or barrel of a concrete truck onto a construction site, upon the town right-of-way or town streets. 
(f)  Chemical storage. Any chemicals stored on a construction site shall be stored in approved containers, property secured, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction site to permit the improper storage of chemicals on a construction site. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-14) 
Sec. 32-17. - Litter receptacles at places frequented by the public. 
(a)  Receptacles required. Every owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee in control of any property that is held out to the public as a place for assemblage, for the transaction of business or recreation, or as a public way shall provide adequate receptacles of sufficient number and size to contain all litter generated by those persons frequenting that public place. The owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee in control of any property shall determine the number and size of the receptacles, except that no less than one receptacle shall be placed at each site. Receptacles shall be no less than ten gallons in capacity and clearly marked and designed to prevent the escape of litter and waste. Any person owning or in control of any property at which receptacles are required by this chapter shall at his own expense be responsible for the placement, and maintenance of such receptacles as required by this chapter. 
(b)  Periodic emptying of receptacles. All litter and solid waste shall be removed from receptacles as necessary, but not less frequently than weekly, and all receptacles shall be maintained in a sanitary and serviceable condition. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-15) 
Chapter 34 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal street systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Streets and sidewalks not to be damaged. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drag or run, or cause to be dragged or run, any implement, engine, machine or tool upon any asphalt, or other type of permanently paved street or sidewalk of the town that would in any way injure or cut the surface thereof. It shall also be unlawful to damage any dirt street in the same manner. 
(Code 1984, § 4-1-7) 
Secs. 34-2-34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 34-21. - Permit to dig in streets. 
    No person shall make any excavations or openings or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the town manager or his designee. A permit shall not be required where the work is performed under a contract with the town but in the event that work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the town manager or his designee and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Code 1984, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 34-22. - Application for permit. 
    All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in section 34-21, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor, the approximate date and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
(Code 1984, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 34-23. - Town indemnified. 
    Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in sections 34-21 and 34-22 agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the town against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
(Code 1984, § 4-1-3) 
Sec. 34-24. - Street repair. 
    When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the town shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. Any person neglecting, refusing or failing to comply with any provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof; and where any neglect, refusal or failure is continued, after notice from the town, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1984, § 4-1-4) 
Sec. 34-25. - Excavations; leaving unprotected. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit under this article to commence work without proper protection surrounding the work site. Warnings sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work are required to be placed and/or posted to alert all persons, using reasonable care, from injuries due to the work. Excavations of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the town will require the placing and maintaining proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in, or around the work. 
(Code 1984, § 4-1-5) 
Secs. 34-26-34-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY USE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-54. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. The term "construct" also includes the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the rights-of-way. 
    Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. The term "construction" also includes the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the rights-of-way. 
    Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
    Facilities representative means the specifically identified agent/employee of a utility who is authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent for facilities-related information. A utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives will be available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities-related emergencies or situations. 
    Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the town. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
    Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public rights-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the town or in a related provision of this Code. 
    Right-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the town has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the town, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
    Service means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
    Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the town or the state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the town and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the town. 
    Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the town within the corporate limits of the town, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
    Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
    Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the town with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
    Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-3), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-55. - Fine for violation. 
    Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-28), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-56. - Intent and purpose. 
    The town is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the town as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, and economic development of the town and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the town, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the state, including, but not limited to, article 9, section 1, paragraphs 2 and 3 of the state Constitution and O.C.G.A. §§ 36-35-3 and 32-4-92(10), has adopted the ordinance from which this article is derived for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the town rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-1), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-57. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-2), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-58. - Appeal of administrative decisions; notices. 
    All appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the town required by this article shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the town manager as specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-32), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-59. - Failure to enforce compliance. 
    No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this article by reason of any failure of the town to enforce compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-31), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-60. - Additional permits required. 
    The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to town ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in section 34-114. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-27), 6-18-2009) 
Secs. 34-61-34-78. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 34-79. - Registration required. 
    Each utility which occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-4), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-80. - Registration procedure. 
    The registration information provided to the town shall be on a form approved by the town and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is now the owner of the facility in the rights-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone number and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representatives. Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representatives in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the town at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable, or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-5), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-81. - Incomplete registration. 
    If a registration is incomplete, the town manager shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the town manager shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-6), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-82. - Registration acceptance. 
    Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy the rights-of-way in the town for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by town ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the town. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the town of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-7), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-83. - Facilities in place without registration. 
    Beginning one year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained, unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the town, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The town may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Abating the nuisance; 
(2)  Taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the rights-of-way; 
(3)  Prosecuting the violator; and/or 
(4)  Any other remedy provided by town ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-8), 6-18-2009) 
Secs. 34-84-34-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 

Sec. 34-110. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the town without a utility permit from the public works department in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-9), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-111. - Permit procedure. 
    Utility permits shall be obtained from the town manager upon application made on forms prescribed by the public works department. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representatives; 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the town to pay any damages to any part of the town road system or other town property or to any town employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the rights-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-10), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-112. - Permit fees. 
    Fees shall be determined by the town manager, subject to the approval by resolution of the town council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the town clerk and open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-11), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-113. - Issuance of permit. 
    If the town manager determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the town manager may issue a permit: 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this chapter; 
(2)  Whether the applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the rights-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-12), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-114. - Emergency situations. 
(a)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the town manager of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility which engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(b)  In the event that the town becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the town may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The town may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cutting or moving any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The town shall not incur any liability to the utility for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-13), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-115. - Effective period of permit. 
(a)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based upon information provided in the permit application. 
(b)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The town manager may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)  Violated a provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the town, state or federal government; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this article; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the town; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-14), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-116. - Cancellation for cause. 
    If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the town, then such default shall be a material breach and the town may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the town manager decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  The town shall serve the utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow the utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure the breach within 15 calendar days, the town may declare the permit terminated. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-15), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-117. - Expiration of permit. 
    If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-16), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-118. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
    The town, by issuing a written approval of registration under this article, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has not or may be hereafter vested in the town under the Constitution and laws of the United States, the state and the town Charter, and under the provisions of this Code to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the town, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the town at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the town to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the town pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with the town's zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-30), 6-18-2009) 
Secs. 34-119-34-149. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MINIMUM REQUIRED STANDARDS 

Sec. 34-150. - Utility accommodation manual adopted. 
    The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this division as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modifications contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the town clerk and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the town municipal equivalents. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-17), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-151. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
    Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the town rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the town from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the rights-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-18), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-152. - Grading. 
    If the grades or lines of any street within the town rights-of-way are changed at any time by the town during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the town upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the town shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the town the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-19), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-153. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
    Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the town determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-20), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-154. - Blasting and excavating. 
    As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the Utilities Protection Center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-21), 6-18-2009) 
Secs. 34-155-34-176. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 34-177. - Repair of facilities. 
    Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-22), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-178. - Responsibility for damages. 
    A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities, to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the town, the town or the owner of the affected structure may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-23), 6-18-2009) 
Secs. 34-179-34-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTIONS, STOP WORK ORDERS AND NOTICE OF CONSTRUCTION COMPLETION 

Sec. 34-210. - Reasonable access. 
    The utility shall make the construction site available to the town manager and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-24), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-211. - Stop work order. 
    At any time, including the time of inspection, the town manager may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this chapter, or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-25), 6-18-2009) 
Sec. 34-212. - Notification of completion of construction. 
    When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008, § 1(8-2-26), 6-18-2009) 
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-370, 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Adopted by reference. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372-40-6-376, O.C.G.A. title 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.) known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this town with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-1; Ord. No. 207, 1-17-1991; Ord. No. 324, 9-18-1996) 
Sec. 36-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
    In cases where traffic upon the streets of the town may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, who shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-2) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parades or public assemblages, O.C.G.A. § 4-6-71(a)(3). 
Sec. 36-3. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones, signs and traffic control devices; schedule. 
(a)  The police chief or a designee thereof is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Pedestrian crosswalks; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; and 
(4)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the town. 
(b)  The police chief shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. 
(c)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall be, so far as practicable, uniform as to type and location throughout the town. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the town. 
(d)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-4) 
Sec. 36-4. - Obstruction of view and use by trees and shrubs; notice. 
(a)  No person owning, occupying or in anywise controlling property in this town shall permit any tree, bush or shrub on the property to project over any street or sidewalk of this town so as to obstruct or interfere with the view and use of persons walking or riding in a vehicle on the street or sidewalk or of other persons or vehicles approaching from cross or intersecting streets. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether the owner, tenant, agent or person controlling property in the town to fail to remove any tree, bush or other obstruction from the streets or sidewalks of this town after ten days' notice by certified mail from the town to do so. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-5) 
Sec. 36-5. - Truck traffic restrictions. 
(a)  The through travel of any truck or other motor vehicle with a gross weight of 12,000 pounds or over is prohibited on certain designated streets and roads within the municipal street system of the town. 
(b)  The schedule of streets and roads to which through travel of trucks or other motor vehicles with gross weights of 12,000 pounds or over is prohibited shall be maintained by the police chief in accordance with section 36-3. 
(c)  A sign indicating the restrictions set forth pursuant to this section shall be placed on the right-of-way of each road designated herein. 
(d)  The term "through traffic" means all traffic except traffic to a destination located on the street or road involved or traffic to a destination within the town for which there is no other reasonable alternative to travel over the streets or roads involved. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-6; Ord. No. 69, 11-18-1982) 
Sec. 36-6. - Free flow of traffic; obstruction prohibited. 
    All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways and other public ways of the town. Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver, or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic or to needlessly circle the block or dawdle or make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
(Code 1984, § 8-2-1) 
Sec. 36-7. - Moving buildings through streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to move, haul, or transport a building or buildings through the town without having obtained a permit therefor from the town clerk as provided herein. 
(b)  The permit required by subsection (a) of this section may be obtained upon written application to the town clerk, provided that requirements as herein set out regarding the movement are met: 
(1)  No permit required by this section shall be issued unless the applicant agrees to pay and hold the town harmless from any claim which may be made against it by reason of the occupation of any street, alley, road, sidewalk or other public place by the building or structure moved. 
(2)  No permit required by this section shall be issued unless the applicant certifies at the time of making application that he has complied or will comply with state law regulating the maintenance and use of public roads generally, and with the rules of the state department of transportation regulating permits for vehicles or loads of excess weight or dimensions. 
(3)  No permit required by this section shall be issued unless the applicant states on the application the proposed route of movement and the approximate date the movement is to take place. 
(4)  No permit shall be issued unless the proposed route is approved by the chief of police. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued unless the application therefor is made at least 48 hours in advance of the time of movement. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other subsection herein, no building shall be moved, hauled, or transported through the town unless the hauling vehicle is escorted by the chief of police or his officer-designee at all times while moving through the town. If the escort-designee consists of personnel from the town police department, a minimum escort fee of $20.00 shall be charged. For purposes of this section, the permittee shall give notice to the office of the chief of police 24 hours in advance of the permitted movement. 
(d)  Buildings may be moved between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on any day except Friday. 
(Code 1984, § 8-2-6; Ord. No. 103, 7-18-1985; Ord. No. 116, 2-20-1986) 
Sec. 36-8. - Restriction of truck traffic on Senoia Road. 
    All vehicles exceeding six tons in weight, whether fully loaded or not, shall be prohibited from using Senoia Road in the town, beginning at the intersection of Senoia Road and Georgia Highway 74 and continuing in a southerly direction down Senoia Road to the intersection of Senoia Road and Dogwood Trail. This section shall not prohibit any local traffic by trucks which exceed six tons. The exemption for trucks exceeding six tons in weight as to local traffic shall be limited solely to those vehicles which are owned by or connected to businesses which have their physical situs on Senoia Road, or, are vehicles which are making deliveries to or from businesses and residences whose physical situs is on Senoia Road, or who have no other means of ingress and egress than by the utilization of Senoia Road, or those who have their situs on streets and roads which have no other means of ingress and egress than by way of Senoia Road. Any person convicted of violation thereof shall be punished as set forth in the town charter for violations of this Code. Nothing contained herein shall limit or restrict the travel of vehicles or the use of roads by vehicles when travelling on either Dogwood Trail or Georgia Highway 74. 
(Code 1984, § 8-2-7; Ord. No. 331, 2-6-1997; Ord. No. 337, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 36-9. - Restriction on through traffic on Ashland Trail. 
    All motor vehicles shall be prohibited from using Ashland Trail as a cut through street between Castlewood Road and Senoia Road in the town and motor vehicle use shall be restricted to motor vehicle traffic use by residents except as hereinafter set forth and shall be posted "No Through Traffic Permitted." This section shall not prohibit any local traffic by residents and their visitors, school buses, emergency vehicles, service vehicles and to those motor vehicles which are making deliveries to or from residences located on Ashland Trail. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 8-2-7, 1-19-2006) 
Sec. 36-10. - Restriction of truck traffic on Swanson Road. 
    All vehicles exceeding six tons in weight, whether fully loaded or not, shall be prohibited from using Swanson Road in the town, beginning at the intersection of Swanson Road and Georgia Highway 74 and continuing in an easterly direction down Swanson Road, up to the junction of the municipal limits of the town and the limits of the county. This section shall not prohibit any local traffic by trucks which exceed six tons. The exemption for trucks exceeding six tons in weight as to local traffic shall be limited solely to those vehicles which are owned by or connected to businesses which have their physical situs on Swanson Road; or are vehicles which are making deliveries to or from businesses and residences whose physical situs is on Swanson Road; or who have no other means of ingress and egress than by the utilization of Swanson Road; or those who have their situs on streets and roads with no other means of ingress and egress than by way of Swanson Road. 
(Code 1984, § 8-2-8; Ord. No. 357, 6-4-1998) 
Sec. 36-11. - Use of engine brakes on highways, roads and streets. 
(a)  The use of an engine brake by vehicles exceeding six tons shall be prohibited on all highways, roads and streets in the town. 
(b)  As used herein, the term engine brake shall have the same meaning as Jake brake which is an add-on engine brake for diesel engines which locks down the engine exhaust valve during the exhaust stroke and increases the resistance delivered to the piston thereby slowing down the vehicle. 
(c)  Signs to be erected by the town as provided in this section shall read as follows: 
"Jake brakes prohibited by Town Ordinance Town wide." 
(Ord. No. 475, § 1(8-2-8), 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 36-12. - Speed limits in construction sites. 
(a)  The town police department shall be authorized to establish maximum speed limits in work zones in or located adjacent to any street or highway in and around the town. 
(b)  The reduced speed limit signs in construction zones, where established at less than ten miles per hour less than the established speed limit on the street or highway. 
(c)  Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be mandated to appear before the judge of the municipal court of the town for entry of plea and adjudication. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-14; Ord. No. 299, 10-4-1995) 
Secs. 36-13-36-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; power of local authority to regulate or prohibit parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 

Sec. 36-43. - No parking in restricted areas. 
    The mayor and council may from time to time prohibit or restrict the parking of motor vehicles within the town in certain designated areas. Said restricted or no parking areas shall be designated as such by signs or other appropriate methods. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-1; Ord. No. 38, 12-8-1977) 
Sec. 36-44. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
    Whenever a space is marked off on any highway for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-2) 
Sec. 36-45. - Parking trucks in residential areas. 
(a)  No person shall park or stand any semi-trailer or other vehicle exceeding 31/2 tons upon any property zoned for residential use or upon any public street or highway within or adjacent to property zoned for residential uses. 
(b)  The police department shall have authority to enforce this section as provided by law. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-4; Ord. No. 107, 10-17-1985) 
Sec. 36-46. - Parking fines and removal of vehicles. 
    Parking fines shall be those as established by the town police department in accordance with its existing fine and bond schedules as is determined in the sound discretion of the chief of police. Any vehicles parked in violation of this article shall be subject to removal and impoundment by the town police department according to regulations to be established by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 12-1-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2016, repealed the former § 36-46, and enacted a new § 36-46 as set out herein. The former § 36-46 pertained to prohibition of parking on Senoia Road and derived from Code 1984, § 8-3-5; Ord. No. 332, adopted Feb. 7, 1997. 
Sec. 36-47. - Parking on certain streets, restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked, any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle or unmotorized trailer on either side of Byewood Road along the entire length of Redwine Park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked, any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle or unmotorized trailer on either side of Palmetto Road, Tyrone Road, Castlewood Road and Dogwood Trail along the entire length of said road, street, or trail within the town limits. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked, any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle or unmotorized trailer on either side of Senoia Road along the entire length of Senoia Road from the southern municipal limits of the town northerly to its end. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked, any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle or unmotorized trailer on either side of Carriage Oaks Drive along the entire length of said Carriage Oaks Drive from GA. SR 74 to Senoia Road. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked, any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle or unmotorized trailer on the north side of Brentwood Road along the entire length of Brentwood Road from its intersection with Arrowood Road westwardly to its end. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked, any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle or unmotorized trailer on either side of Handley Road along the entire length of Handley Road from its intersection with Senoia Road south to its dead end. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-6; Ord. No. 398, 4-5-2001; Ord. No. 430, § I, 10-17-2002; Ord. No. 487, § I, 5-4-2006; Ord. No. 491, § I, 12-7-2006; Ord. No. 2016-04, § 2, 12-1-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-04, § 2, adopted Dec. 1, 2016, changed the title of § 36-47 from "Parking within the right-of-way of certain streets, restrictions" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 36-48. - Parking on town-owned property restrictions. 
    Except as to deliveries of goods or merchandise to town property lasting no longer than 15 minutes and waivers specifically approved by the mayor and town council: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked, any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle or unmotorized trailer on town-owned property except in those areas specifically designated for parking. Any vehicles parked in violation of this subsection shall be subject to removal and impoundment by the town police department according to regulations to be established by the chief of police. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked, any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other motor vehicle or unmotorized trailer in any town park or within 100 feet of the playing fields, adjacent to the concession areas, fan viewing areas or other landscaped or grassed areas, except in those areas specifically designated for parking. Parking shall be permitted only in those areas specifically designated for parking. Any vehicles parked in violation of this subsection shall be subject to removal and impoundment by the town police department according to regulations to be established by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 488, § I, 5-18-2006) 
Secs. 36-49-36-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GOLF CARTS AND SIMILAR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, adopted Mar. 21, 2013, repealed former Art. III, §§ 36-70-36-78, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1984, §§ 8-5-1-8-5-8; Ord. No. 385, 5-4-2000; Ord. No. 499, §§ 8-5-1-8-5-8, 4-19-2007. 
State Law reference- Personal assistive mobility devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-320 et seq.; motorized carts, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-330 et seq.; low speed vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-360 et seq. 

Sec. 36-70. - Findings; definitions; general restrictions. 
(a)  Findings . The mayor and town council find that all public streets and paved recreational paths located within its territorial boundaries and under its jurisdiction are designed and constructed so as to safely permit their use. 
(b)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    All-terrain vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for off-road use which is equipped with three or more low-pressure tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars for steering control. 
    Bicycle means any device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having only two wheels which are in tandem and either of which is more than 13 inches in diameter. 
    Dealer means a person engaged in the business of buying, selling, or exchanging vehicles, and who has an established place of business in this state. 
    Electric bicycle means a device with two or three wheels which has a saddle and fully operative pedals for human propulsion and also has an electric motor. For such a device to be considered an electric assisted bicycle, it shall meet the requirements of the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, as set forth in 49 CFR 571 et seq., and shall operate in such a manner that the electric motor disengages or ceases to function when the brakes are applied. The electric motor in an electric assisted bicycle shall: 
(1)  Have a power output of not more than 1,000 watts; 
(2)  Be incapable of propelling the device at a speed of more than 20 miles per hour on level ground; and 
(3)  Be incapable of further increasing the speed of the device when human power alone is used to propel the device at or more than 20 miles per hour. 
    Electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD) means a self-balancing, two non-tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (one horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour on a paved level surface when powered solely by such propulsion system and ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds, e.g., Segways. 
    Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
    Low-speed motor vehicle (LSMV) means any four-wheeled electric vehicle whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and which is manufactured in compliance with the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 CFR 571.500 and in effect on January 1, 2001. 
    Moped means a motor driven cycle equipped with two or three wheels, with or without foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion, and an independent power source providing a maximum of two brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum piston or rotor displacement shall be 3.05 cubic inches (50 cubic centimeters) regardless of the number of chambers in such power source. The power source shall be capable of propelling the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour (48.28 kilometers per hour) on level road surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged. 
    Motor driven cycle means any motorcycle, including any motor scooter, with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, any bicycle with a motor attached, and any moped. 
    Motorcycle means any motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor, all-terrain vehicle, dirt bike, and moped. 
    Motorized cart or golf cart means any motor vehicle having no less than three wheels and an unladen weight of 1,300 pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than 20 miles per hour. 
    Motorized play vehicle means a coaster, pocket bike, motorized skateboard, any other alternatively fueled device, or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled by a motor engine, gas or electric, and is not otherwise defined as a motorized cart, low-speed motor vehicle (LSMV), motorcycle, electric assisted bicycle, or electric personal assistive mobility device. 
    Pocket motorcycle or pocket bike means a two-wheeled vehicle other than a motor vehicle, bicycle with helper motor or a motorized scooter and which is propelled by an internal combustion engine, electric motor or other mechanical means, is capable of carrying a rider and/or passenger at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour, and is designed to replicate the general appearance of a motorcycle, regardless of the scale of the replication. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 3-21-2013) 
Sec. 36-71. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates the terms of the article shall be punished as provided in section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 3-21-2013) 
Sec. 36-72. - Liability. 
    Each person using the paved recreation paths is liable for his/her own actions. Liability insurance coverage varies and each person operating a golf cart or low-speed motor vehicle on the designated streets and/or paved recreation paths should review their coverage. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 3-21-2013) 
Sec. 36-73. - Equipment. 
(a)  A low speed motor vehicle must be equipped with headlamps, stop lamps, turn signal lamps, tail lamps, reflex reflectors, parking brakes, rearview mirrors, windshields, and a vehicle identification number. Low speed motor vehicles not meeting these requirements are prohibited from operating on the streets of the town. 
(b)  Golf carts that are operated between sunrise and sunset must be equipped with headlights, brake lights, turn signals, and a windshield. Golf carts that do not meet these additional standards shall only be operated during the hours between sunrise and sunset. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 3-21-2013) 
Sec. 36-74. - Registration; inspection. 
(a)  Required . It shall be the duty of every owner of an electric or gasoline-powered motorized cart or low-speed motor vehicle that is operated over the designated streets, paved recreational paths or sidewalks to register the vehicle with the town within ten business days of the date of purchase. Proof of ownership listing the vehicle must be presented. This is to be accomplished at the town police department where two numerical decals will be issued for each vehicle registered. A record of each vehicle so registered will be completed. The registration will record the name and address of the owner, vehicle manufacturer, model, serial number or VIN, and color. 
(b)  Registration fee. The registration fee for motorized carts and low-speed motor vehicles shall be $15.00, and the registration shall be effective until the end of the third calendar year in which the registration is made. Registration must be renewed by January 1 of each fourth calendar year from the initial registration. Every renewal will be for a period of three years and the fee for said renewal shall be $15.00. If registration is not made within ten business days of purchase or if renewal of registration is not made by January 1 of the required year, a $5.00 penalty shall be applied for each month the motorized cart remains unregistered. This additional penalty shall be capped at $30.00 and will be in addition to the registration or renewal fee. In addition, those persons wishing to register a vehicle designed for a disabled person, presentation of medical verification of a disability is required. An annotation will be placed on the registration document. A decal will be issued and must be displayed when utilizing parking designated for the disabled. Upon termination of the disability, this decal must be removed and the vehicle's registration form updated. 
(c)  Revocation . The registration of gas-powered golf carts will be revoked if the golf cart is not in compliance with subsection (f) of this section and a new registration will be required upon compliance with subsection (f) of this section. 
(d)  Reciprocal agreement. A reciprocal agreement exists between the Town of Tyrone and the City of Peachtree City. The Town of Tyrone will honor/recognize permits issued from the City of Peachtree City. Nonresidents from Peachtree City will be afforded the same privileges as those Tyrone resident permit holders and all sections of this article will apply to those non-residents as well. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the minimum age for operating a motorized cart or low-speed motor vehicle in the Town of Tyrone is 12 years old with an accompanying adult and 15 years old with a valid learner's permit. 
(e)  Transfers of ownership. Upon the sale of a golf cart or low-speed motor vehicle to another person who will operate the vehicle over the streets or paved recreation paths of the town, the registration must be transferred to the new owner within ten business days of the change in ownership. Transfer cost will be $5.00. If the transfer registration is not accomplished within ten business days, a $5.00 penalty shall be applied for each month the registration has not been updated. This additional fee shall be capped at $30.00 and will be in addition to the transfer fee. 
(f)  Gasoline golf carts. 
(1)  Every gasoline-powered golf cart must be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
a.  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer. 
b.  The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened, including the consideration of missing or broken brackets or hangers. 
c.  The engine and power mechanism of every golf cart shall be equipped, adjusted and tuned so as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any golf cart to operate or to permit the operation of such cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions which was placed on the golf cart by the manufacturer, to render the device unserviceable by removal, alteration or by any act that interferes with its operation. 
(g)  Rental golf carts and low-speed motor vehicles. Golf cart and low-speed motor vehicle dealers and distributors, as well as other commercial establishments, may rent golf carts and low-speed motor vehicles to the public for use on the streets and paved recreation paths. Each such establishment renting golf carts or low-speed motor vehicles shall be required to register each and shall maintain a written record of each person renting a golf cart or low-speed motor vehicle. Renters shall be required to furnish positive identification and shall be furnished a copy of this article to read. Each renter must be at least 16 years of age and possess a valid driver's license. Registration fees and transfer fees shall be the same as those in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. Golf carts and low-speed motor vehicles for temporary use by the town during special events are exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
(h)  Age, number of registrants limited. Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a golf cart or low-speed motor vehicle. Registration may be in one person's name only and the registration form must be signed by that person. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 3-21-2013) 
Sec. 36-75. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  Only those persons who hold a valid motor vehicle driver's license may drive a golf cart or low-speed motor vehicle on the streets or paved recreational paths of the town. Exception: Those persons who are 12 years of age or older may drive a golf cart or low-speed motor vehicle on designated streets and paved recreation paths of the town if they are accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. In addition, those persons who are 15 years of age or older may drive a golf cart or low-speed motor vehicle on designated streets and paved recreation paths of the town if they hold a valid learner's permit. 
(b)  Golf carts and low-speed motor vehicles may be operated on public streets within the town limits where the posted speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less. The operator of a golf cart or low-speed motor vehicle shall not operate such vehicle on any street where the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour. This does not prohibit golf carts or low-speed motor vehicles from crossing any road or street at properly marked crossings. No all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) are permitted to operate on town streets or recreation paths. 
(c)  All golf cart and low-speed motor vehicle operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the streets and paved recreation paths of the town. All golf cart and low-speed motor vehicle operators are required to use available paved recreation paths where present in lieu of town streets. 
(d)  Golf carts may be operated on sidewalks only if the driver yields the right-of-way to all pedestrians, bicycle riders or others not using a golf cart. 
(e)  No low-speed motor vehicles or golf carts shall be permitted to operate over, along, or across Georgia Highway 74 within the boundaries of the town except where authorized crossings are provided. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any low-speed motor vehicle or golf cart or for any other person operating, employing, or permitting the use of, or otherwise directing the use of such vehicle, to operate or permit the operator of any such vehicle to drive over the streets or paved recreation paths in violation of this article. 
(g)  No low-speed motor vehicle or golf carts shall be permitted to operate on the following streets within the boundaries of the town, except where authorized crossings are provided: 
(1)  Palmetto Road. 
(2)  Tyrone Road. 
(3)  Dogwood Trail. 
(4)  Jenkins Road. 
(5)  Sandy Creek Road. 
(6)  Peggy Lane. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 3-21-2013) 
Sec. 36-76. - Paved recreation path users. 
    Prohibited users of paved recreation paths and sidewalks are as follows: 
(1)  Automobiles and trucks (except authorized maintenance vehicles). 
(2)  Motorcycles. 
(3)  Horses, mules or donkeys. 
(4)  Unregistered electric golf carts. 
(5)  Unregistered gas golf carts. 
(6)  Go-carts. 
(7)  Minibikes and mopeds. 
(8)  All-terrain vehicles. 
(9)  Motorized play vehicles. 
(10)  Street and trail motorized bikes or vehicles (not to include electric bicycles). 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 3-21-2013) 
Sec. 36-77. - Hazardous activities and special rules. 
(a)  Paved recreation paths are for transportation and public recreation by various groups of permitted users. No individual or group shall engage in hazardous activities on the streets and paved recreational paths. Such hazardous activities and the special rules pertaining to them include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Racing of any form, except for special events approved by the town; and 
(2)  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the town. 
(b)  None of the prohibited users in section 36-76 shall use the path system or the bridges and/or their underpasses for any purpose whatsoever. 
(c)  Pedestrians, skaters and permitted vehicles shall not loiter or park on paved recreation path bridges or in underpasses. 
(d)  Normal rules of the road shall apply to the paved recreation paths. For instance, when approaching oncoming path users, each user shall move to his right side of the path. Passing shall be on the left side of the path. 
(e)  Pedestrians should be given due consideration and reasonable right-of-way by other users of the paved recreation paths to ensure safe passage. 
(f)  A warning or announcement shall be given by operators of golf carts and other users of the paved recreation paths, i.e., bicyclists or skaters when approaching pedestrians from the rear. This warning or announcement may be verbal, but it is recommended that bicyclists and golf cart operators equip their vehicles with a warning device such as a horn or bell. Each user of the paved recreation paths shall be considerate of the safety and welfare of the other users and dangerous conduct will not be tolerated. 
(g)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol or illegal drugs and it use, including open container laws that apply to traffic on the streets of the town, also apply to the paved recreation paths. 
(h)  All litter shall be deposited in the receptacles provided along the paved recreation paths or retained by the path user for proper disposal later. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 3-21-2013) 
Chapter 38 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Water restrictions. 
(a)  Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. Failure to comply with this section is an offense. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the state department of natural resources environmental protection division to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
(6)  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface well is on said property; 
(10)  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale or installation; 
(11)  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(c)  In case of an emergency which immediately threatens the public health, safety or welfare, the mayor and council may impose more stringent restrictions on outdoor water use than those contained in this section; however, such emergency restrictions shall be valid for a period not exceeding seven days unless a variance is obtained from the director of the state environmental protection division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-7(a). 
(Code 1984, § 5-1-1; Ord. No. 119, 5-12-1986; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, 11-18-2010) 
Sec. 38-2. - Conservation requirements for car washes. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section: 
    Conveyor car wash means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
    In-bay automatic car wash means a commercial car wash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the car. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
    Recycled water system means a water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
    Self-service car wash means a commercial car wash where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to reduce water consumption from commercial car wash facilities by requiring all new conveyor car washes to install operational recycled water systems. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  This section applies to all new conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011, regardless of the water source. 
(2)  The provisions of this section do not apply to conveyor commercial car washes that were permitted or constructed before January 1, 2011. 
(3)  The provisions of this section do not apply to self-service car washes or in-bay car washes. 
(d)  Commercial car wash water recycling requirement. All new commercial conveyor car washes, permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011, must install operational recycled water systems. A minimum of 50 percent of water utilized must be recycled. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 5-19-2011) 
Sec. 38-3. - Rain sensor shut-off switches on irrigation systems. 
(a)  The building inspection department for the Town of Tyrone shall complete an inspection checklist for every building built in the town. Each checklist shall include whether or not the buildings have an irrigation system and whether or not the system is equipped with a rain sensor shut off switch. 
(b)  The town shall have a certificate of occupancy checklist to be completed by the planning and zoning department before a certificate of occupancy can be issued to a developer. Each certificate of occupancy checklist shall include whether or not the building's irrigation system consists of a rain sensor shut-off switch. This checklist shall be given to the developer at the beginning of each project so that he or she knows that he or she is required to install a rain sensor shut-off switch on his or her irrigation system. 
(c)  If, upon the final inspection the building inspection department, it is found that the developer has failed to install a rain sensor shut-off switch on his or her irrigation system, the inspection will be considered to have a failure rating and it will be the responsibility of the developer to install the rain sensor shut-off switch on the system and call the inspector for a re-inspection. Re-inspection fees shall apply. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the developer for the project until the project passes the final inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 5-19-2011) 
Secs. 38-4-38-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION (RED FLAG) PROGRAM 

Sec. 38-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, and litigation risks. 
    Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
    Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, and continue credit, and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
    Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
    Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
    Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 USC § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address in the agency's file for the consumer. 
    Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information, and drivers' license information, and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
    Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
    Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the town. 
(Ord. No. 2008-520, § 1(5-5-2), 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-22. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-520, § 1(5-5-1), 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-23. - Findings. 
(a)  The town is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of town services include water, sewer, and sanitation services. 
(c)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(d)  The town limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the town's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(e)  The town determines that there is a risk of identity theft occurring with respect to covered accounts maintained by the town. 
(Ord. No. 2008-520, § 1(5-5-3), 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-24. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition of opening a covered account in the town, each applicant shall provide the town with personal identifying information of the customer. Such information shall be entered directly into the town's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The town may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 2008-520, § 1(5-5-4), 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-25. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized town personnel. 
(b)  Such passwords shall be changed by town manager on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length, and shall contain letters, numbers, and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the town manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the town manager and the town attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2008-520, § 1(5-5-5), 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-26. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the town's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 2008-520, § 1(5-5-6), 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-27. - Sources and types of red flags. 
    All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account, or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies, or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual patterns of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing addresses, mail drop addresses, or jail addresses or invalid phone numbers, pager numbers, or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the town receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud. For example, the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; or 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used, taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage, and other relevant factors. 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The town is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The town is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The town is notified by a customer, law enforcement, or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims, or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2008-520, § 1(5-5-7), 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-28. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any town employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the town manager. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the town manager, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the town manager in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a town employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the town manager: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any town employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the town manager. If, in his discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the town manager, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the town manager in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a town employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the town manager: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-520, § 1(5-5-8), 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-29. - Updating the program. 
    The town council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the town and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the town council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The town's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the town offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 2008-520, § 1(5-5-9), 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-30. - Program administration. 
(a)  The town manager is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation and is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by the town regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the town manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the town council for consideration by the council. 
(b)  The town shall develop, at least annually, a report for review by the town manager on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
(1)  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the town in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
(2)  Service provider arrangements; 
(3)  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
(4)  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(c)  The town manager is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The town manager shall exercise his discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2008-520, § 1(5-5-10), 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-31. - Outside providers. 
    In the event that the town engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the town manager shall exercise his discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-520, § 1(5-5-11), 10-16-2008) 
Sec. 38-32. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(a)  Policy. In the event that the town receives a notice of address discrepancy, the town employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the town obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 USC § 5318(1); 
b.  Information the town maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records, or tax records; or 
c.  Information the town obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant town employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the customer. 
(b)  Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(1)  In the event that the town reasonably confirms that an address provided by consumer to the town is accurate, the town is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the town received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
a.  The town is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the town requested the report; 
b.  The town establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
c.  The town regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(2)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the town to such agency for the reporting period in which the town establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(c)  Methods of confirming customer addresses. The town employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the town's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-520, § 1(5-5-12), 10-16-2008) 
Secs. 38-33-38-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-53. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer intended to serve as a sanitary sewer and a storm sewer, or as an industrial sewer and a storm sewer. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in milligrams per liter. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures or lagoons used for treatment of sewage presently owned or afterward acquired by the town. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Slug means either or all of the following: 
(1)  Any discharge of wastewater from whatever source which is more than three times the quantity of the average eight-hour flow discharges during the normal operational mode of said source and lasting longer than ten minutes; 
(2)  Any discharge of wastewater from whatever source which contains over two times the average eight-hour concentration of any toxic substance whatsoever found in normal flows during normal operation mode; or 
(3)  Any discharge of wastewater from whatever source which contains more than two times the average eight-hour concentration of BOD or suspended solids. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Town means the Town of Tyrone, its mayor and councilmembers, and any authorized agent. It shall also mean the area inside the town limits and any area outside the town limits where the town has jurisdiction over the sewer lines. 
    Water authority means the water authority or manager of the sewerage works of the town, or his authorized deputy agent or representatives as designated by the governing authority. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-12; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-54. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section 38-55, shall be served by the town with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 38-55, or who shall continue any violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in section 38-59, or who shall continue any other violation hereof beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor Each day in which such a violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and violation. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-13; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-55. - Damage to sewerage works prohibited. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewerage works. Any person violating this section shall be tried in the municipal court of the town, and if convicted, shall be punished as provided in section 1-7; and, in addition, shall be responsible for the full costs of repairing or correcting any damage caused to the sewer system of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-14; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-56. - Inspections and tests. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the town shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing town property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with either the water service and its facilities or the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  The water authority and other duly authorized employees of the town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. The water authority and all town employees will observe all company safety rules while on private properties. 
(Code 1984, §§ 6-9-1, 6-9-15; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-57. - Waste disposal, unlawful methods designated. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner, upon public or private property within the town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-16; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-58. - Sewer service; application requirements; security deposit. 
    The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service in person at town hall, and at the same time shall make a cash security deposit as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council for sewer service. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-17; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-59. - Connection to public sewer required. 
    The owner of any houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose within the corporate limits of the town and located within 250 feet of a line of public sanitary sewer, now in existence or afterwards constructed, to which such house, building or property may be connected, so that sewage will flow therefrom and into such sewerage line by gravity, is hereby required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities directly with the line of public sanitary sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 60 days after the date of official notice to do so. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-18; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-60. - Sewer connection regulations, tap fees, service fees, and charges. 
(a)  Purpose and legislative intent. The purpose of this section is to provide for the safe, proper, and correct means by which residential and commercial buildings shall be connected to the town's sewer system and for the collection of tap fees, service fees, and charges related thereto. It is the express intent of the town and of this section to promote a clean, healthy, safe, and attractive environment in which to live. 
(b)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all connections to the public sewer system within the area described in the map in subsection (f) of this section and within each subdivision, development, or property contained in the list in subsection (g) of this section. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building sewer means a privately owned and maintained conduit that conveys wastewater from a single premises to a public sewer. 
    Sewer means only those conduits intended to carry sewage and wastewater and does not mean conduits used to carry stormwater. 
    Single-family dwelling unit or equivalent means a building designed for or used to house not more than one family, including all domestic employees of the family. 
    Wastewater means the spent water from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, institutions, and business offices, including liquid and waterborne waste, but excluding uncontaminated groundwater, surface water, and stormwater. 
    Weser tap means the action of the town in installing an opening in a sewer main to accommodate a building sewer connection. 
(d)  General provisions. 
(1)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building that is to be occupied. The minimum size shall be four inches in diameter for a single-family unit. 
(2)  Only those persons certified as tappers shall be allowed to connect building sewers to the town's sewer system. 
(3)  All building sewers shall be constructed of materials meeting the standards of the town and the requirements of the town's plumbing code. 
(4)  In the development of residential subdivisions with sanitary sewers, all lots shall be served by connections to the sanitary sewer system either by gravity or by means of a pump or ejector. No individual disposal devices shall be permitted. 
(e)  Establishment, payment, and review of rates, charges, and compensation. The following rates, fees, and charges are established and shall be charged and collected at the time of issuance of the building permit or other special permit or at such other time as agreed to by the applicant and the town. Payment of rates, fees, and charges as set forth herein shall be based on the fee schedule in effect on the date the appropriate permit is issued. 
(1)  Sewer connection permit fee. A sewer connection permit shall be required for all new, altered, or relocated sewer connections to the town's sewer system. The permit fee shall cover the cost of the town's engineering, administration, inspection, and associated services. 
(2)  Sewer service deposit. The town reserves the right to require a deposit from a customer should the customer's account become delinquent. A deposit equal to the average of the previous two months' sewer bill will be required of residential customers who become delinquent on their account. The town reserves the right to require the aforementioned deposit from residential customers if the customers' service is disconnected for nonpayment two or more times in a 12-month period. 
(3)  Sewer tap charge. 
a.  A charge shall be made for installation by the town of a sewer tap fitting for each single-family dwelling unit or equivalent. A separate tap fee shall be paid for each equivalent unit. The town shall not be responsible for construction of the sewer service connection or excavation for the tap fitting installation. 
b.  A schedule of fees for the installation of a sewer tap shall be as established by the town council. 
c.  A tap fee shall be charged by the town for each connection to the public sewer system of the town for each residential dwelling unit and for each nonresidential use. 
d.  Tap fees and permits are not transferable and may be used only on the property to which assigned. Under no circumstances shall a tap fee charge be waived. 
(f)  Map. 

(g)  Schedule of sewer tap fees for specified subdivisions. 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall apply to all connections to the public sewer system within the following subdivisions, developments, or properties: 
a.  Southampton Subdivision, all phases. 
b.  Rivercrest Subdivision. 
c.  Powers Court Medical Park. 
d.  The Jenkins Road fire station. 
(2)  The sewer tap fees shall be as follows: 
EXHIBIT B. TOWN OF TYRONE SCHEDULE OF SEWER TAP FEES 
Per Unit Charge 
(Water Service Size) Fee Less than 2 inches $ 3,500.00 2 inches   9,600.00 3 inches  18,100.00 4 inches  30,200.00 6 inches  60,300.00 8 inches  96,600.00  
(Ord. No. 2009-003, § 1(5-2-20), exhibits A, B, 3-19-2009; Ord. No. 2012-11, §§ 1, 2, 9-20-2012) 
Sec. 38-61. - Extensions to water and sewer systems; easement required. 
    Extensions to the water and sewer systems shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed to the town a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-2; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Secs. 38-62-38-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 38-81. - Building sewers and connections; permit required; application and fees. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the water authority. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  For residential and commercial service; and 
(2)  For service to establishments producing industrial wastes. 
(c)  In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the town. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent to the judgment of the water authority. A permit and inspection fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council shall be paid to the town at the time the application is filed. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-19; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-82. - Connection fees and expense. 
(a)  All cost and expense incident to the connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the town property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the town from any loss or damage that may be directly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. Any connection from the town property line into the public sewer shall be made by the town, for which the owner shall pay the town a tap-on fee set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The sewer tap-on fee shall be a nonrefundable connection fee which shall consist of the total of a sewer system impact fee plus the cost to the town of connecting the building to the sewer system. The sewer system impact fee shall be determined from the impact fee schedule as established by the town, or by multiplying the per-gallon-per-day fee as then established by the town times the average daily water consumption of the proposed use in gallons per day, whichever is less. The cost of sewer connection shall be the actual cost of the connection to the town, including all direct and indirect costs of materials, labor and equipment, as determined by the town manager from time to time. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-20; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-83. - Separate connections for every building. 
    A separate and dependent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another or on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-21; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-84. - Use of old building sewers with new buildings. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found, on examination and test by the water authority, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-22; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-85. - Construction specifications and requirements. 
(a)  Pipe material specifications. The building sewer shall be cast-iron pipe; ASTM concrete sewer pipe, ASTM Specification C14: or polyvinyl plastic sewer pipe, ASTM Specification D2241. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service shall be constructed of cast-iron soil pipe with leaded joints. Cast iron pipe with leaded joints may be required by the water authority where the building sewer is subject to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast-iron soil pipe, except that nonmetallic material may be accepted if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the water authority. 
(b)  Pipe size and slope. The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the water authority but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(c)  Elevation; placement; grade. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to and within three feet of any bearing wall. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings. 
(d)  Use of lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewerage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(e)  Excavation, pipe laying and backfill. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the water authority. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected. 
(f)  Joints and connections generally. All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Joint materials and workmanship shall in all cases comply with the pipe manufacturer's recommendations. 
(g)  Connection of building sewer to public sanitary sewer. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the Y branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location, if the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less and no properly located Y branch is available. The town shall install a Y branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the water authority. Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter and no properly located Y is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public sewer to receive the building sewer, which shall enter in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell ("L") may be used to make such connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the water authority. 
(h)  Connection of sources of surface water runoff to public sanitary sewer. No person shall cause the connection of downspouts, exterior foundation drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer which is in turn connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  Protection of public from hazard during work; restoration of public property after completion of work. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the town. 
(j)  Work safety standards. All applicable provisions, rules, regulations, and statutes of the federal Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA) shall be met by persons, firms or corporations constructing any building sewer or appurtenances with the jurisdiction of the town. 
(k)  Inspection. The applicant of the building sewer permit shall notify the water authority when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-23; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Secs. 38-86-38-113. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED DISCHARGES 

Sec. 38-114. - Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the water authority. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the water authority, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-24; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-115. - Objectionable and harmful items. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes which may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of fat, oil or greases or any other substance which may solidify between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees Celsius) and 65 degrees Celsius; 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded; 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage works; 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage works; 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewerage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewerage treatment plant; 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids or dissolved solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewerage treatment plant; 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. Concentrations of hydrogen sulfide, sulphur dioxide and nitrous dioxide are hereby limited to a maximum of 1.0 milligrams per liter; 
(10)  Any waters containing strong acid, iron-pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
(11)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the water authority in compliance with state and federal regulations; 
(12)  Any materials which exert or cause excessive discoloration; 
(13)  Any unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs as defined herein; 
(14)  Any waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewer treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other receiving waters. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-25; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-116. - Sewage. 
    No sewage, as defined herein, shall be discharged directly or indirectly onto any street or other surface, nor into any storm sewer, stream or body of water. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-26; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-117. - Liquid wastes containing grease, oil and sand; construction and maintenance of interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the water authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)  All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the water authority and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, and shall be watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(c)  When installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-27; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-118. - Certain discharges conditioned on review and approval; preliminary treatment facilities. 
(a)  The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes with the following characteristics shall be subject to the review and approval of the water authority: 
(1)  Having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 milligrams per liter; 
(2)  Containing more than 350 milligrams per liter of suspended solids; 
(3)  Containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics described in section 38-115; or 
(4)  Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the town. 
(b)  Where necessary, in the opinion of the water authority, the owner shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to do the following: 
(1)  Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 milligrams per liter and the suspended solids to 350 milligrams per liter; 
(2)  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 38-115; or 
(3)  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
(c)  Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the water authority, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing. 
(d)  Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-28; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-119. - Industrial wastes containing incompatible or toxic pollutants; pretreatment standards. 
    Any industrial user who purposes to discharge incompatible or toxic pollutants into the sewer system shall meet pretreatment requirements of best practical treatment, in accordance with federal regulations as set forth in 40 CFR 128. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-29; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-120. - Special agreements to accept industrial wastes of unusual strength. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the town for treatment subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-30; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-121. - Control manhole for sampling and measuring discharges. 
    When required by the water authority, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when acquired, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the water authority. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and the owner at his expense shall maintain the same so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-31; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-122. - Standards for testing discharges. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in sections 38-115 and 38-118 shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided in section 38-121, or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-32; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Secs. 38-123-38-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 38-143. - Permitted. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 38-59, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewerage disposal system complying with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-33; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-144. - Permit requirements. 
    No property owner, occupant, tenant or lessee will be allowed to construct a privately owned sewage disposal system without first filing an application with the town, paying an inspection fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council, and obtaining a written consent from the mayor and council. Any person installing a private sewage disposal system shall execute an agreement with the town stating that should sewage facilities become available to the subject property that said person, his/its heirs, administrators, executors, transferees, successors and assigns, shall agree to connect onto the town sewage disposal facilities and pay the required tap-on fees and deposit at the time those facilities are made available to the property owner. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-34; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-145. - Inspection requirements. 
    A permit for the private sewerage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the water authority. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the water authority when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the water authority. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-35; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-146. - Construction specifications. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewerage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of natural resources. No permit shall be issued for any private sewerage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-36; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-147. - Operation and maintenance at owner's expense. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewerage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-37; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-148. - Compliance with health officer requirements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the county health officer. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-38; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-149. - Abandonment when public sewer becomes available. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewerage disposal system, as provided in section 38-59, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewerage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-39; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Secs. 38-150-38-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RATES AND CHARGES; BILLING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES; TERMINATION OF SERVICE 

Sec. 38-167. - Minimum charge required. 
    The minimum charge provided in the rate schedule shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only and, except for fire protection, the town shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-3; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-168. - Rate schedule; special contracts. 
(a)  The schedule of water and sewer rates shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. A current copy of the rate schedule shall be maintained on file in the office of the town clerk and shall be available for public inspection. 
(b)  Extraordinary circumstances, such as multiple dwelling units, industrial users and fire protection shall be governed by special contract agreements made by the mayor and council on recommendation of the town's engineer. 
(c)  The sewer rate to be charged to the owners of any property located in the town that are served by a private water system and the public sewer system of the town shall be per residential unit. Said fee shall be billed on a monthly basis. Payment of said bill and the collection thereof shall be as provided by the water and sewer ordinance of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-4; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-169. - Meter reading; billing and collection of charges. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the town. Bills shall be paid at town hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. 
(b)  The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  All bills shall be due on or before the tenth day of the month following the issuance thereof; 
(2)  Nonpayment within ten days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account; 
(3)  Nonpayment within 20 days from the due date will be subject to a penalty of 20 percent of the delinquent account, and will cause the commencement of the procedure for termination of water service as provided in section 38-171. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-5; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-170. - Collection of connection fees. 
    All fees for connection to the water system shall be paid as a prerequisite for approval of the connection to the water system. All fees for connection to the sewer system shall be paid as a prerequisite for approval of the connection to the sewer system. The following shall control the collection of the fees: 
(1)  Deposit. The town may accept a deposit reflecting the estimated cost of installing the water meter or connecting the use to sewer, pending final determination of actual costs after the work has been completed. 
(2)  Impact fee schedule. Fees paid on the basis of the impact fee schedule as then established by the town, to which the direct cost of connection has been added, shall constitute full and complete payment and shall be deemed to be in compliance with this section. 
(3)  Fees calculated on average daily basis. 
a.  For water or sewer impact fees proposed to be calculated on the basis of average gallon-per-day usage instead of the impact fee schedule, the applicant shall present credible evidence prepared, certified and sealed by a knowledgeable professional engineer (P.E.) registered in the state acceptable to the town, or other person acceptable to the town, regarding the projected water usage of the proposed use. Such evidence shall be based on other similar uses, historical water usage by the same type of use, engineering calculations based on accepted standards and practices, or other data or procedures acceptable to the town. 
b.  The payment of an impact fee calculated on the basis of average daily usage may be accepted by the town as a conditional payment, pending actual water usage experienced by the use over a 12-month period of full operation or occupancy. 
(4)  Appeals. The town manager or his designee shall have the authority to interpret this section and the calculation of appropriate connection fees, including both impact fees and direct connection costs to the town. Any aggrieved applicant for connection to the water or sewer system may appeal the decision of the town manager to the town council, whose determination shall be final. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-6; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-171. - Termination of service; conditions and procedure. 
(a)  The water and sewer committee, as appointed by the mayor, shall be empowered to terminate water service for the failure of customers and property owners of the town to pay their water bills. The water and sewer committee, prior to termination of water service for nonpayment of water bills, shall direct the town clerk to issue the following notice to the customer and/or property owner: 
    Dear Customer: Your water bills for the month(s) of have not been paid. Your present amount due the Town for water service is $ ____________ . Delinquent payment penalties have been assessed in the amount of $ ____________ . If your bill is in error, or if you have a legitimate complaint to file with the Town concerning your water bill, you must appear before the Water and Sewer Committee on ____________ at ____________ o'clock ____________ .M. to discuss any discrepancies that might exist. Failure to appear before this Committee will result in the termination of the water service to you on ____________ . 
(b)  If the customer and/or property owner fails to pay the bill and penalties prior to the hearing, and/or the customer and/or property owner fails to appear for the hearing set forth in the notice, the committee shall be authorized to terminate the water service on the date specified in the notice. 
(c)  If the customer and/or property owner and the committee are unable to resolve any discrepancies that might appear in the bill, the customer and/or property owner shall have ten days from the date of the hearing in which to file for injunctive relief in the superior court of the county. If no injunction is filed within that time, the water service to the customer shall be terminated. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-7; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-172. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the town. Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the town toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the town may proceed to collect the balance as provided in section 38-174. 
(b)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only if the bills are paid in full and a security deposit has been paid together with a reconnection of service charge for each meter reconnected. The security deposit and reconnection charge shall be fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(c)  The town reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the town's rules; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the town's control; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; or 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-8; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-173. - Complaints and adjustments; meter testing. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at town hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  Settlement of claims and adjustments of bills are subject to the following additional provisions: 
(1)  The town will make a special water-meter reading at the request of the consumer for a fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council provided, however, that if such special reading discloses that the meter was overread, no charge will be made. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the town of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the town's representative, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-9; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-174. - Liability of property owner. 
(a)  Each owner of property shall be liable and responsible for the full payment of all water and/or sewer services furnished to their property. The charges to be made for services rendered shall be made against the owners, occupants, tenants or lessees of the buildings or premises receiving the services from the town. 
(b)  In addition to the right of termination of water and/or sewer services as provided herein, if enforcement of payment is necessary, the costs of such enforcement, including attorney's fees, shall be the expense of the firm, corporation, owner or lessee liable for the payment of water and/or sewer services and collection may be made by process or procedures of law now available or which may hereafter be available, expressly including the right to cause a fi. fa. to be issued, levied and collected against the person who incurred the charges. 
(c)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-60-17, no lien shall be imposed against real property to secure unpaid charges for water and/or sewer services furnished unless the owner of such real property is the person who incurred the charges. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-10; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 38-175. - Discontinuance or change of service; notice to town by consumer. 
    Not less than three days' notice must be given in person or in writing at town hall to discontinue water and sewer service. Not less than three days' notice must be given in person or in writing at town hall of the change of ownership, lessee or occupant of any property in the town. The owner of the property shall be responsible for the collecting and paying of any past due water and/or sewer bills incurred by the party from which he purchased the property. Failure to pay any past due water and/or sewer bills shall result in the new owner being liable for paying said bills. The owner of the property shall be responsible for the collection and payment of any water and/or sewer bills due the town from his lessee or occupant of his property. Failure to collect and pay any water and/or sewer bills shall result in the owner of the property being liable for the payment of said bills. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-11; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Secs. 38-176-38-203. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GREASE INTERCEPTORS 

Sec. 38-204. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Domestic wastewater means wastewater from sanitary fixtures such as toilets and urinals. 
    Food service facility means any facility, which cuts, cooks, bakes, prepares, or serves food, or which disposes of food related wastes. 
    Garbage grinder means a device that shreds or grinds up solid or semisolid waste materials into smaller portions for discharge into the sanitary sewer. 
    Grease means a material composed primarily of fats, oil, and grease from animal or vegetable sources. The terms fats, oil, and grease shall be deemed as grease by definition. Grease may also include petroleum-based products. 
    Hauler or transporter means one who transfers waste from the site of a user to an approved site for disposal or treatment. The hauler is responsible for assuring that all federal, state and local regulations are followed regarding waste transport. 
    Interceptor, separator or trap means a device so constructed as to separate, trap, and hold fats, oils, greases, sand, and grit substances from the wastewater discharged by a facility to prevent these substances from entering the sanitary sewer. 
    Under-sink or inline grease trap means a device placed under or in close proximity to sinks or other facilities likely to discharge grease in an attempt to separate, trap or hold, oil and grease substances to prevent their entry into the sanitary sewer. 
    User means a source of discharge to the sanitary sewer of the town. 
    Waste or wastewater means the liquid and water-carried domestic or industrial wastes from dwellings, commercial establishments, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, contributed to the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 505, § I(5-2-19(2)), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 38-205. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this program is to minimize the introduction of fats, oils, and greases into the town public and community wastewater collection systems. The main components of the program are the proper sizing, installation, and maintenance of grease interceptors. The administrative and inspection requirements of food service facilities are established herein as well. 
(Ord. No. 505, § I(5-2-19(1)), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 38-206. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  Enforcement of these regulations shall be in accordance with the provisions of the town enforcement response plan. Failure to comply with this program will be grounds for penalty imposition and/or discontinuance of service. Additionally, failure to comply may result in revoking the business' certificates and license. See Appendix C to Ord. No. 505, on file in the office of the town clerk for town grease enforcement response plan. 
(b)  In addition, violation of this article shall be an offense. 
(Ord. No. 505, § I(5-2-19(7)), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 38-207. - Administrative requirements. 
(a)  Initial data acquisition. All food service facilities will be asked to complete a data sheet to establish the grease interceptor database. A copy of the form is attached to Ord. No. 505 as appendix A and is on file in the office of the town clerk. The town database will be updated with additional or modified information after each yearly inspection. 
(b)  Administrative fees. No fee will be charged for an annual inspection by the town. However, if the user's grease interceptor is not in compliance with this section, a $200.00 re-inspection fee will be charged for each inspection thereafter until compliance is achieved. 
(c)  Inspection and entry. Authorized personnel of the town, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall have the right to enter upon all properties subject to this program, at any time and without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or record review, as part of this program. 
(d)  Record retention and reporting. All users must keep a record of any cleaning or maintenance of their grease interceptor. The following records must be kept on site at the food service facility for a period of two years: 
(1)  Manifests are required for all grease interceptors and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Food service facility (generator) information, including name, address, volume pumped, date and time of pumping, and generator signature verifying the information; 
b.  Transporter information, including company name, address, license plate number, permit number, driver name, and driver signature verifying transporter information; and 
c.  Receiving information, including facility name, address, date and time of receiving, EPD permit number, and signature verifying receipt of the waste. 
(2)  Manifests must be mailed, faxed, or electronically submitted to the Town of Tyrone within 14 days of interceptor maintenance. 
(3)  A manifest may not be required for under-sink or inline grease interceptors, if user can demonstrate to Town of Tyrone a valid reason not to use one. 
(4)  Maintenance logs are required for all under-sink and in-line interceptors. This log shall include the date, time, amount pumped or cleaned, hauler, disposal site, and signature. Log shall be kept in a conspicuous location for inspection. This log shall be made immediately available to a Town of Tyrone representative upon request. See Appendix B to Ord. No. 505, on file in the office of the town clerk, for an example. 
(Ord. No. 505, § I(5-2-19(6)), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 38-208. - General criteria. 
(a)  Installation requirements for new food service facilities. All proposed or newly remodeled food service facilities inside the town wastewater service area shall be required to install an approved, properly operated and maintained grease interceptor. All interceptor units shall be installed outdoors of the food service facility building unless the user can demonstrate to the town that an outdoor interceptor would not be feasible. All interceptor units shall of the type and capacity approved by the town. 
(b)  Prohibited discharges. Domestic wastewater shall not be discharged to the grease interceptor unless specifically approved, in writing, by the town. 
(c)  Requirements for existing food service facilities. All existing food service facilities inside the town wastewater service area are expected to conduct their operations in such a manner that grease is captured on the user's premises and then properly disposed. Existing food service facilities will be handled under the town grease management program in the following manner: 
(1)  Town will periodically inspect each food service facility on an as-needed basis to assure that each facility is complying with the intent of the grease control program. The as needed inspection shall be determined by the town. 
(2)  Each food service facility in the vicinity of the problem area will be inspected. The facilities' grease control practices and the adequacy of their grease control interceptor/equipment will be assessed. Maintenance records will also be reviewed. 
(3)  Following the inspections, the town will send written notice to the inspected food service facilities, containing a summary of the policy requirements, and the results of the inspection. The inspections will typically result in one of the following actions: 
a.  Facilities equipped with an appropriate and adequately sized grease interceptor who are meeting the intent of the grease management program through effective grease control practices will be commended for their compliance. 
b.  After notice and an opportunity to be heard, facilities not in compliance shall be required to develop and submit to the town proposed plan designed to achieve compliance through improved housekeeping and/or increased maintenance and pumping on the existing grease interceptor/equipment. 
c.  Facilities that are not successful in achieving compliance with the intent of the grease management program through improved housekeeping and increased maintenance and pumping on the existing grease interceptor/equipment will be required to install the necessary interceptor/equipment to bring the facility into compliance 
(d)  Waste minimization plan. Food service facilities shall develop and implement a waste minimization plan pertaining to the disposal of grease, oils, and food particles. 
(e)  Floor drains. Only floor drains which discharge or have the potential to discharge grease shall be connected to a grease interceptor. 
(f)  Location. Each grease interceptor shall be installed and connected so that it is easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted grease at anytime. Grease interceptors required under this article shall be installed outdoors of the food service facility. The best location is in an area outside of an exterior wall, but upstream from the domestic wastewater drain line. A grease interceptor may not be installed inside any part of a building unless approved in writing by the town. The user bears the burden of demonstrating that an outdoor grease interceptor is not feasible. 
(Ord. No. 505, § I(5-2-19(3)), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 38-209. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Construction of interceptors. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with the town's plumbing standards and outdoor units shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention. All alternative grease removal devices or technologies shall be subject to the written approval of the town. Such approval shall be based on demonstrated removal efficiencies of the proposed technology. 
(b)  Access. Outdoor grease interceptors shall be provided with two manholes terminating one inch above finished grade with cast iron frame and cover. All grease interceptors shall be designed and installed to allow for complete access for inspection and maintenance of inner chambers as well as viewing and sampling of wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer. 
(c)  Load-bearing capacity. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the grease interceptor shall be designed to have adequate load-bearing capacity (example: vehicular traffic in parking or driving areas). 
(d)  Inlet and outlet piping. Wastewater discharging to the grease interceptor shall enter only through the inlet pipe of the interceptor. The inlet pipe bottom tee branch shall extend one foot below liquid level. The outlet pipe bottom tee branch shall be submerged to two-thirds of the liquid depth. Each grease interceptor shall have only one inlet and one outlet pipe. 
(e)  Interceptor sizing. Outdoor grease interceptors shall not have a capacity of less than 1,500 gallons nor exceed a capacity of 3,000 gallons. No matter what the calculated capacity using the following formulas, the minimum interceptor size shall be 1,500 gallons. If the calculated capacity using one of the following formulas exceeds 3,000 gallons, then multiple units in series shall be installed. The size of a grease interceptor shall be approximated by the following methods and grease interceptor size shall be the larger of the two results: 
(1)  Interceptor Capacity (gallons) = (S) × (25) × (Hr/12) 
S = Number of Seats 
Hr=Maximum hours of daily operation (Include preparation & clean up) 
(2)  Interceptor Capacity (gallons) = (Sum of fixture flows) × (20) 
Type of Fixture Flow Rate 
(gpm) Restaurant hand sink 15 Pre-rinse sink 15 Single-compartment sink 20 Double-compartment sink 25 Two double-compartment sinks 35 Dishwasher up to 30 gallons 15 Dishwasher up to 50 gallons 25 Dishwasher up to 100 gallons 40 Other fixture Manufacturer peak  
(3)  Under-sink or in-line grease interceptor requirements shall meet Plumbing and Drainage Institute Standard PDI-G101: 
Type of Fixture Flow Rate 
(gpm) Grease Retention 
Capacity 
(lbs) Restaurant hand sink 15 30 Pre-rinse sink 15 30 Single-compartment sink 20 40 Double-compartment sink 25 50 Two double-compartment sinks 35 70 Dishwasher up to 30 gallons 15 30 Dishwasher up to 50 gallons 25 50 Dishwasher up to 100 gallons 40 80 Other fixture Manufacturer peak gpm × 2  
(f)  Grease interceptor designs represent minimum standards for normal usage. Installations with heavier usage require more stringent measures for which the user is responsible and shall pay the costs to provide additional measures if required by the town. The town reserves the right to evaluate interceptor sizing on an individual basis for facilities with special conditions, such as highly variable flows, high levels of grease discharge, or other unusual situations that are not adequately addressed by the formula. 
(Ord. No. 505, § I(5-2-19(4)), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 38-210. - Grease interceptor maintenance. 
(a)  Pumping. All grease interceptors shall be maintained by the user at the user's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludges and solids. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the interceptor from which the waste was removed or any other grease interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be disposed, is strictly prohibited. 
(b)  Pumping frequency. Outdoor grease interceptors must be pumped out completely a minimum of once every three months. Under-sink or in-line grease interceptors must be pumped/cleaned out completely a minimum of once every month. Grease interceptors may need to be pumped more frequently as needed to prevent carry over of grease into the sanitary sewer collection system. Pumping frequency may be extended past the minimum period if it can be demonstrated by the user and approved by town. 
(c)  Pump out order. When the oil and grease concentrations exceed the town's maximum discharge limits and/or the combined depth of bottom and top solids exceeds 33 percent of the total depth of the trap, town will issue a pump out order to the user. The user shall have seven days from receipt of the order to comply. Where an emergency exists, a written or verbal warning shall be given to the user, and the user will have 24 hours to comply. 
(d)  Disposal of interceptor pumped material. All waste removed from each grease interceptor shall be recorded on a proper manifest form. Also, all waste removed from each grease interceptor must be disposed at a facility approved by the Town of Tyrone to receive such waste in accordance with the provisions of this program. In no way shall the pumped material be returned to any private or public portion of the sanitary sewer collection system. 
(e)  Additives. Any additives placed into the grease interceptor or building discharge line system on a constant, regular, or scheduled basis shall be reported to the town. Such additives shall include, but are not be limited to commercially available bacteria or other additives designed to absorb, consume, or treat fats, oils, and grease. The use of additives shall in no way be considered as an alternative technology or a substitution for maintenance procedures required herein. 
(f)  Chemical treatment. Chemical treatments such as drain cleaners, enzymes, acids, and other chemicals designed to dissolve, purge, or remove grease shall not be allowed to enter the grease interceptor. 
(Ord. No. 505, § I(5-2-19(5)), 6-7-2007) 
Secs. 38-211-38-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TYRONE UNDERGROUND MARKING STANDARDS 

Sec. 38-225. - Definitions 
    The following words are to be understood consistent with the definitions contained herein as applicable to this article. 
    Emergency means a sudden or unforeseen occurrence involving a clear and imminent danger to life, health, or property; the interruption of utility services; or repairs to transportation facilities that require immediate action. 
    Extraordinary circumstances means circumstances other than normal operating conditions which exist and make it impractical or impossible for a facility owner or operator to comply with the provisions of this article. Such extraordinary circumstances may include, but shall not be limited to, hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, ice and snow, and acts of God. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 2, 2-6-2014) 
Sec. 38-226. - White lining. 
(a)  Background. White lining is a practice that has been widely used in the United States where the National Transportation Board concluded that pre-marking is a practice that helps prevent excavation damage. The procedure simply involves an excavator using white paint to indicate the route or area that is going to be excavated, such that the locator then knows exactly how much marking is required and where. White lining reduces confusion about what utilities need to be marked or not marked. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of white lining is to allow everyone involved with the dig site to know the exact location of the proposed excavation. White lining the excavation site is an excellent way to assist the utilities or utility locators in marking lines in the work area right the first time and in less time. This technique eliminates speculation by the locator about where the excavation will take place and will often enable the utility or its agent to locate faster and more accurately. In short, pre-marking the area and the extent of the intended excavation can reduce delays and the time it takes to perform the locate. 
(c)  Examples; timing. Examples of areas to be white lined are smaller (involving only a portion of a particular address) or linear excavations such as telecommunication drops and lines, service lines (such as for water, gas, electricity and sewer), utility pits, cuts and repairs, curb repairs, bore holes, directional boring pathways, pole and signage placements, etc. Such examples are merely explanatory of the type of excavation where white lining is appropriate and are not meant to be exclusive. White lining shall be completed prior to contacting GA811 to obtain a locate request ticket number. Electronic/virtual white lining shall be clearly marked on submitted documentation within a 20-foot tolerance zone of the proposed excavation site. 
(d)  Exceptions to white lining. Exceptions are allowed as follows: 
(1)  For large projects as defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-3(18), unless one or more utility facilities are damaged three times or more collectively by a contractor making the locate request within a 90-day contract period, white lining will not be required for any large project so designated in accordance with GSPC Rule 515-9-4-.13. A copy of GSPC Rule 515-9-4-.13 currently in effect is attached to Ordinance No. 2014-03 as Exhibit "A" and by this reference is incorporated herein; said exhibit is on file in the town offices. Every contractor begins each large project with zero damages. It is only when three damages (at-fault damages) occur during the 90-day period of the specific large project that the white lining requirement will be triggered. A large project ticket holder whose past prohibits it from being exempt, as stated above, will be subject to no more than a two-day shutdown period and shall be required to white line the remainder of the project to meet the large project marking facility locating agreement schedule that the ticket holder and utility originally agreed upon; 
(2)  Homeowners/occupants involved in excavation or land disturbance that is confined to a single address or parcel. Homeowners/occupants shall not submit locate requests for excavation or land disturbance that will be performed by a business, a contractor, or a utility. Businesses, contractors, and utilities are not exempt from white lining; 
(3)  "Emergencies" and "extraordinary circumstances" as such terms are defined herein, are statutory exceptions to the requirement for obtaining a locate ticket prior to commencing mechanized excavation and, hence, also exceptions to the requirement for white lining under this section. However, if a particular emergency notification is later determined not to have been an emergency or an extraordinary circumstance, then the excavator's failure to procure a locate ticket before excavating will be treated as a violation of this section. Also, pre-excavation emergency locate ticket requests (that is, a request for a locate ticket on an expedited basis sooner than the prescribed time limit) will not be an exception to white lining as required in this section; 
(4)  Residential telecommunication service drop lines that can be delineated by the route of the existing line on the ground for single residential address/parcel requests only; and 
(5)  Termite baiting systems. 
(e)  White lining symbols as directions to locator. White lining proposed dig sites that will follow a single path or trench shall be marked using white lines and/or arrows and shall be located for 20 feet on either side of the white line and for 20 feet outward beyond the designated "START" and "END" of such linear white line. Therefore, it is important to identify the starting and ending points. 

(f)  Identification of white lining excavator. In order to enable the locating utility or its locators to quickly identify the requested locate at the job site and expedite the locating process, such excavator when white lining shall identify himself or itself by labeling the white line area with the excavator's name or the applicable locate ticket number or both. 
(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 3, 2-6-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05, §§ 1, 2, 8-6-2015) 
Sec. 38-227. - Facility marking by or for utilities. 
(a)  Utility markings. Facility owners or their locate contractors shall indicate utility facilities by placing their UPC alpha code, along with the type material (if known) that the facility consists of, at the beginning and end of locates. Also, arrows should be placed at the ends of markings to indicate that the underground facility continues. In accomplishing the locate task, the line locator shall use industry-approved and generally accepted methods of locating. The tolerance zone shall be 18 inches measured horizontally from the outer edge of either side of such marked utility facilities. 
(1)  To avoid confusion on long runs, the marks shall be frequent enough to identify the owner. 
(2)  The marks shall indicate the approximate center-line of the underground lines. For example, the middle of the cable, line or pipe shall be at the center of the dashed marks. 
(3)  Location marks shall be four to 12 inches in length and at intervals of five to ten feet. If the facility to be marked has a greater diameter than 12 inches the size of the facility shall be indicated if known. If size is not known, then the mark shall be greater than 12 inches. 

(4)  The line locator (person marking the lines) shall extend marks outside the proposed work area by 20 to 30 feet if those facilities extend outside the proposed excavation area. 

(5)  In areas such as flower beds, rock gardens, etc., flags or stakes may be an alternative to paint. The decision to use flags, paint, or stakes shall be based on the terrain and job conditions. For instance, flags or stakes in wet areas, offsets in dirt construction zones that have a high volume of traffic crossing their line location marks. 

(6)  Dead ends, stub-outs, termination points, etc., shall be marked as follows: 

(7)  Lines that have connections (e.g., T's or Y's) or changes in directions shall be clearly indicated. Marks indicating lines or connections shall clearly show the intersection and path of the line or connection. Marks that show changes in direction shall be placed closer together for more clarity and accuracy. 

(8)  Manholes and valves shall be identified by using a circle and letters if they are not visible (dirt covering valve boxes or pavement covering manhole cover). 

(9)  Facilities that cross but do not intersect shall be marked as described to indicate such installation manner. 

(10)  Unlocateable sewer laterals shall be marked by placing a green triangle on the sewer main and, if the location of the tap for such unlocateable sewer lateral is known, by placing a green "T" or "Y" or other appropriate symbol at the tap pointing generally toward the address served by such unlocateable sewer lateral. 

(11)  When facilities share the same trench, they shall be heavily identified and separated enough so that they can be readily identified. This would apply to lines that share the same color code. For example, cable television and telephone lines: 

(12)  If the facility to be marked has a diameter greater than 12 inches, the size of the facility shall be indicated if known. If the size is not known, then the mark shall indicate greater than 12 inches. 
(13)  Duct structures shall be marked by using a dot with parallel boundary on each side of the dot. 

(14)  In areas where there is a strong likelihood that any or all marker types showing line location would be destroyed, offsets shall be placed on a permanent surface. However, offsets should be used only in conjunction with marks placed above a facility. Offset spacing should be every third or fourth mark. For example, the following mark would indicate the line is 16 feet from the end of the arrow. 

(15)  In areas where cables are spliced, the facilities should be located individually as far as possible on both sides of the splice. When the signal is distorted due to the near proximity to the splice a circle with "SP" should indicate the area of distortion or "splice pit". 

(Ord. No. 2014-03, § 4, 2-6-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05, §§ 3, 4, 8-6-2015) 
Sec. 38-228. - Facility protection/damage prevention requirements for contractors/excavators/utilities. 
(a)  When excavating is to take place within the tolerance zone, the contractor/excavator/utility shall utilize at least one of the following: hand digging, pot holing, soft digging, vacuum excavation methods, pneumatic hand tools, or other mechanical methods that may be developed. Other mechanical methods may be used with the approval of the facility owner or operator. 
(b)  Any person involved in an excavation with mechanized equipment found digging or performing land disturbing activities within the "Tolerance Zone" of a facility without evidence of "Potholing" will be found to be in violation of this article. 
(c)  The tolerance zone shall be 18 inches measured horizontally from the outer edge of either side of such marked utility facilities. 
(d)  White lining is a mandatory practice except as stated in section 38-226(d) (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5). 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 5, 8-6-2015) 
Sec. 38-229. - Stop work orders. 
    Upon notice from any government official, work shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be given to the person doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to resume. Any person who shall continue any wok after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to rectify the violation, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 6, 8-6-2015) 
Sec. 38-230. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates a provision of this article shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. Multiple offenses can result in revocation of the privilege to work within rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 7, 8-6-2015) 
Sec. 38-231. - Large projects. 
(a)  Public Service Commission Rule 515-9-4-.13 Procedures for Large Projects shall be followed. 
(b)  The Large Project Marking Agreement referenced in Public Service Commission Rule 515-9-4-.13 must describe the scope of the project. The Large Project Marking Agreement must divide the Project into sections and assign "locate by" and "excavation by" dates for each section. 
(c)  Changes to the Large Project Marking Agreement must be in writing, i.e., hard copy or e-mail. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 8, 8-6-2015) 
Subpart B - LAND AND USE DEVELOPMENT 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 101-1. - Applicability of chapter 1. 
    The provisions of chapter 1 of this Code apply to this subpart. 
Sec. 101-2. - Status. 
    While this subpart is a codification of the ordinances pertaining to land use and development, provisions in subpart A of this Code may also pertain to land use and development. The failure to include provisions in this subpart does not excuse failure to comply with such provisions. Additionally, provisions in this subpart that do not pertain to land use and development are valid even though they are included in this subpart. 
Secs. 101-3-101-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 101-23. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a body known as the "Planning Commission for the Town of Tyrone." 
(Code 1984, § 2-7-1) 
Sec. 101-24. - Membership and appointments. 
    The planning commission, referred to hereinafter as the "commission," shall consist of five members residing within the town and shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. Each councilmember may place names in nomination for consideration by the mayor. The mayor shall make the actual appointments. The council must approve, by simple majority, the appointments made by the mayor. None of the commission members shall hold any other public office, including public office within the town, the state or the federal government. Commission members may be removed, with or without cause, upon a vote in favor of removal by four members of the town council at a public meeting. Any member of the commission shall be disqualified to act or deliberate upon a matter before the commission with respect to any property in which the member has an interest, and the member shall disclose his interest, and shall exclude himself from the portion of the meeting in which the matter is discussed, considered and voted upon by the commission. 
(Code 1984, § 2-7-2) 
Sec. 101-25. - Term of office. 
    The term of office of each member of the commission shall be for two years or until his successor is appointed. The mayor shall appoint the members at the first council meeting in January, and each member's term shall continue until the next appointment, or until the member resigns or is removed from office. Commissioners One, Three and Five shall be appointed to begin their terms at the first council meeting in January during odd-numbered years. Commissioners Two and Four shall be appointed during even-numbered years to begin their terms at the first council meeting in January. The mayor shall appoint commissioners to fill any vacancy on the commission as they occur. 
(Code 1984, § 2-7-3) 
Sec. 101-26. - Compensation. 
    Each member of the planning commission shall receive compensation for his service as determined by the mayor and council of the town. This salary is exclusive of any amount payable as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties for the town. 
(Code 1984, §§ 2-7-4, 6-1-11; Ord. No. 308, 2-21-1996; Ord. No. 2008-513, § 1, 3-20-2008) 
Sec. 101-27. - Quorum. 
    Three of the five commissioners must be present to constitute a quorum for a regularly scheduled or called meeting. If said quorum is not present, official business may not be conducted. 
(Code 1984, § 2-7-5) 
Sec. 101-28. - Rules and procedures. 
(a)  The commission, at its first meeting after the first Monday of each January, shall elect one of its members as chairperson and another as vice-chairperson, for one-year terms or until their successors are elected, whichever first occurs. The vice-chairperson shall have the authority to act as the chairperson in the chairperson's absence. The chairperson shall preside over all meetings of the commission. A minimum of three votes is required to adopt any resolution, regardless of whether the chairperson or vice-chairperson presides, and for a motion to carry. The chairman of the commission can make and/or second motions but shall not vote except: 
(1)  When all members of the commission are present and the chairperson's vote is required to break a tie; 
(2)  When there are only three members of the commission present with one of the members being the chairperson and the third vote is required to meet the minimum vote of three; and 
(3)  When there are only three members of the commission present with one of the members being the vice-chairman acting as chairperson and the third vote is required to meet the minimum vote of three. 
(b)  The commission shall have authority to adopt rules of procedure, which shall be submitted to and approved by the town council prior to their adoption. The town manager, with the approval of the mayor and council, will establish the day, time and place for the commission's regularly scheduled semimonthly meetings. Called meetings of the commission may be held at the call of the chairperson, or in the chairperson's absence, the vice-chairperson, the town manager or the mayor. Reasonable attempts shall be made to notify all commission members as soon as possible of a called meeting. 
(c)  The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, and if absent or failing to vote, indicate such fact. Said minutes shall be filed with the town clerk and shall be public record. The minutes of the commission shall contain the decisions of the commission, a statement of the subject matter being considered, and the grounds for the decision. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1984, § 2-7-6) 
Sec. 101-29. - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall hear and act upon applications pursuant to procedures and standards established by the town council. The commission shall act upon applications for preliminary plat approval, and/or enlargement or continuation of a nonconforming use, subject to the council's right to review said decision and the applicant's right to appeal the commission's action to the town council. The commission shall review, conduct public hearings, and make recommendations to the council on applications for annexations and rezonings, special exceptions, text amendments, etc. The commission shall have such other powers and duties as the town council may from time to time establish. 
(Code 1984, § 2-7-7) 
Sec. 101-30. - Hearings. 
(a)  Public notice of hearing. The commission shall give public notice of a hearing to consider a zoning variance, annexations, continuance of nonconforming use and special exception, zoning applications, or on any other matter which the town council or the law requires public notice, in a newspaper designated as the official organ for the town at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days, prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(b)  Who may appear. Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(c)  Decision. The decision of the commission shall be made by a public vote and shall constitute a recommendation to the town council unless the town council provides otherwise in its ordinances. The commission shall reach a decision following a public hearing by no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Code 1984, § 2-7-8) 
Sec. 101-31. - Standard for review. 
    The commission shall review all applications pursuant to the applicable standards established by the town council or established by state or federal law. 
(Code 1984, § 2-7-9) 
Secs. 101-32-101-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Georgia Development Impact Fees Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. 

Sec. 101-51. - Short title, authority and applicability. 
(a)  The ordinance codified in this article shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of the Town of Tyrone, Georgia." 
(b)  This article has been prepared and adopted by the mayor and council of the town in accordance with the authority provided by article IX, section II, paragraph IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq.). 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the town to adopt such an ordinance pursuant to any other source of local authority or to use any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. 
(d)  This article shall apply to all areas of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-78; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
Sec. 101-52. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building permit means the permit required for new construction pursuant to the town building code. The term "building permit" shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation or other improvements to an existing structure, provided there is no increase in the number of units resulting therefrom. 
    Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
    Capital improvements element means that portion of the comprehensive plan which sets out projected needs for system improvements during a planning horizon established in the comprehensive plan, a schedule of capital improvements that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement. 
    Commencement of construction or commenced construction means expenditure of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, marshaling of forces to undertake a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project, or any action normally found to proceed subsequent to these actions in a typical flow of project construction activities. 
    Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
    Development means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land, any of which creates additional demand and need for public facilities. 
    Development approval means any written authorization from the town which allows the commencement of construction. 
    Development exaction means a requirement attached to a development approval or other municipal or county action approving or authorizing a particular development project, including but not limited to a rezoning, which requirement compels the payment, dedication or construction of goods, services, land or money as a condition of approval. 
    Development impact fee means a payment of money imposed upon development as a condition of development approval to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve new growth and development. 
    Encumber means to legally obligate by contract, or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of the town. 
    Excess capacity means capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide service at a specified level of service. 
    Feepayor means that person who pays a development impact fee, or his successor in interest, where the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. In the absence of an express transfer or assignment of the right or entitlement to any fund of previously paid development impact fees, the right or entitlement shall be deemed "not to run with the land." 
    Individual assessment study means the engineering and/or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor to allow determination of a development impact fee other than by use of an applicable fee schedule, as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4(g). 
    Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for public facilities in terms of demand to capacity ratios, the comfort and convenience of use or service of public facilities, or both. 
    Present value means the current value of past, present or future payments, contributions or dedication of goods, services, materials, construction or money. 
    Project means a particular development on an identified parcel of land. 
    Project improvements means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project, are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project, and are not system improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or system improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative. If an improvement or facility provides, or will provide, more than incidental service or facilities capacity to persons other than users or occupants of a particular project, the improvement or facility is a system improvement and shall not be considered a project improvement. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities approved by the governing body of the town shall be considered a project improvement. 
    Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements which is reasonably related to the service demands and needs of the project within the defined service area. 
    Public facilities means: 
(1)  Water supply production, treatment and distribution facilities; 
(2)  Wastewater collection, treatment and disposal facilities; 
(3)  Roads, streets and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping and any local components of state or federal highways; 
(4)  Stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection and enhancement improvements; 
(5)  Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; 
(6)  Public safety facilities, including police, fire, emergency medical, rescue and jail facilities; and 
(7)  Libraries and other related facilities. 
    Service area means a geographic area determined by the town in which a defined set of public facilities provides service to development within the area. Service areas shall be designated on the basis of sound planning or engineering principles, or both. 
    System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide additional public facilities capacity needed to serve new growth and development for planning, design and construction, land acquisition, land improvement, design and engineering related thereto, including the cost of constructing or reconstructing system improvements or facility expansions, including but not limited to the construction contract price; surveying and engineering fees; related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees and expert witness fees); and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvement element; and administrative costs, provided that such administrative costs shall not exceed three percent of the total amount of the costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payments of principal and interest on bonds, notes or other financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the town to finance the capital improvements element, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training and other operating costs. 
    System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities and are designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to project improvements. 
    Unused or excess impact fee means any individual impact fee payment paid to the town from which no amount of money has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of section 101-69. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-82; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2. 
Sec. 101-53. - Penalty provision. 
(a)  A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law. However, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution, the town shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this article. Recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary are available to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article including injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of the article and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
(b)  Knowingly furnishing false information to the town on any matter relating to the administration of this article shall constitute a violation thereof. 
(c)  The town administrator may withhold the issuance of any building permit or other development permits if the provisions of this article have been violated by the owner feepayor or his assigns on any property within the town until the provisions of this article, including the conditions on any permit issued thereunder, have been fully met. 
(d)  The town administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this article and shall have the right to issue cease-and-desist orders and citations for violations. Refusal of written notice of violation under this article shall constitute legal notice of service. 
(e)  For any violation, the town administrator shall have the authority to issue a citation. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 working days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the town administrator. If the required corrective action is not taken within the time allowed, the town administrator may use any available civil or criminal remedies to secure compliance, including revoking a permit. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-94; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
Sec. 101-54. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the town comprehensive growth management plan (hereinafter "the comprehensive plan") and specifically the capital improvements element included therein. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and development of real property so that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve new growth and development through the imposition of impact fees. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-79; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
Sec. 101-55. - Findings. 
    The mayor and council of the town find and declare that: 
(1)  Land development shall not be allowed unless adequate public facilities are available or are assured; 
(2)  New land development in identified service areas shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities to serve new growth and development; 
(3)  The imposition of impact fees is the preferred method of regulating land development in order to assure that it bears a proportionate share of the cost of the new public facilities necessary to accommodate the new growth and development, and to promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the town; and 
(4)  The town must expand its public facilities in order to maintain current levels of service if new development and growth is to be accommodated without decreasing the level of service. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-80; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
Sec. 101-56. - Restrictions on credits and refunds. 
    The intent of this article in granting credits and/or refunds is to make such grants to persons or entities who actually paid or will pay fees. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-81; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
Sec. 101-57. - Exemptions. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4(l), the public policies expressed in the comprehensive plan, and in accordance with the policies of the mayor and council, exemptions from development impact fees may be available if: 
(1)  Such projects are determined to create extraordinary economic development and employment growth or affordable housing; 
(2)  The public policy which supports the exemption is contained in the comprehensive plan; and 
(3)  The exempt development's proportionate share of the system improvement is funded through a revenue source other than development impact fees. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-92; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
Sec. 101-58. - Enforcement provision. 
    The enforcement of this article will be the responsibility of the town administrator and such town personnel as the town administrator may designate from time to time. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-95; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
Sec. 101-59. - Effect on other regulations. 
    This article shall not affect in any manner the permissible use of property, density of development, design, improvements or any other requirements or aspect of the development of land, or provision of capital improvements subject to zoning and subdivision regulations, or other regulations of the town. All such regulations and requirements shall be operative and shall remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all development. Application and imposition of development impact fees is additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the town on the development of land or the issuance of building permits. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-96; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
Sec. 101-60. - Zoning approved prior to effective date. 
    For any development which has a currently approved zoning that imposes, as conditions of zoning, requirements for dedication of land, contribution of funds and/or construction of system improvements, the feepayor may elect to: 
(1)  Proceed with the project under the existing conditions of zoning by entering into a private agreement (section 101-64). If the feepayor chooses to proceed under the existing conditions of zoning, none of the provisions of this article shall apply; 
(2)  Proceed with the project under the provisions of this article, in which case: 
a.  Any development for which a valid application for a building permit has been received by the town prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article may proceed to issuance of a building permit without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this article provided that: 
1.  All fees for system improvements imposed by conditions of zoning approval or any code or regulation in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance be or have been paid in full; and 
2.  The building permit is or can be issued within 120 calendar days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, exclusive of delays caused by the town's normal review process; 
b.  For any development for which a land disturbance permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, but not an associated building permit, the building permit shall be issued only under the terms and conditions of this article, provided further that: 
1.  Any fees, contributions or dedications attributable to system improvements paid at the time of issuance of the land disturbance permit shall be credited in full against the development impact fees under this article for issuance of the building permit; 
2.  In the case of multi-building projects, such as a subdivision or multi-family complex, the credit shall be prorated among the various buildings and proportioned to the number of dwelling units; 
3.  In all such cases, the feepayor may elect to receive a refund of prior payments in lieu of credit for prior payments. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-97; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
Sec. 101-61. - Review. 
(a)  As part of its annual capital improvement program process, or as part of any other planning process which causes the town to evaluate development potential in any area, the town may review the development potential of any area within the town, whether it be a previously designated service area or not, or the town as a whole. Based on such review of development potential, the town may adjust boundaries of service areas or create new service areas. 
(b)  As part of its annual capital improvement program review process, or as part of any other planning process which causes the town to evaluate development potential in any area, the town may review capital facilities plans in service areas and modify such plans as a result of development occurring in the previous year and/or requests for permission to develop (e.g., applications for rezoning, applications for land disturbance permits and applications for building permits). Plans may also be modified as a result of: 
(1)  Capital facilities actually constructed; 
(2)  Changes in capital facility needs and/or standards; 
(3)  Revised cost estimates for capital facilities; 
(4)  Changes in availability of other funds applicable to public facility projects; 
(5)  Other relevant factors. 
(c)  As a result of modifications to service area boundaries and/or capital facilities plans, the town may modify development impact fee schedules as appropriate and adopt such revised schedules through official action of the mayor and council. 
(d)  As part of its annual comprehensive plan review process, the county may revise the provisions specified in section 101-57 (Exemptions). 
(e)  Failure by the town to undertake such a review shall result in the continued use and application of the existing fee schedule and other data. The failure to review such structure shall not invalidate this article. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-93; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
Sec. 101-62. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any administrative determination made under this article, or by the application of any provision of this article, may appeal such determination or provision under this section. 
(b)  A notice of appeal must be filed with the mayor and council within 30 days following the receipt of a written determination of the amount of the development impact fee to be paid or entitlement to a refund, credit or exemption. 
(c)  All appeals shall be made to the mayor and council following the town administrator's decision on the applicability or amount of the development impact fee, or eligibility for or amount of a refund, credit or exemption. Upon filing of an appeal, the town administrator shall forthwith transmit to the mayor and council all papers constituting the record upon which the appeal is taken. The mayor and council shall thereafter establish a reasonable date and time for the hearing on the appeal, give notice thereof to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time following the hearing. Any party taking an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the mayor and council may take an appeal to the superior court of the town within 30 days after the decision by the mayor and council is rendered. 
(d)  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest in order to obtain a development approval or building permit, as the case may be. A developer making such payment shall not be estopped from exercising his right of appeal, nor shall such developer be estopped from receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been illegally collected. 
(e)  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to issuance of development approval or a building permit. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-89; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-10. 
Sec. 101-63. - Intergovernmental agreements. 
    For the provision of fire services, the town has entered into an intergovernmental agreement with Fayette County, Georgia. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-90; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-11. 
Sec. 101-64. - Private agreements. 
(a)  The town may require a developer to construct reasonable project improvements in conjunction with a development project. 
(b)  Private agreements may exist between property owners or developers and the town with regard to the construction or installation of system improvements in providing for credits or reimbursements for system improvement costs incurred by a developer including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project. 
(c)  A private agreement may include, but shall not be limited to provisions which: 
(1)  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of development impact fees, provided that any such agreement allows the town to assess additional development impact fees after completion of construction according to the schedule set forth in this article; 
(2)  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which a development impact fee would be imposed in lieu of, or with a credit against, applicable development impact fees; 
(3)  Permit a schedule and method of payment of imposed development impact fees in a manner appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this article, provided that security acceptable to the town is posted insuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security which may be acceptable to the town include a cash bond, a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, negotiable certificate of deposit or escrow account or lien or mortgage on land to be covered by the building permit. 
(d)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the town administrator for review, negotiation and submission to the mayor and council. Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the board of commissioners prior to the issuance of a building permit. Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lienholders or contract purchasers in addition to the land owner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of the superior court of the county for recording. The mayor and council shall approve such agreement only if it finds that the agreement will apportion the burden of expenditure for new facilities proportionately, consistent with the principles set forth in O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 71 (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq.) and this article. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-91; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-13. 
Sec. 101-65. - Imposition of development impact fees. 
(a)  Any person who engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article shall not be subject to development impact fees, so long as the building permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the development impact fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(d)  Development impact fees for stormwater collection, retention, detention, treatment and disposal facilities, flood control facilities, and bank and shore protection and enhancement improvements shall be collected at the time of issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-83; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
State Law reference- Development impact fees authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-3. 
Sec. 101-66. - Calculation of development impact fees. 
(a)  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this article shall not exceed a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements. 
(b)  Development impact fees shall be calculated and imposed on the basis of service areas as provided in the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Development impact fees shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities adopted in the comprehensive plan that are applicable to existing development as well as to new growth and development. 
(d)  To determine the development impact fee for a residential dwelling unit or for a single nonresidential building or structure with a known use, see the impact fee schedule in Attachment A of the ordinance codified in this article. For a single nonresidential building or structure with an unknown use, or for a nonresidential building or structure with multiple units, the zoning of the parcel will determine the development impact fee by establishment type. (See Attachment A). 
(e)  The following types of development are not subject to the imposition of a development impact fee: 
(1)  Rebuilding of a residential dwelling unit on the same parcel; 
(2)  Rebuilding of a nonresidential building or structure so long as the number of nonresidential buildings or structures is not increased; 
(3)  The construction of an accessory structure which is allowed per the town zoning ordinance; 
(4)  The expansion of a residential dwelling which does not increase the number of dwelling units; and 
(5)  The expansion of a nonresidential building or structure. 
(f)  Individual assessments of development impact fees are permitted at the option of applicants for development approval under guidelines established in this article. (See section 101-67). 
(g)  A developer may receive certification of the development impact fee schedule or individual assessment for a particular project which shall establish the development impact fee for a period of 180 days from the date of certification. 
(h)  The developer shall have the right to elect to pay a project's proportionate share of system improvement costs by payment of development impact fees according to the fee schedule as full and complete payment of the development project's proportionate share of system improvement costs. 
(i)  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs. 
(j)  Development impact fees shall be calculated on a basis which is net of credits for the present value of revenues that will be generated by new growth and development based on historical funding patterns and that are anticipated to be available to pay for system improvements, including taxes, assessments, user fees, and intergovernmental transfers. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-84; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-4. 
Sec. 101-67. - Individual assessment determination. 
    Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
(1)  In the event that a developer elects an individual assessment, the developer shall submit an individual assessment study. Any such study is to be presented to the county administrator. If the county administrator finds that the data, information, and assumptions used in such an individual assessment study satisfy the requirements of this article, then that study shall be used to calculate the individual assessment for that project. 
(2)  Each individual assessment study must: 
a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source, or engineering or planning data; 
b.  Be based on actual, relevant and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in the Atlanta Metropolitan Statistical Area carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and 
c.  Be based on any other specifications required in this article. 
(3)  Any fee calculated in accordance with this provision shall have standing for 180 days following the date of a formal response from the town administrator to the applicant. Following such a period, a new application must be made. 
(4)  A determination by the town administrator that any individual assessment study does not satisfy the requirements of this article may be appealed by the applicant to the mayor and council subject to the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in section 101-62 (Appeals). 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-85; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
Sec. 101-68. - Credits. 
(a)  In the calculation of development impact fees for a particular project, credits shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution, dedication of land, or money required or accepted by the town from a developer, or his predecessor in title or interest, for system improvements of the category for which the development impact fee is being collected. Credits shall not be given for project improvements. 
(b)  In the event a building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the development impact fee against future development impact fees for the same parcel of land. 
(c)  Credits under subsection (a) of this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
(1)  For the present value of the construction of any system improvements required or accepted, in conjunction with the project for which approval is being sought, by the town from the developer or predecessor in title or interest for the category of system improvements in the service area for which the development impact fee is being collected, the developer must present evidence of the costs and age of the improvement from which present value may be calculated using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent) as estimates of inflation and depreciation. 
(2)  For the present value of any contribution or dedication of land required or accepted for system improvements, in conjunction with the project for which approval is being sought by the town from the developer or predecessor in title or interest for the category of system improvements in the service area for which the development impact fee is being collected, the value for contributed land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the current validated town tax appraisal at the time of dedication; present value shall be calculated from the time of dedication using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent). 
(3)  For the present value of any contribution or dedication of money required or accepted, in conjunction with the project for which approval is being sought, by the town from the developer or predecessor in title or interest for the system improvements in the service area for which the development impact fee is being collected, the value of contributed money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution or dedication; present value shall be calculated from time of contribution or dedication using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent). 
(d)  Upon submission of adequate evidence that a development impact fee was previously paid and that the building permit has expired, credit for the present value of the development impact fee shall be in the amount of the development impact fee paid, inflated from the date of payments using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent), and shall be applied against that parcel of land. Should the development impact fee be less than the amount credited under the circumstances previously mentioned herein, the excess credit shall remain with the town. Should the development impact fee be greater than the amount credited, under the circumstances previously mentioned, the developer shall pay the difference to the town. 
(e)  In the event that a developer enters into an agreement with the town to construct, fund or contribute system improvements such that the amount of credit created by such construction, funding or contribution exceeds the development impact fee calculated for the project, the developer shall be compensated for such excess contribution by the town or, at the town's option, from development impact fees paid by other developments located in the service area benefited by such improvements. 
(f)  The present value of any such construction or contribution shall be established by: 
(1)  Use of documented prices actually paid by the developer for the system improvements with such prices inflated by use of the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent); 
(2)  Use of documented prices which would have been paid by the town for such system improvements with such prices inflated by use of the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent), whichever is less. 
The town is under no obligation to make immediate compensation, but will make compensation if funds are available. 
(g)  Except as provided in subsection (f) of this section, no credits shall be given for construction, contribution or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article nor shall credit be given for system improvements or funds for system improvements constructed, contributed or dedicated after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article if an agreement to do so was entered into before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article for projects which have already received a building permit. 
(h)  In the event that a feepayor has, under previously established conditions of zoning, constructed, contributed or dedicated system improvements or funds when receiving permits to proceed with only a portion or phase of a project as defined by a particular zoning case, where the construction, contribution or dedication is in excess of that required by the portion or phase permitted, the excess construction, contribution or dedication shall be credited against future development impact fees which shall be required as additional portions or phases of the zoned projects seeking building permits. 
(i)  The developer must present adequate evidence of the cost and age of the improvement from which present value may be calculated using the Bloomberg AAA GO Municipal Bond Yield Index (or equivalent) estimates of inflation and depreciation. 
(j)  Credits required under subsection (b) of this section shall be automatically given at the time of fee imposition. Any other credits shall be given only upon request by the developer to the town administrator. To receive consideration for such other credits, a developer must present adequate evidence or proposals for creditable activities and adequate evidence of value to the town administrator at or before the time of application for a building permit. 
(k)  The town administrator shall review all claims for allowance and valuation of credits and make determinations regarding: 
(1)  Allowance of any claimed credit; 
(2)  Value of any allowed credit. 
(l)  Any credits shall be acknowledged in writing and calculated at the time of imposition of the development impact fee. A developer may appeal any such determination by following the guidelines established in section 101-62 (Appeals). 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-86; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-71-7. 
Sec. 101-69. - Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
    The town administrator shall prepare an annual report describing the amount of any development impact fees collected during the preceding year by category of public facility and service area. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-87; Ord. No. 399, 5-1-2001) 
Chapter 103 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Building and housing, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 103-1-103-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State building codes, § 8-2-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 103-19. - Mandatory state codes adopted. 
    The standards enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)-(VIII), which standards are mandatory pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a), are hereby adopted. 
Sec. 103-20. - Permit and inspection fees. 
    Permit and inspection fees for the standard adopted in this chapter shall be as established by the town. 
Sec. 103-21. - Minimum penalty for violation. 
    In addition to the penalty provided for violation of this chapter, the business license and/or occupational tax certificate of the permit holder shall be suspended for a minimum of 90 days, during which period no further permits shall be issued and all work under previously issued permits shall cease. In the event that the permit holder does not have a business license and/or occupation tax certificate from the town, then the permit holder shall be suspended for a minimum of 90 days, during which period no further permits shall be issued or inspections performed on work performed by the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 422, § 1, 5-1-2002) 
Secs. 103-22-103-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONSERVATION STANDARDS FOR PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Water conservation standards for plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 103-46. - Enforcement authority; citations. 
    This chapter shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-8-6) 
Secs. 103-47-103-65. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Provisions Effective Until July 1, 2012 

Sec. 103-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
    Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucets, showerheads, toilets or urinals in an existing building. 
    Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Code 1984, § 6-8-1) 
Sec. 103-67. - Repeal of provisions. 
    The provisions of this division are effective only until July 1, 2012, and are repealed on July 1, 2012. 
Sec. 103-68. - Residential construction. 
    On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the town for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Code 1984, § 6-8-2) 
Sec. 103-69. - Commercial construction. 
    On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the town for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of section 103-68(1) through (5). 
(Code 1984, § 6-8-3) 
Sec. 103-70. - Applicability to additions, repairs and renovations. 
    The requirements of section 103-68 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers, or both. 
(Code 1984, § 6-8-4) 
Sec. 103-71. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 103-68, 103-69 and 103-70 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this chapter were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately or by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the town. A fee of $35.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Code 1984, § 6-8-5) 
Secs. 103-72-103-100. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Provisions Effective July 1, 2012 

Sec. 103-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
    Lavatory faucet means a faucet that discharges into a lavatory basin in a domestic or commercial installation. 
    Plumbing fixture means a device that receives water, waste, or both and discharges the water, waste, or both into a drainage system. The term includes a kitchen sink, utility sink, lavatory, bidet, bathtub, shower, urinal, toilet, water closet, or drinking water fountain. 
    Plumbing fixture fitting means a device that controls and directs the flow of water. The term includes a sink faucet, lavatory faucet, showerhead, or bath filler. 
    Pressurized flushing device means a device that contains a valve that: 
(1)  Is attached to a pressurized water supply pipe that is of sufficient size to deliver water at the necessary rate of flow to ensure flushing when the valve is open; and 
(2)  Opens on actuation to allow water to flow into the fixture at a rate and in a quantity necessary for the operation of the fixture and gradually closes to avoid water hammer. 
    Toilet means a water closet. 
    Water closet means a fixture with a water-containing receptor that receives liquid and solid body waste and on actuation conveys the waste through an exposed integral trap into a drainage system and which is also referred to as a toilet. 
    WaterSensem means a voluntary program of the United States Environmental Protection Agency designed to identify and promote water efficient products and practices. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3(b). 
Sec. 103-102. - Effective date. 
    The provisions of this division are effective on and after July 1, 2012. 
Sec. 103-103. - Other state standards. 
    In the event that the state promulgates additional standards pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3, such additional standards shall apply. 
Sec. 103-104. - Standards generally. 
    In the event that the state promulgates more stringent standards pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3 that conflict with the provisions of this section, such state standards shall control and be deemed to be incorporated into this section. In the event that the state promulgates additional standards pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3 not provided for in this section, such standards shall be deemed to be incorporated into this section. No construction may be initiated within the town for any building of any type that contain plumbing that does not comply with the following: 
(1)  A water closet or toilet that: 
a.  Is a dual flush water closet that complies with the following: 
1.  The average flush volume of two reduced flushes and one full flush may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
2.  The toilet performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the following standards, as applicable: 
(i)  American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2-2008; and 
(ii)  American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.14-2006 "Six-Liter Water Closets Equipped with a Dual Flushing Device"; and 
3.  Is listed to the WaterSensem Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; or 
b.  Is a single flush water closet, including gravity, pressure assisted, and electro-hydraulic tank types, that meets the following standards: 
1.  The average flush volume may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
2.  The toilet performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.192/CSA B45.1 or A112.19.14; and 
3.  Is listed to the WaterSensem Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; 
(2)  A shower head that allows a flow of no more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  A urinal and associated flush valve that: 
a.  Uses no more than 0.5 gallons of water per flush; 
b.  Meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2/CSA B45.1; 
c.  For flushing urinals, meets all WaterSensem specifications for flushing urinals; and 
d.  If a nonwater urinal, complies with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.3/CSA B45.4 or American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.19/CSA B45.4. Nonwater urinals shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions after installation. Where nonwater urinals are installed they shall have a water distribution line roughed-in to the urinal location at a minimum height of 56 inches (1,422 mm) to allow for the installation of an approved backflow prevention device in the event of a retrofit. Such water distribution lines shall be installed with shut-off valves located as close as possible to the distributing main to prevent the creation of dead ends. Where nonwater urinals are installed, a minimum of one water supplied fixture rated at a minimum of one water supply fixture unit shall be installed upstream on the same drain line to facilitate drain line flow and rinsing; 
(4)  A lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 1.5 gallons of water per minute at a pressure of 60 pounds per square inch in accordance with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.18.1/CSA B.125.1 and listed to the WaterSensem High-Efficiency Lavatory Faucet Specification; and 
(5)  A kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3(c). 
Sec. 103-105. - Exemption. 
    The provisions of section 103-104 do not apply to new construction and to the repair or renovation of an existing building, under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets, or shower heads within such existing building; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets, or shower heads required by this division were installed; 
(3)  When such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  When units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
State Law reference- Exemption authorized, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3(e). 
Chapter 105 - ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 105-1. - Wetlands Protection District. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  The wetlands in the town are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality, maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the state. 
(2)  Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
(3)  The purpose of this section is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the Town of Tyrone, Georgia. 
    Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
    Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1344, as amended. 
    Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States, excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act. 
    Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(c)  Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
(1)  The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the town that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps. This map shall be referred to as the "generalized wetlands map" and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this section, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
(2)  The generalized wetlands map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the town and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this section does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(d)  Protection criteria; requirement for local permit or permission. No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the town. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the [building official or authorized local government representative] using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(e)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations, provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual permit 404 permit. However, under section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances: 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would required an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed, and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(f)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills; 
(3)  Any other uses either not otherwise specifically permitted or allowed under other provisions of the zoning ordinance or the development standards of the town. 
(g)  Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(1)  Site plans. Application for a local development permit within the wetlands protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
a.  A map of all planned excavation and fill including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
b.  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
c.  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
d.  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
e.  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet, and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
f.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
g.  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(2)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specification of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, or result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed can be amended only with the approval of the building official or designated appointee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structure and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions, are exempted from this requirement. 
(3)  Exemption to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
a.  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
b.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
c.  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(4)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the town manager (or the town manager's designee; hereinafter the term "town manager" shall include any designee) and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the town. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the town manager. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the town manager. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the town manager. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the town manager may be appealed to the mayor and town council. 
(5)  Duration of permit validity. 
a.  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
b.  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
c.  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the town manager. 
(6)  Penalties. 
a.  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the town manager. 
b.  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the town manager. 
c.  If the town manager discovers a violation of this section that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the town council shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(7)  Suspension, revocation. The town manager may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The town manager shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(8)  Judicial review. 
a.  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the town council concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable by writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county. 
b.  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the superior court of the county, the town, or its designee may, within the time specified by the superior court of the county, elect to: 
1.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
2.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
3.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the mayor and council. 
(9)  Amendments. These regulations and the generalized wetlands map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(10)  Relief assessment. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Code 1984, § 6-1-31; Ord. No. 395, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 105-2. - Water Supply Watershed Protection District. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the town and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted development. Land-disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport, and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
(2)  The purpose of this section is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of the town, to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply, and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This section shall apply to all existing and proposed water supply watersheds within the town. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land-disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas, located adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
    Corridor means all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed and within other setback areas specified in subsection (d) of this section. 
    Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
    Large water supply watershed means a watershed containing 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
    Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a U.S. Geodetic Survey quad map. 
    Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
    Small water supply watershed means a watershed that contains less than 100 square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
    Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
    Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers. 
    Water supply/watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
(c)  Establishment of a water supply watershed district. 
(1)  The Line Creek and Flat Creek Water Supply Watershed Districts are hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to Line Creek and Flat Creek respectively. The boundaries of these overlays are defined by the ridgelines of the respective watersheds and the boundary of a radius of seven miles upstream of the respective public water supply intakes or reservoirs. These overlays shall be further delineated and defined on the water supply watershed protection district overlay map of the town. The map is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this section by reference. 
(2)  The following water supply watershed districts and reservoirs are hereby defined and the boundaries shall be identified on the water supply watershed district overlay map: 
a.  Line Creek is a small water supply watershed. An intake for Fayette County, Georgia, is located on this creek in Peachtree City, Fayette County, Georgia, and an intake for the city of Newnan, Coweta County, Georgia, is located on this creek in unincorporated Coweta County, Georgia. There is no reservoir on Line Creek. Both Fayette County, Georgia, and Coweta County, Georgia, and Peachtree City, Georgia, have enacted water supply watershed protection ordinances. 
b.  Flat Creek is a small water supply watershed. There are two reservoirs located on Flat Creek, Lake Kedron and Lake Peachtree. An intake for Fayette County is located on Flat Creek in Peachtree City, Fayette County, Georgia. Both Fayette County, Georgia, and Peachtree City, Georgia, have enacted water supply watershed protection ordinances. 
(d)  Protection criteria. 
(1)  The following regulations shall apply to both the Line Creek and Flat Creek water supply watershed; each is identified on the adopted map as a small water supply watershed. 
a.  The corridors of all perennial streams within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir must be protected by the following criteria: 
1.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the 150-foot setback area as described in subsection (b)(1)a.2 of this section. 
b.  The corridors of all perennial streams outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir must be protected by the following criteria: 
1.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the 75-foot setback area as described in subsection (b)(1)b.2 of this section. 
c.  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to 25 percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
d.  New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks), and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the International Fire Code. 
(2)  The following regulations shall apply to the Flat Creek Water Supply Watershed identified on the adopted map as a small water supply watershed with reservoirs known as Lake Kedron and Lake Peachtree. 
a.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 150 feet from the reservoir boundary. The allowable buffer vegetation and disturbance is specified in the reservoir management plan. 
b.  Lake Kedron is owned by Fayette County, Georgia, and will be protected as described in the Lake Kedron reservoir management plan. 
c.  Lake Peachtree is owned by Peachtree City, Georgia, and will be protected as described in the Lake Peachtree reservoir management plan. 
(e)  Exemptions. The following uses shall be exempted: 
(1)  Land uses existing prior to the adoption of this section. 
(2)  Mining activities permitted by the department of natural resources under the Surface Mining Act. 
(3)  Utilities, from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions in accordance with the following conditions, if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas: 
a.  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible. 
b.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
c.  The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(4)  Specific forestry and agricultural activities in the stream corridor buffer and setback areas in accordance with the following conditions: 
a.  The activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state forestry commission or the state department of agriculture. 
b.  The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
(f)  Administration and enforcement. 
(1)  Site plans. Application for a local development permit within the water supply watersheds protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet, with the following information: 
a.  A map of all planned excavations and fills including calculations of the volumes of cut and fill involved, and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
b.  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
c.  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
d.  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
e.  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet, and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
f.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
g.  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(2)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, or result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed can be amended only with the approval of the building official or designated appointee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(3)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans. 
a.  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
b.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
c.  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(4)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the town manager (or the town manager's designee; hereinafter "town manager" shall include any designee) and will be reviewed within 15 days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the town. Filing fees up to the larger of $500.00 or $100.00 per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the town manager. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the town manager. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the town manager. If the review process is not completed within 30 days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the town manager may be appealed to the mayor and town council. 
(5)  Duration of permit validity. 
a.  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
b.  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
c.  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the town manager. 
(6)  Penalties. 
a.  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the town manager. 
b.  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the town manager. 
c.  If the town manager discovers a violation of this section that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the town council shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(7)  Suspension, revocation. The town manager may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The town manager shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(8)  Judicial review. 
a.  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the mayor and town council concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable by writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county. 
b.  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the superior court of the county, or the town, or its designee may, within the time specified by the superior court of the county, elect to: 
1.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
2.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
3.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the mayor and town council. 
(9)  Amendments. These regulations and the water supply watershed protection district overlay map may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(10)  Relief assessment. Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Code 1984, § 6-1-33; Ord. No. 395, 11-16-2000) 
Secs. 105-3-105-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 

Sec. 105-23. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aquifer means any stratum (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
    Groundwater recharge area (synonymous with aquifer recharge area) means an area of the earth's surface where water infiltrates the ground, thereby replenishing the groundwater supplies within an aquifer. 
    Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations or pollution generated by other human activities. 
    Pollution susceptibility maps means maps prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that show the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
    Significant groundwater recharge areas means areas mapped by DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of the rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of "karst" topography (sinkholes, caves and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks), and potentiometric surfaces. 
(Code 1984, § 6-4-202; Ord. No. 379, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 105-24. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the town council concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of development plans, building permits, or cease and desist orders may be reviewable in the county superior court, but only after exhaustion of the administrative remedies provided. 
(b)  Alternative actions. Based upon judicial proceedings or the decision of the court, the town council may: 
(1)  Institute negotiations to settle or compromise the pending judicial proceedings; 
(2)  Approve the development plan application with lesser restrictions or conditions; or 
(3)  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-4-206; Ord. No. 379, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 105-25. - Title, findings and objectives. 
(a)  Title of article. This article shall be known as the "Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance of the Town of Tyrone, Georgia." 
(b)  Finding of fact. 
(1)  In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the town, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that the town relies on as a source of public water. Groundwater resources are contained within aquifers, which are permeable rock strata occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. 
(2)  Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(c)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
(2)  Protect groundwater quality by limiting density of development; and 
(3)  Protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. 
(Code 1984, § 6-4-201; Ord. No. 379, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 105-26. - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district. 
    A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the town that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the state department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. 
(Code 1984, § 6-4-202; Ord. No. 379, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 105-27. - Determination of pollution susceptibility. 
    Each recharge area shall be designated as having a pollution susceptibility of high, medium or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map prepared by the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1984, § 6-4-203; Ord. No. 379, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 105-28. - Permit requirements and enforcement. 
    The town will approve no building permit, rezoning request or subdivision plat unless the permit, request or plat is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards provided in this article: 
(1)  Enforcement. The town, its agents, officers and employees shall have the authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the town deems necessary. 
a.  The town manager (or the town manager's designee; hereafter "town manager" shall include any designee) is hereby designated as the administrator and enforcement officer for this article. 
b.  The town manager shall have the authority to enforce this article, issue permits hereunder, and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation, notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as civil damages against the violator. 
c.  Law enforcement officials or other town officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the town manager in enforcement. 
d.  Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provisions of this article shall be fined and/or imprisoned up to the maximum sanction authorized by the town's Charter. 
e.  The town manager shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to the town council. 
f.  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to remove the structure. 
g.  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(2)  Building permit review requirement. With the exception of building permit applications made pursuant to and compliant with a development plan previously approved pursuant to this article, building permit applications for work within the groundwater recharge area district shall include the following additional information specific to developments in groundwater recharge area, to wit: 
a.  Site plan. A map or maps, drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet, showing all planned improvements including all structures, roads, watercourses and drainageways shall be provided by the applicant. Site plans must include the name of the owner and/or developer, lot lines with dimensions, building footprints with dimensions, rights-of-way, building setback lines, buffers, parking areas and driveways, landscaping areas and tree protection areas. If the graphic representation of the proposed activities occupies more than one page, a general location map drawn at a larger scale showing the entire site is required. 
b.  Grading and utility plan. This map, or set of maps, must include the basic elements of the site plan and show water lines, wastewater and stormwater facilities, and all other utility installations. The grading and utility plan must also show the orientation and distance from the boundaries of the site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. Existing and proposed elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet must be included. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross-sectional drawings. The grading and utility plan must also include the location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(3)  Development plan review and requirements. With the exception of certain exempted activities identified in subsection (4) of this section, applications for a development plan review within the groundwater recharge area district shall include a full set of development plans containing the usual required information plus additional information specific to developments in groundwater recharge areas, to wit: 
a.  Site plan. A map or maps, drawn to a scale no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet, showing all planned improvements including all existing and proposed structures, roads, watercourses and drainageways shall be provided by the applicant. Site plans must include the name of the owner and/or developer, lot lines with dimensions, building footprints with dimensions, rights-of-way, building setback lines, buffers, parking areas and driveways, landscaping areas and tree protection areas. If the graphic representation of the proposed activities occupies more than one page, a general location map drawn at a larger scale showing the entire site is required. 
b.  Soil erosion sediment control plan. 
c.  Grading and utility plan. This map, or set of maps, must include the basic elements of the site plan and show water lines, wastewater and stormwater facilities, and all other utility installations. The grading and utility plan must also show the orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. Existing and proposed elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet must be included. Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation must be included. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross-sectional drawings. The grading and utility plan must also include the location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
d.  Tree protection plan. This map, or set of maps, must include the basic elements of the site plan, list and label all existing trees on-site by species and diameter, show which trees will be saved and which trees will be removed, and show calculations that indicate how the tree savings requirements of article V of this chapter will be met. 
e.  Landscape plan. This one-page map must include the basic elements of the site plan, an impervious surface calculation for proposed development must be shown, a calculation for required landscaping must be shown, a plant list including species and size must be included, and the proposed locations for each plant must be shown. 
f.  Detail sheets for soil erosion sediment control facilities, stormwater management facilities, and utility profiles must be included. 
g.  Building elevations including material and color samples must be submitted. 
h.  Activities must comply with the approved development plans. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the development plans shall conform to the specifications of said development plans. Significant changes to the development plans that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of the development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed can be amended only with the approval of the town planner. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(4)  Exemptions to development plan review requirements. The following activities are exempt from development plan review requirements: 
a.  A single-family detached home constructed which is not part of a subdivision. 
b.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development, if the exterior of the building remains unchanged. 
c.  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(5)  Review period. The application shall be made to the town planner and will be reviewed through the standard plan review process. The review period shall include the preparation of staff comments, the opportunity for the applicant to submit revised plans, a planning and zoning commission work session, and the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions or disapproval) by the planning and zoning commission at the regularly scheduled monthly meeting. The applicant must be present at both the planning and zoning commission work session and meeting. Decisions of the planning and zoning commission may be appealed to the town council. 
(6)  Public notice and public hearing. 
a.  A public hearing on an application for development plan review (within the groundwater recharge area district) shall be held before the planning and zoning commission at a regularly scheduled monthly meeting. Public notice of the application and of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least 15 days prior to the public hearing. Minutes of the public hearing shall be made and maintained by the town. Any interested person with relevant material and reliable information may speak for a reasonable period of time at the hearing. Decisions of the planning and zoning commission on the application may be appealed to the town council. 
b.  Public notice of the filing of applications for a building permit described at subsection (2) of this section shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least 15 days prior to the decision to grant or deny the permit, notifying the public that any resident of the town may file an objection to the permit application if said application is contrary to the groundwater protection standards of this article. Written notice of objection shall be filed with the town manager within said 15 days. A valid request shall result in a public hearing and notice pursuant to subsection (6)a of this section. 
(7)  Duration of planning commission approval of development plans and building permit. 
a.  Building permits may be issued ten days after development plans are approved by the planning commission and no appeal is filed. 
b.  Building plans must exactly match the development plans approved by the planning commission. No building permits shall be issued unless the building plans and development plans exactly match. 
c.  If construction described in the development plans has not commenced within 24 months from the date of approval, the planning commission approval shall expire. 
d.  If construction described in the building plans has not commenced within six months from the issuance of the building permit, the permit shall expire. 
e.  The town manager may issue written notice of pending expiration of the building permit. 
(Code 1984, § 6-4-204; Ord. No. 379, 6-4-2001) 
Sec. 105-29. - Groundwater protection standards. 
(a)  For all pollution susceptibility areas, new waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(b)  New agricultural impoundments shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  For areas of high susceptibility, a liner shall be provided that is approved by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service (SCS). 
(2)  For areas of medium susceptibility, an SCS-approved liner shall be provided if the site exceeds 15 acres. 
(3)  For areas of low susceptibility, an SCS-approved liner shall be provided if the site exceeds 50 acres. 
(c)  No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. 
(d)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas, the handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials shall take place on an impermeable surface having spill and leak protection approved by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division (EPD). 
(e)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas, new aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks or cluster of tanks totaling more than 650 gallons must have the secondary containment for 110 percent of the tanks' volume. 
(f)  For high pollution susceptibility areas, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner approved by EPD and the county health department. 
(g)  For high pollution susceptibility areas, no new stormwater infiltration basins may be constructed. 
(h)  For high pollution susceptibility areas, wastewater spray irrigation systems or the land spreading of wastewater sludge shall be practiced in accordance with department of natural resources criteria for slow-rate land treatment. An application for development plans for activities involving wastewater spray irrigation or land spreading of wastewater sludge must be accompanied by proof that the applicant has received a land application system permit from EPD. 
(i)  Minimum lot size and septic systems. New homes served by septic tank/drain systems outside of the groundwater recharge area shall have a lot area of not less than 43,560 square feet, regardless of the zoning district classification. New homes served by septic tank/drain systems located in the groundwater recharge area shall conform to minimum lot size requirements identified below: 
Table 1. Minimum Lot Size Requirements* 
Pollution 
Susceptibility Any New Homes Served By Septic Systems High 65,340 square feet minimum lot size Medium 54,450 square feet minimum lot size Low 47,916 square feet minimum lot size  
*Source: DHR Manual for On-Site Sewerage Management Systems. 
(j)  No new mobile home parks shall be allowed on septic systems. 
(k)  The county environmental health department shall first approve any septic system prior to the issuance of a building permit for a building or mobile home. 
(Code 1984, § 6-4-205; Ord. No. 379, 6-4-2001) 
Secs. 105-30-105-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local ordinances regulating land-disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

Sec. 105-47. - Short title. 
    This article will be known as "Town of Tyrone Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 10-01, 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 105-48. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means and includes sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Commission (see definition) as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
    Board means the Board of Natural Resources. 
    Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
    Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
    CPESC means Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
    Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
    Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
    Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying, or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
    Director means the Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
    District means the Towaliga Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Division means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
    Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
    Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 105-57. 
    Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
    Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
    Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 105-56(5). 
    Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
    Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
    Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
    Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation, filling, or other land-disturbing activity. 
    Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
    NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
    NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
    Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
    Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
    Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
    Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
    Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Towaliga Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
    State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
    Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, chapter 391-3-6, at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
    Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 10-03, 7-1-2010; Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, 10-6-2016) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3. 
Sec. 105-49. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining a required permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  Whenever the issuing authority has reason to believe that a violation of this article, or the provisions of any permit issued pursuant to this article, has occurred, the issuing authority may require that the land-disturbing activity be stopped until necessary corrective action and mitigation have been taken and may require that necessary corrective action and mitigation be taken within a reasonable time. For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that all land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state, or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters, and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one. The local issuing authority may cause the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 10-08, 7-1-2010) 
State Law reference- Enforcement and penalties, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-12 et seq. 
Sec. 105-50. - Findings and intent. 
    It is hereby found that soil erosion and sediment deposition are occurring as a result of widespread failure to apply proper soil erosion and sedimentation control practices in land clearing, soil movement, and construction activities, and that such erosion and sediment deposition result in pollution of water and damage to domestic, agricultural, recreational, fish, wildlife, and other resource uses. It is, therefore, declared to be the policy of this town and the intent of this section to provide for the establishment and implementation of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures to conserve and protect land and water resources, in accordance with the requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (H.B. No. 174, 1975 Session, General Assembly of Georgia), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 10-02, 7-1-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-2. 
Sec. 105-51. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The town staff will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The town staff shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The districts or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as an issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 10-07, 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 105-52. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible in charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and who meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-15(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 10-09, 7-1-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Sec. 105-53. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § IV, 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 105-54. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the town without first obtaining a permit from the town to perform such activity and providing a copy of the notice of intent submitted to the EPD, if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the town and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. of this ordinance. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD rule 391-3-7-10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5); provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land-disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division, except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the town shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the town to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the town, and any variances required have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required, has been obtained. The town shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the town with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits (either in this or any other jurisdiction), this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of a government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 105-57 or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for the site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary, and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article; any variances required are obtained; bonding requirements, if necessary, are met; and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons, and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit, and the maintenance obligations imposed thereon. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 10-06, 7-1-2010) 
Sec. 105-55. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the town manager within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 10-10, 7-1-2010) 
State Law reference- Permits, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 et seq. 
Sec. 105-56. - Exemptions from permitting requirements. 
    This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Minor land-disturbing activities. Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  Single-family residences. 
a.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this section; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this section. 
b.  For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this section, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 12, ch. 5, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 15-5-20 et seq.), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. 
1.  For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. 
2.  For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. 
Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations. Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, definitions, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management. Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 105-57(c)(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Natural Resource Conversation Service Projects. Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the state department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the state department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the State road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power, except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 10-04, 7-1-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
Sec. 105-57. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions of this section shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this subsection (b) and subsection (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or issuing authority or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section, or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection (b)(2) shall not apply to any land-disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection (c)(9), a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent properties and waters beyond the levels specified in this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented, or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection (15). The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; they cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 10-05, 7-1-2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6. 
Secs. 105-58-105-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 105-84. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Town of Tyrone, Georgia, Stream Buffer Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1(6-10-1), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 105-85. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base flow means the discharge that enters a stream channel mainly from groundwater, but also from lakes during periods when no precipitation occurs. 
    Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by section 105-88), lying adjacent to the stream. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan, i.e., the regulatory flood. 
    Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. The term "impervious cover" includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools, any concrete or asphalt including concrete or asphalt trails or walkways. 
    Intermittent stream means a stream that flows in a well-defined channel during wet seasons of the year, but not for the entire year. 
    Intrusions means land development activities within the setback not otherwise authorized by this article. 
    Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that does not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land-disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
    Normal stream flow for non-trout waters only means any stream flow that consists solely of base flow or consists of both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. Base flow results from groundwater that enters the stream channel through the soil. This includes spring flows into streams. Direct runoff is the water entering stream channels promptly after rainfalls or snow melts. 
    Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
    Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGS quadrant map. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the Town of Tyrone required for undertaking any land development activity. 
    Pervious surface means a manmade structure or natural surface that allows the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface. 
    Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
    Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
    Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
    Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by section 105-88 extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
    Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the town may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
    Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
    Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
    Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1(6-10-3), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 105-86. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the town manager or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the town manager or his designee by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the town manager or his designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the town manager or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(3)  Stop work order. The town manager or his designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The town manager or his designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(5)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The town manager or his designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein; provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the town manager or his designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(6)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days or such greater period as the town manager or his designee shall deem appropriate (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). After the town manager or his designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the town manager or his designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(7)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the town manager or his designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1(6-10-9), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 105-87. - Purposes and findings. 
(a)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the town for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(b)  Findings. The mayor and town council of the town find that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(5)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1(6-10-2), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 105-88. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 105-85. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law, and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
b.  Existing development and on-going land-disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land-disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval, or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
2.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
4.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
6.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically exempted above. 
c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this ordinance takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land-disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the (review and permitting authority) on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the review and permitting authority to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity of the town, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silviculture or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land-disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(b)  After the effective date of Ord. No. 504, this article shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 105-92(b). 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1(6-10-4), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 105-89. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
(a)  This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(b)  Specifically, the town's water supply watershed protection ordinance and wetlands protection district ordinance shall not be repealed by the adoption of this article and the requirements therein shall be in addition to the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1(6-10-5), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 105-90. - Responsibility. 
    Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof or with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the town, its officers or employees for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1(6-10-7), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 105-91. - Inspection. 
(a)  The town manager or his designee may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the town manager or his designee in making such inspections. The town shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1(6-10-8), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 105-92. - Land development requirements. 
(a)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)  Variance procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the town manager or his designee finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the mayor and town council of the town may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the mayor and town council of the town shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the mayor and town council shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the town. The town shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
(3)  Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances where strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the article would create an extreme hardship. 
(4)  Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(5)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(6)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment; 
g.  It is noted that Line Creek and Trickum Creek are of great significance to the county as drinking water sources. Therefore, this factor and its relationship to these two streams will be considered in all requests as to whether to grant a variance along either of these two streams. 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1(6-10-4), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 105-93. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the town manager or his designee, may appeal in writing within 14 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the mayor and town council and shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor and town council within 45 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the town manager or his designee, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1(6-10-10), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 105-94. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
(a)  Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the town manager or his designee may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
(b)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1(6-10-6), 6-7-2007) 
Sec. 105-95. - Septic tank and drain field location. 
    The sighting and location requirements of the county department of health shall govern the placement of a septic and drain field on any lot within the town not served by public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 504, § 1(6-10-11), 6-7-2007) 
Secs. 105-96-105-118. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VEGETATION, TREE PROTECTION AND LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-119. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person seeking approval to take action under this article and chapter 109. 
    Basal area means the cross sectional area of a tree trunk at diameter breast height (dbh) expressed herein as units per acre. 
    Buffer means a natural or planted landscaped area intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of adjacent land uses from one another or from a public right-of-way or for purposes of noise reduction and interrupting vision. 
    Buildable area means the area of a lot that is outside the minimum required front, side or rear yard and which is not subject to the open space requirements or other environmental restrictions of this article or other laws, codes or ordinances. 
    Caliper means a measure of the diameter of a tree trunk performed at a point on the tree six inches above the natural, adjacent grade for trees up to and including four-inch caliper, and 12 inches above the natural, adjacent grade for trees larger than four-inch caliper. The caliper of multiple-stemmed trees, such as crape myrtles, shall be the sum of the individual stem diameters. 
    Clearing means any activity which disturbs the vegetative cover of a parcel, including trees. 
    Coniferous tree or evergreen means any tree which retains its green foliage throughout the year. 
    Construction permit means a permit issued by the zoning administrator to allow initiation of any clearing, grubbing and/or grading. This permit is issued only following issuance of a land disturbance permit, and all erosion control and tree protection measures have been installed in accordance with an approved plan. 
    Critical root zone (CRZ) means the minimum area beneath a tree which must remain undisturbed during land development or construction activity to preserve a sufficient root mass which will afford a reasonable chance of tree survival. CRZ is defined by a circle with a diameter dimension equal in feet to 11/2 the trunk diameter in inches and centered on the tree's trunk. For example, the CRZ of a 20-inch diameter tree is 30 feet. 
    Crown means the upper portion of a tree comprised of branches and leaves. 
    Deciduous tree or broad-leafed tree means any tree which loses its leaves at the end of the growing season. 
    Density factor means a unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a site. The required site density standard for properties within the corporate limits of the town is 100 units per acre. 
    Development activity means any alteration of the natural environment which requires approval of a site plan, construction drawings or issuance of a development permit. Development activity shall also include the selective cutting, thinning or removal of trees from any undeveloped land, including that performed in revegetation. Re-establishment of trees and other landscape materials within the minimum required landscaped areas according to standards and provisions of this article as determined by the zoning ordinance or conditions of zoning approval. 
    Diameter breast height (dbh) means a standard measure of tree size performed at a height of 41/2 feet above the natural, adjacent grade. 
    Drip line means a vertical line extending from the outermost branches of a tree canopy to the ground. 
    Drip line area means the total area underneath a tree which would encompass all drip lines. 
    Shrub means a woody plant or bush, usually between one and six feet in height, and distinguished by multiple stems. 
    Site density standard means the minimum number of trees, measured in average tree density units per acre, that must be present on a lot following development and is not exempted from this article. 
    Softwood tree means any coniferous (cone-bearing) tree, such as pine, spruce, hemlock, cedar, etc. This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
    Specimen tree or stand means any tree or grouping of trees, which qualifies as being of high value because of its size, species, age, location or historical character. Designation of such trees may be initiated by the town manager, upon application by the zoning administrator or any other interested person. Such designation may occur only by resolution of the council. The zoning administrator shall maintain and file with the town clerk a complete listing of the location and identifying features of all specimen trees. General criteria for the determination of specimen trees are: 
(1)  Any deciduous tree with a diameter of 30 inches or greater. 
(2)  Any coniferous tree with a diameter of 24 inches or greater. 
(3)  Any understory tree with a diameter of ten inches or greater. 
(4)  Any tree with significant historical value, documented through historical records or otherwise. 
(5)  Any tree which is rare and unique. 
    Thinning means selective cutting or removal of timber. 
    Timber harvesting means the felling, loading and transportation of timber products (saw logs, pulpwood, etc.). The term "timber harvesting" may include both clear cutting and selective cutting of timber. 
    Tree means any self-supporting, woody perennial plant usually having a single trunk diameter of three inches or more which normally attains a mature minimum height of 15 feet. 
    Canopy trees are defined as any tree of greater or equal height and crown spread than surrounding trees. Examples include beech, hickory, maple, oak, pecan, pine and sycamore. 
    Understory trees are defined as any tree or woody plant of lesser height and crown spread than surrounding trees. Understory species generally reach a mature height of less than 40 feet. Examples include cherry, crabapple, dogwood, magnolia, pear, redbud, holly, sassafras, and red cedar. 
    Tree bank means an account of funds, maintained by the administration department of the town, contributed by developers as a alternate form of compliance. Funds from the tree bank are to be used solely for the purchase and planting of trees on public sites within the town as authorized by the town manager. 
    Tree destruction means any intentional or negligent act which will cause a tree to die within a period of two years, including but not limited to cutting or otherwise damaging the trunk, tools or other vital sections of the tree damage inflicted upon the root system of a tree by the application of toxic substances, damage caused by the operation of heavy machinery or change or natural grade by excavation or filling of the cover. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-120. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense. As a condition of suspension of any fine or sentence, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law which may include mandatory attendance at an educational program concerning tree preservation. Each day's continuance of a violation may be considered a separate offense. Each tree cut, damaged or poisoned shall constitute a separate offense. The owner of any property wherein a violation exists, and any architect, developer, builder, contractor, tenant or agent who commits or may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-032), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-121. - Purpose. 
(a)  The guiding presumption behind this article is the belief that the natural environment has significant value in and of itself, and that all reasonable measures available should be used in the preservation of that environment, consistent with the continued development of a viable town. The purpose of this article is to promote the preservation of existing tree canopy and tree specimen diversity within the town and preserve the aesthetic quality of land during and after development. Such preservation shall protect and enhance the town's urban greenery through tree protection and planting of trees and landscaping during land development of all property, public and private. Benefits associated with these regulations are reduced soil erosion, stormwater management costs and flooding potential; moderation of microclimates; improved air and water quality; mitigation of noise and glare; energy conservation through reduced heating and cooling costs; and enhanced property values. These benefits are heightened by the scenic and psychological values associated with the tree cover and are consistent with the town's emphasis on rural character. 
(b)  The town council, therefore, declares it to be public policy to: 
(1)  Aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by contributing to the process of air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, and stormwater runoff retardation, while at the same time aiding in noise, glare, and heat abatement; 
(2)  Assist in providing adequate light and air by preventing overcrowding of land; 
(3)  Provide visual buffering and enhance beautification of the town; 
(4)  Safeguard and attempt to enhance property values and, in so doing, protect private and public investment, 
(5)  Preserve, protect and further the unique identity and environment of the town, and, thereby, preserve the economic base attracted to the town by such factors; 
(6)  Recognize that the protection and enhancement of the natural beauty, environment, and greenspace within the town contributes to the economy, as well as provide a truly necessary aesthetic balance to the development of an urban setting; 
(7)  Conserve an ever-dwindling supply of energy, by the preservation and enhancement of the natural environment; 
(8)  Protect the atmosphere, lands, and water from pollution, impairment or unnecessary destruction; 
(9)  Protect natural vegetation except where its removal is necessary for responsible property development or control of disease and infestation. This article shall serve to dissuade the unnecessary clearing of land and its disturbance, so as to preserve, insofar as possible, the natural and existing growth of vegetation, and to replace whenever possible the removed foliage with new vegetation; 
(10)  Protect vegetation within the intermediate regional floodplain and for a minimum of ten feet from the banks of those streams not having defined intermediate regional floodplain elevation contours, so as to assist in the retention of stormwater runoff and the control of erosion, including particularly the protection of stream bank stability by vegetation protection or restoration; 
(11)  Preserve protected and "specimen" trees or stands of trees which are exceptional representatives of their species either in terms of size, age or unusual botanical quality, and encourage the good care of same through properly applied forestry practices; 
(12)  Protect and supplement existing vegetation within greenbelts, open space, recreation areas and protected area where feasible; 
(13)  Establish and maintain the maximum amount of tree cover on public and private property in the town by prohibiting destruction and removal of trees except in accordance with standards herein set forth as well as requiring the planting of trees on all development sites to achieve a specified minimum tree cove; 
(14)  Maintain trees in the town in a healthy and nonhazardous condition through adoption and enforcement of professional arboricultural practices; 
(15)  Establish, and revise as necessary, standards for planting and maintaining trees designed to improve the town's economic base by improving property values, enhancing the town's visual quality and its neighborhoods, and improving public health by reducing air pollution and the incidence of flooding; 
(16)  Structure a tree density calculation method that favors the preservation of existing trees as opposed to replanting with smaller nursery stock; and 
(17)  Strongly encourage the use of native plant materials to preserve the heritage of the town's natural beauty and promote best practices for water usage. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1101), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-122. - Applicability. 
    The terms and provisions of this article and these standards shall apply to any activity that requires issuance of a development permit on all public and private property within the town. No development permit or grading permit shall be issued until it is determined that the proposed development is in conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1102), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-123. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  So-called "grandfathered" projects, that is, any portion of a property included within the limits of a valid land disturbance permit issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, provided that all time constraints relating to the permit issued shall be observed. In no event shall any grandfathered project be extended for a time period greater than 12 months from the date of enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived; 
(2)  Removal of any dead, diseased, structurally unsound or infested tree trees which constitute a danger to human life or property as determined by the county extension service, the state forestry commission, a certified arborist, a registered forester or the town manager; 
(3)  Removal of trees, other than specimen trees, from an owner-occupied, single-family platted lot. Removal shall be limited to removal of no more than five trees per acre that are less than 24 inches in diameter within a single calendar year; 
(4)  All licensed plant or tree nurseries and farms shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this article only in relation to those trees which are planted and being grown for sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of business; 
(5)  Removal of trees from agricultural or horticultural properties such as farms, nurseries or orchards; 
(6)  Necessary removal of trees by a utility company within dedicated utility easements; 
(7)  Removal of trees on public rights-of-way conducted by, on behalf of, or for any activity to be dedicated to a federal, state, county, municipal or other government agency in pursuit of its lawful activities or functions in the construction or improvement of public rights-of-way, including public buildings, streets, drainage systems, recreational facilities and utilities; 
(8)  Removal of trees, other than specimen trees, from detention ponds and drainage easements; and 
(9)  Activities which require issuance of a building permit, but do not require or authorize land disturbance. 
(b)  None of the above exemptions shall be interpreted to include tree removal or timber harvesting incidental to the development of the land. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all reasonable efforts shall be made to save specimen trees. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-021), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-124. - Emergencies. 
    During the period of an emergency, such as a hurricane, wind storm, ice storm, flood or other natural disaster, the requirements of this article may be waived by the mayor, or other designated official, upon a finding that such waiver is necessary to the restoration of order in the town. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-030), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-125. - Prior permits; replacement of certain trees. 
(a)  Nothing herein shall be construed as repealing the conditions of use, operation, or site development accompanying building or development permits issued under previous ordinances or resolutions; provided further that modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished as authorized and provided by the requirements of this article. 
(b)  It could also be considered permissible to replace a removed tree with a number of smaller trees of the same species, provided the combination caliper measurements of the smaller trees is at least equal to the measurement of the protected or specimen tree which was removed. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-034), 5-1-2002) 
Secs. 105-126-105-148. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 105-149. - Enforcement; inspections. 
    The town manager shall enforce this article, and may withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or permits and inspections, for any development as required until the provisions of this article have been fully met. 
(1)  Pre-construction inspection. Prior to issuance of a permit for clearing, grubbing and grading, site development or road construction, the town engineer shall inspect all tree inspection devices for compliance with the approved plans. Failure to adhere to this article will subject the owner and/or developer to enforcement procedures provided in this article. 
(2)  Construction inspection. During construction, the town engineer will periodically inspect all projects to assure the adequacy of tree protection fencing. Failure to adhere to town standards for tree protection shall constitute ordinance noncompliance and shall subject the owner and/or developer to enforcement procedures provided in the tree preservation regulations. 
(3)  Final inspection. 
a.  Prior to the release of the project for final platting or certificate of occupancy, or other form of acceptance by the town, the town engineer shall inspect the project for compliance with all requirements of this article. Any disturbances in tree save areas or deficiencies in the required site density standard will be sited at this time. Tree save area disturbances and/or site density standard deficiencies must be corrected with new tree plantings prior to project release. 
b.  Existing trees which are not expected to survive will not be credited toward fulfilling site density standards. Conversely, any existing trees not shown to remain on plans but which have been preserved (meeting all tree preservation standards) through field adjustments, may be so credited, provided that all such adjustments are properly recorded on the approved plans on file at town hall. 
(4)  Maintenance inspection. 
a.  One full growing season following the date if inspection of newly-planted trees, the town engineer shall inspect all trees on the project site. Any trees planted to meet the required site density standard which are dead, or nearly dead, shall be replaced. Trees preserved to meet the required site density which are dead, or nearly dead, shall be replaced whenever the loss of such trees due to construction-related injury is evident. The owner of the project or property at the time of the maintenance inspection shall be responsible for compliance with this article. 
b.  Trees used to fulfill site density standards of this article shall be maintained for two years following the date of final approval of the project. The property owner shall maintain the required site density. The developer or builder shall be responsible for identifying newly planted trees to the homeowner or tenant, as well as informing the homeowner or tenant of proper tree maintenance procedures. 
c.  Any trees required to be replaced as a result of this inspection shall be planted within 30 days of receipt of notification by the current owner. New tree plantings may be postponed for up to six months by posting of a performance bond in the amount of 110 percent of the planting cost. Failure to plant new trees in accordance with the provisions of this article will constitute ordinance noncompliance, and may subject the owner to civil penalties. 
(5)  Issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
a.  All trees used to fulfill the site density standard shall be planted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy (C.O.). 
b.  Upon final installation of newly planted trees in compliance with this article, and following acceptance by the town manager, the owner shall warrant the new trees and provide for the replacement of those that do not survive for a minimum period of two years. 
c.  In the event that new trees proposed to be planted to achieve that site density standard are not installed upon application for a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval, as appropriate, a performance bond or other acceptable surety in an amount equal to 110 percent of the value of the new trees and their installation shall be posted in accordance with performance bonding requirements. The term of the bond shall not exceed one year. 
d.  An inspection of all tree plantings shall be made by the town engineer to assure compliance with plan requirements prior to release of the performance bond. The bond shall be drawn upon by the town at the time of expiration should any approved plan requirements not be fulfilled and the owner has not requested an extension. One six-month extension is permitted with documented justification. Any inspections performed after the final inspection for project release are subject to reinspection fee schedules. 
(6)  Restoration of disturbed tree save areas. Once a tree save area has been established through the plan approval process set forth in this article, any destruction of trees in that area must be remedied by planting new trees to restore the required site density or to achieve the intended effect of the buffer, as appropriate. 
(7)  Remedial care. Trees in tree save areas which have been adversely impacted by construction activities may be subject to remedial care. Remedial care will be performed at the discretion of town manager, and may include, but not be limited to, the following actions: 
a.  Tree pruning. 
b.  Soil aeration. 
c.  Fertilization. 
d.  Supplemental watering. 
(8)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by a decision of the town manager, town engineer or zoning administrator in the enforcement or interpretation of any of the terms or provisions of this article may appeal the decision to the planning commission. Such appeal shall be made by filing written notice thereof with the zoning administrator within a maximum of ten business days following the decision being appealed. 
(9)  Administrative variances. Front, side and rear yard seatbacks may be reduced by an amount not to exceed 50 percent where it is determined by the town manager to be necessary in order to preserve existing specimen or other significant trees. Appropriate conditions to said administrative variances shall be imposed so as to ensure the continued health of said trees following the granting of such variances, including mandatory replacement requirements. Such administrative variances shall be considered and decided consistent with the procedures and criteria contained in this article. Appeals of final decisions regarding administrative variances may be made to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-031), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-150. - Stop work orders. 
    Upon notice from the issuing authority, work on any project that is being performed contrary to the provisions of this article shall cease immediately. Such notice shall be in writing; shall state the specific violations; shall be given to the applicant, his authorized agent, or the person in charge of the activity on the subject property; and shall state the conditions under which work may resume. In the event of an emergency or threat to public health or safety, written notice shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-029), 5-1-2002) 
Secs. 105-151-105-168. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TREE REPLACEMENT PLANS 

Sec. 105-169. - Tree replacement plan documentation. 
(a)  Tree replacement plans shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect, registered forester, or certified arborist in accordance with specifications for such plans contained herein. Performance of professional services in preparation of plans required herein shall comply with state law governing the practice of the applicable profession. 
(b)  The tree replacement plan shall be shown on a site plan, as appropriate to the proposed development, drawn to the same scale as other plan documents prepared for a land disturbance permit application on the property, and shall cover the same area. 
(c)  Following submission of the plan, the town engineer will perform a site inspection. The tree replacement plan shall provide sufficient information and detail to clearly demonstrate that all applicable requirements and standards of this article will be fully satisfied. 
(d)  A tree replacement plan shall include the following information: 
(1)  All tree protection zones, and areas of re-vegetation. 
(2)  Approximate location of all specimen trees or stands of trees. 
(3)  Exact location of all specimen trees when their preservation is questionable, or might result in a change of site design. 
(4)  Indication of those specimen trees to be removed. Removal of specimen trees is subject to town manager approval. 
(5)  Limits of clearing and land disturbance such as grading, trenching, etc., where these disturbances may affect tree protection zones. 
(6)  Existing and proposed location of underground utilities or easements. 
(7)  Methods of tree protection shall be indicated for all tree protection zones, including but not limited to tree fencing, erosion control, retaining walls, tunneling for utilities, aeration systems, transplanting, staking, signs, etc. 
(8)  Staging areas for parking, material storage, concrete washout, and debris burn and burial holes where these areas might affect tree protection. 
(9)  Compliance to the required site density standard shall be demonstrated on the tree replacement plan. Existing trees or stands of trees used in the density calculation must be indicated. 
(10)  Ornamental replacement trees may not be used in site density calculations without prior approval from the town manager. 
(11)  Replacement trees used in density calculations must be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site. 
(12)  Planting schedule showing the type (common and botanical names), size and quantity of trees to be planted, and any special planting notes. 
(13)  The locations of all trees to be planted on the site to meet density standards. 
(14)  Indication of the type of irrigation to be used. 
(15)  Additional information as required by the town manager. 
(e)  The following notes shall also be shown on the tree replacement plan: 
Tree replacement notes: 
COMPLIANCE WITH SITE DENSITY STANDARDS SHOWN ON THE TREE REPLACEMENT PLAN MUST BE VERIFIED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF THE CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR ACCEPTANCE OF THE PROJECT. CALL THE TOWN ENGINEER AT 770.487.4038 FOR AN INSPECTION. 
WITH THE EXCEPTION OF SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PLATTED LOTS, A TREE MAINTENANCE INSPECTION WILL BE PERFORMED AFTER ONE FULL GROWING SEASON FROM THE DATE OF THE FINAL CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION. PROJECT OWNERS AT THE TIME OF THE MAINTENANCE INSPECTION ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR ORDINANCE COMPLIANCE. 
ALL PLANT MATERIALS ARE TO CONFORM TO THE AMERICAN STANDARD FOR NURSERY STOCK 1980 EDITION AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF NURSERYMEN. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-009), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-170. - Tree replacement plan standards. 
(a)  Tree replacement plans must be prepared with appropriate consideration given to the function of trees in the urban landscape. Every effort must be made to maximize the environmental benefit of the plant material. 
(b)  Trees proposed for replanting must be on the tree species selection list found in section 105-266, unless otherwise approved by the town manager. Trees selected must be free from injury, pests, disease, nutritional orders or root defects, and must be in good vigor to assure a reasonable expectation of survival. Standards for transplanting shall be consistent with those established in the International Society of Arboriculture publication Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual or similar publication. 
(c)  Spacing and the potential size of species chosen shall be compatible with spatial limitations of the site. 
(d)  Replanted trees shall be ecologically compatible with the site and neighboring sites. Accordingly, the replanted trees shall be of the same or similar species as those removed whenever practical. 
(e)  Trees must be replaced within a minimum of 60 percent canopy tree species. 
(f)  The tree must be compatible in extent of crown and root systems at maturity with nearby utilities. 
(g)  Where trees must be added to achieve 100 site-density units per acre, pines may not comprise more than 50 percent of the required units. Where existing pines already comprise more than 50 percent or more of the required units, no additional pines may be credited toward achieving site density. 
(h)  The use of flowering ornamental trees or plants classified as tree-form shrubs may be included in the tree replacement plan, but shall not be used for the purpose of fulfilling site density standards unless approved by the town manager. 
(i)  All replanted canopy trees shall be a minimum height of eight feet and a minimum trunk diameter of 21/2 caliper inches. All replanted understory trees shall be a minimum height of six feet and a minimum trunk diameter of 11/2 inches. The following minimum criteria must be observed in order to provide sufficient growing area for planted trees, unless otherwise approved by the town manager: 
(1)  Canopy trees: 200 square feet of pervious root zone. 
(2)  Understory trees: 75 square feet of pervious root zone. 
(3)  All planting areas: Ten feet minimum width. 
A maximum of 30 percent of the root zone may be comprised of impervious area. 
(j)  No more than 40 percent of any one genus may comprise the trees proposed in any replanting plan. 
(k)  Trees must be relocated or replaced on site in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-010), 5-1-2002) 
Secs. 105-171-105-193. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LANDSCAPE PLANS 

Sec. 105-194. - Landscape plan documentation. 
(a)  A landscape plan shall be prepared by a landscape architect registered in the state. 
(b)  All areas not devoted to structures, site development features, and natural vegetation shall be landscaped. 
(c)  A landscape plan shall include one canopy tree with a minimum trunk caliper of 21/2 inches (at four inches from the ground) for every 1,000 square feet of permanently disturbed area on the site. An area is considered permanently disturbed if it is covered with a building, structure, or other impervious surfaces like walks, drives and patios. 
(d)  A landscape plan shall include one understory tree with a minimum trunk caliper of one inch (at four inches from the ground) for every 1,000 square feet of permanently disturbed area on the site. 
(e)  All required landscaping shall be maintained in a horticulturally healthy and aesthetically pleasing manner. 
(f)  It is recommended that no new planting should be more than 100 feet from a watering source; however, it is required that assurances acceptable to the town will be provided that water will be available and appropriate watering will take place. 
(g)  All landscape areas within parking lots shall be 100 percent landscaped with deciduous trees, shrubs, ground cover (not requiring mowing), and/or flowers in mulched beds. 
(h)  Landscaped areas within and around parking lots must be large enough to provide for health and continued growth of the vegetation. 
(i)  Landscaping shall not obstruct the view between 24 inches high and 60 inches high on access drives, streets or parking aisles. 
(j)  The perimeter of all parking areas shall be landscaped. Parking areas designed to accommodate no more than 20 automobiles are not required to install interior landscapes areas like islands, peninsulas, and medians. Parking areas designed to accommodate more than 20 automobiles must install interior landscaped areas so that no more than 12 adjacent parking spaces exist without a landscaped separation of at least five feet in width. If significant tree save areas or natural areas exist within a parking area, the town may make an exception to this requirement as appropriate. 
(k)  Screening shall be used as a buffer between incompatible uses, and to reduce the effects of headlight glare, noise and other objectionable activities. The following minimum requirements shall apply to screening: 
(1)  All vegetation used for screening shall be at least three feet in height at time of installation. Plants shall be spaced as to provide for effective visual screening within three growing seasons. Planting beds required for screening shall be a minimum of six feet in width. 
(2)  Screening may consist of a fence, a wall, or vegetation and/or a mix of any or all of the foregoing. The outer or public side of fences and walls shall be landscaped enough to soften the structure with a tree or shrub group at least every 50 feet, subject to approval of the town council. 
(3)  Screening shall be installed on all lot lines where commercial, industrial, and institutional uses abut residential zoning districts except for entrances or exits. 
(4)  No screening shall be removed without the written permission of the town. 
(5)  Screening vegetation and fencing shall be maintained in a healthy and attractive manner. 
(6)  The town may require screening in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit not requiring plat or site plan approval. 
(l)  The town staff, upon site inspection and conceptual landscape plan review, may require an applicant to naturalize areas which visually impair public rights-of-way. The intent of this requirement is to supplement tree requirements with small caliper material (one gallon maximum) in areas where screening or landscape visual continuity is required. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-024), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-195. - Landscape plan requirements. 
    Any landscape plan required by these regulations shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Title of project, address of site. 
(2)  Site location map, north point, scale of drawings. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of owner/developer. 
(4)  Name and seal of landscape architect who prepared the plan. 
(5)  Planting key; botanical and common name of all plant materials proposed, quantity of each species; size of plant material (caliper, height, width); condition (i.e., balled and burlapped, container grown, bare root, collected, etc.); and special remarks (number of stems, color or bloom, etc). 
(6)  Estimated cost of landscape improvements. 
(7)  Name and location of existing trees to be saved and protected during construction. Indicate all protected and specimen trees to be saved or removed. 
(8)  Retention areas, drainage inlets and structures. Floodplain limits shall be shown whenever subject property is within such areas. 
(9)  Names of adjacent property owners, and adjacent land uses. Indicate all required greenspace and screened areas. 
(10)  Provide that sight distances at intersections are not obscured by planting. Keep planting below 24 inches and tree limbs above 60 inches. 
(11)  Submit three copies of prints for review. One will be returned with review comments. 
(12)  Show all pertinent site features: buildings, walks, drives, signs, lighting drains, meter boxes, underground utility lines, curbs, and the available water source for plant maintenance. 
(13)  Show calculations on the plan for total area, area permanently disturbed, and landscaped area (in acres and square feet). Indicate numbers of canopy and understory trees required by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-025), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-196. - Landscape plan approval procedures. 
    For any landscape plan required by these regulations, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  A developer shall submit to the town clerk three copies of a landscape plan which meets the requirements of these regulations. 
(2)  The landscape plan shall be submitted along with the required site plan and the required grading plan. 
(3)  For consideration at a planning commission meeting, the landscape plan must be submitted to and accepted by the town clerk by the third Monday of the month in order to be heard by the planning commission on the last Thursday of the following month. 
(4)  The landscape plan will be reviewed by the town staff. If the landscape plan does not meet the requirements of these regulations, the town clerk will return the plan to the developer with comments and suggestions for correction. If the plan meets the requirements, the town clerk shall place the landscape plan on the next planning commission agenda. 
(5)  The town staff shall submit the results of their review in writing to the planning commission. 
(6)  The planning commission will review the landscape plan, taking into consideration the requirements of these regulations, the town staff's report and approve, disapprove or approve with modifications. 
(7)  If the planning commission approves the landscape plan, a copy will be returned to the developer with the approval inscribed thereon, along with a notation of any appropriate conditions or review comments. 
(8)  If the planning commission does not approve the landscape plan, the developer may resubmit, with necessary changes, following the same procedures as if it were an original application. 
(9)  An approved landscape plan must be implemented prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or the developer may choose to provide the town clerk with a performance bond or other acceptable security in an amount equal to 110 percent of the town's estimated cost of the required improvements which have not been installed or are not installed in a satisfactory manner. 
(10)  Upon posting this bond or security, the developer shall have a one-year period in which to complete the required improvements in a satisfactory manner, or the bond or other security shall be forfeited and revoked, and the town shall then take whatever action is necessary to have the developer complete the required improvements as soon as possible thereafter. 
(11)  When a developer has installed the required landscaping improvements, he shall request that the town clerk schedule an inspection. If the town staff approves the installation, staff shall submit a written report to the town clerk, and the project will be released for a certificate of occupancy. If the town staff does not approve the plan, staff shall submit a report stating reasons for disapproval so the developer can make the necessary corrections. A fee of $100.00 each shall be charged for any required re-inspections, and the fee shall be payable in advance of the re-inspection. 
(12)  The developer shall guarantee all plant materials and provide adequate maintenance of the above improvements for a minimum of one year from implementation. The town shall inspect said improvements during that period to ensure that the approved plan has been fully implemented and maintained. If the improvements have deteriorated within that one-year period, such landscaping shall be replaced by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-006), 5-1-2002; Ord. No. 2008-517, § 4, 5-1-2008) 
Secs. 105-197-105-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OTHER REQUIRED PLANS 

Sec. 105-216. - Application requirements. 
    Applications for land disturbance or other development permit shall be accompanied by an application for a tree removal permit and landscaping plan providing the following information: 
(1)  A complete tree survey and inventory, as specified in section 105-219. 
(2)  A complete tree protection plan, as specified in section 105-220. This plan shall be an integrated site plan showing specimen trees, tree protection areas, those trees to be saved and those to be removed, utilities to be installed, grading, approximate location of all structures, driveways and curb cuts, proposed tree planting and other landscaping. 
(3)  A complete tree replacement plan as specified in section 105-169. Replacement trees used in the density calculation must be ecologically compatible with the site. A list of acceptable replacement trees is provided in section 105-266, tree species selection list. 
(4)  A complete landscape plan, as specified by section 105-195. 
(5)  Minor additions to existing developments may require only a sketch plan showing proposed changes submitted to the town manager for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1103), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-217. - Procedures. 
(a)  A tree protection plan and tree replacement plan, as appropriate, must be submitted to the zoning administrator concurrent with submission of site grading plans. No land disturbance permit shall be issued prior to approval of the TPP. 
(b)  All tree protection plans and related documentation shall be reviewed by the town manager for conformance to the provisions of this article and either approved, returned for revision, or denied. If denied, the reasons for denial shall be annotated on the tree protection plan or otherwise stated in writing. 
(c)  All tree protection measures shall be installed prior to any land disturbance, and the zoning administrator shall be contacted for a pre-construction conference prior to land disturbance. Land disturbance may proceed only after a permit is obtained and tree protection measures have been installed and approved by the zoning administrator. 
(d)  The town engineer shall make unscheduled inspections prior to and during development to ensure protection of trees, critical root zones and buffer zones. 
(e)  Upon completion of a development, the town engineer shall conduct an inspection to ensure compliance with the tree protection plan and tree replacement plan, as appropriate. 
(f)  A landscape plan is required for any development in the town other than the development of individual lots for single-family residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-004), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-218. - Tree protection plan approval, fee and appeal. 
(a)  Plan approval. 
(1)  No land disturbance permit shall be issued until the tree protection plan (TPP) and tree replacement plan, as appropriate, have been reviewed and approved, in writing, by the town manager. The function of the town manager in reviewing the TPP shall be to ensure survival of trees to be retained following development. 
(2)  Developers and design professional may meet at any time with the town manager to discuss the tree preservation planning process. The town engineer is available for field inspections of site conditions prior to submittal to give advice as to the relative value of trees, and to assist in the design process as it relates to preserving trees. Information must also be disseminated concerning preparation of a tree protection plan. 
(3)  The developer shall coordinate the location of utility lines with the utility companies in order to prevent root damage within the critical root zones of protected trees and to minimize damage to trees located in protected zones. 
(4)  The town manager shall approve, deny or approve the TPP with conditions within 30 business days of submittal. Upon approval of the TPP, a tree protection permit shall be issued to the applicant. If no action is taken within 30 business days of the submission of the TPP, it shall be considered approved and the land disturbance permit issued. In the event the TPP is denied, the reasons therefor shall be reported, in writing, to the applicant. 
(5)  All tree protection plans and tree replacement plans, as appropriate, must be approved and stamped by the town manager prior to the issuance of any permits. The town engineer's plan review fee shall include up to two plan reviews, one pre-grading site visit and a final inspection. All other review and/or inspections shall be based upon the town engineer's normal hourly fee, which fee shall be paid by applicant. 
(6)  The town engineer shall conduct a final inspection of the property to ensure compliance with the TPP prior to granting a certificate of occupancy by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to revoke, suspend or void any land disturbance permit, stop all work on a site or any portion thereof, or withhold a certificate of occupancy in the event of a violation of any provision of this article. 
(7)  Any revisions to the proposed development of a property, and any changes reflected in a subsequently submitted tree protection plan, or tree replacement plan, as appropriate, shall be shown on a revised such plans and be approved as a part of the new or revised plans prior to commencement of site work. 
(b)  Fee. The fee for a land disturbance permit shall be $25.00 per acre or any portion thereof and shall be paid at the time of application for the permit. Said fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(c)  Appeal. Any applicant for a land disturbance permit who is aggrieved by a decision of the town manager, town engineer or zoning administrator relating to the application of this article shall have the right to appeal said decision as provided under the town zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-005), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-219. - Tree survey and inventory plan documentation. 
(a)  A tree survey shall be prepared in the form of a scaled site plan sealed by a registered surveyor, professional engineer, landscape architect, certified arborist or registered forester for property in excess of five acres, noting the location of all specimen trees plus all other trees to be preserved and credited toward site density standards. For all tracts less than five acres any required tree survey can be prepared by the property owner or his agent. 
(b)  All specimen trees and their critical root zones shall be labeled, indicated on the surveys and inventoried by size and species. This includes specimen trees to be preserved as well as those proposed for removal. 
(c)  All other trees to be credited toward site density standards must be indicated on the survey and inventoried by size and species. Trees with a dbh measurement of three inches or greater are eligible for density compliance purposes. 
(d)  Trees other than specimen trees that are proposed for removal, and thus cannot be counted toward density standards, are not required to be counted and shown individually on the plan. Such trees shall be identified as a stand, provided the estimated number, size, and species are identified as part of the total site inventory. 
(e)  Sampling methods may be used to determine tree densities for forested areas exceeding five acres. 
(f)  All tree protection zones and tree save areas must be delineated on the tree survey. All buffers with existing trees must be delineated on plans as tree save areas. Land disturbance within any buffer is subject to approval by the town manager. 
(g)  The tree survey shall provide an accurate list of those trees to be saved and the total value of existing density factor units for the entire property. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-007), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-220. - Tree protection plan documentation. 
(a)  A tree protection plan (TPP) shall be submitted to the town manager for review as part of the application for a land disturbance permit for development of any single-family or two- family residential lot in excess of two acres and all multifamily, commercial or industrial lots. The TPP must be approved prior to commencement of any site alteration, defoliation or land-disturbing activity requiring issuance of a development permit. 
(b)  Tree protection plans shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect, registered forester, or certified arborist in accordance with the specifications for such plans contained herein. Performance of professional services in preparation of plans required herein shall comply with state Law governing the practice of the applicable profession. Other licensed professionals, e.g., architects, engineers, surveyors, etc., may be authorized by the town manager to prepare tree protection plans, provided competency and knowledge in the principles and practices of arboriculture are demonstrated to the satisfaction of the town manager. In the case of land disturbance permit applications for owner-occupied detached, single-family properties, the TPP may be prepared by the owner or contractor applying for the land disturbance permit. 
(c)  Prior to approval of the tree protection plan, the town manager may require relocation or replacement of trees as appropriate throughout the site, so that the entire property conforms to the site density standards or other tree coverage objectives are met. 
(d)  The tree protection plan shall be a detailed plan designed to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of two years or after, construction. The tree protection plan shall be submitted on a current survey of the proposed site, drawn to scale and clearly depicting all required information as outlined by this section. The TPP shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Project name, district, land lot and parcel number, north arrow and scale, not to exceed one inch equal 50 feet. 
(2)  Name, address, phone number of property owner, developer and any tenant of the property. 
(3)  Name, address, and phone number of the professional landscape architect, forester, or arborist responsible for preparation of the plan and the seal or statement of professional qualifications of said person (qualifications may be attached separately). 
(4)  Total acreage of the site and acreage exclusive of all zoning buffer areas. 
(5)  Delineation of all areas located within a 100-year floodplain and an indication of acreage. 
(6)  The location of any state waters and the limits of any proposed disturbance within a water quality buffer zone. 
(7)  Location of all specimen trees and their critical root zones indicating those specimen trees proposed for removal or preservation. Any specimen tree proposed for removal is to be identified. 
(8)  The location, size (dbh) and species of all trees to be preserved and to be retained to fulfill site density standards. Five or more trees whose drip lines combine into one tree protection area may be outlined as a group and their number, size and species listed in a summary table. All tree protection areas are to be outlined and labeled. 
(9)  All tree protection zones, natural areas, landscaped areas, buffers and areas of re-vegetation. Specifications describing tree protection methods shall be indicated for all tree protection areas, including tree fencing, erosion control, retaining walls, tunneling for utilities, aeration systems, transplanting, staking, signs, etc. 
(10)  Location, size and species of all new trees to be planted to fulfill site density standards. Trees grouped in tree planting areas may be listed in a summary table by total number in the grouping by size and species. 
(11)  A summary table indicating the number of existing trees to remain and trees to be planted, by caliper to the nearest inch, shall be shown along with calculations demonstrating the site density achieved. Additional credits shall be noted where applicable. Groupings of trees in tree protection areas and areas for tree planting may be keyed to the summary table by area rather than labeling each tree individually on the plan. 
(12)  A delineation of tree save areas in which trees have been inventoried for site density standards. 
(13)  Location and details for all permanent tree protection measures (tree wells, aeration systems, permeable pavement, retaining walls, bollards, etc.). 
(14)  Limits of clearing and land disturbance such as grading, trenching, etc., where these disturbances may affect tree protection zones. 
(15)  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a tree that could adversely impact its survival, with specifications as to how the grade, drainage and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
(16)  Boundaries of all required buffer, landscaped and vehicle use areas. 
(17)  Location of all existing and proposed utility lines or easements, including location of any boring sites for underground utilities. 
(18)  Indication of staging areas for vehicle and equipment parking, materials storage, concrete washout, debris burn and burial holes and other areas where tree protection may be affected. 
(19)  Location of existing and proposed structures, pavement, driveways, cut and fill areas, retention and detention facilities, etc. 
(20)  Phase lines, if applicable. 
(21)  Additional information as requested by the town manager. 
(e)  The following notes shall be shown on the tree protection plan: 
Tree Protection Notes: 
TREE PROTECTION FENCING MUST BE INSTALLED AND INSPECTED PRIOR TO ANY CLEARING. GRUBBING OR GRADING. CALL THE TOWN ENGINEER AT 770.487.4038 FOR AN INSPECTION. 
TREE PROTECTION SHALL BE ENFORCED ACCORDING TO STANDARDS ESTABLISHED IN ARTICLE V OF THE TOWN OF TYRONE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE. 
COMPLIANCE WITH SITE DENSITY STANDARDS SHOWN ON THE PLAN(S) MUST BE VERIFIED PRIOR TO THE ISSUANCE OF THE CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR ACCEPTANCE OF THE FINAL PLAT. CALL THE TOWN ENGINEER AT 770.487.4038 FOR AN INSPECTION. 
WITH THE EXCEPTION OF SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS, A TREE MAINTENANCE INSPECTION WILL BE PERFORMED AFTER ONE FULL GROWING SEASON FROM THE DATE OF THE FINAL SITE INSPECTION. PROJECT OWNERS AT THE TIME OF THE MAINTENANCE INSPECTION ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR ORDINANCE COMPLIANCE. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-008), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-221. - Land disturbance or building construction permits. 
(a)  Clearing and/or grading only permits (commercial/industrial, only). When seeking a limited land disturbance permit, i.e., clearing, clearing and grading, or grading only, applicants must demonstrate compliance with the required site density standards. Trees existing on site should be used to meet the required site density. Tree removal and replacement shall be subject to town manager approval. A tree protection plan and tree replacement plan, as appropriate, must be a part of the approved clearing and/or grading plan. 
(b)  Phased projects and reduced net site areas. Where development is scheduled to occur in phases, site density calculations must be based on the site area defined by an established phase line. Similarly, a reduced net site area may be achieved by using only the area of actual site disturbance, provided that a limit of construction line is clearly shown on the plan. 
(c)  Criteria. In both of the above instances, the following criteria shall be applied regarding existing trees: 
(1)  Existing trees to be credited toward fulfilling the site density standard should be within the phase line or limits of construction. 
(2)  Whenever the tree save areas must be established outside the phase line, or limits of construction, the tree save areas must be established in such locations as future development will not impact them. 
(3)  Trees located in tree save areas established outside the phase line, or limits of construction, the tree save areas must be established in such locations as future development will not impact them. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-022), 5-1-2002) 
Secs. 105-222-105-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 105-251. - Tree planting specifications. 
    Applications for permits under this article shall submit tree planting specifications. Generally, these specifications shall conform to those established by the International Society of Arboriculture, as included in the Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual, latest addition, or similar publication. 
(1)  Tree species selected for replacement plantings shall consist of an appropriate mix of trees species native to the region. 
(2)  Trees shall not be planted within 20 feet of any structure or within ten feet of a paved driveway. 
(3)  The National Arbor Day Foundation (NADF) recommends that conifers (evergreens) be planted close together on the northwestern and northern perimeters of buildings to buffer structures from northern winter winds. 
(4)  NAFD recommends that deciduous (broadleaf) canopy trees be planted along the southwestern and eastern perimeters of buildings to shade structures in the summer and allow sunlight to pass through in the winter. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-011), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-252. - Determination of specimen trees or stands of trees; density credit. 
(a)  Criteria. Specimen trees are characterized by the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Any tree equaling or exceeding the following diameter sizes: 
a.  24-inch dbh: large hardwoods such as beech, oaks, hickories, yellow poplars, etc. 
b.  30-inch dbh: large softwoods such as cedars, pines, spruces, etc. 
(2)  Trees not fully conforming to these sizes may be considered specimen trees in the case of a rare or unusual species, trees of exceptional aesthetic or unique quality, or trees of historical significance. Such trees may also be considered specimen trees when specifically used by a builder, developer or design professional as a focal point in a landscape design. 
(3)  Specimen trees are also characterized as any tree in fair or better condition, as determined by the town manager or state forestry commission representative, meeting the following standards: 
a.  A life expectancy of over 15 years. 
b.  A structurally sound trunk, not hollow and having no extensive decay that exceeds 20 percent radial trunk dieback. 
c.  No more than one major or several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only). 
d.  No major insect or pathological problem. 
(b)  Specimen tree stands. A contiguous grouping of trees that have been determined to be of high value by the town manager based on the following criteria: 
(1)  A relatively mature even-aged stand. 
(2)  A stand with purity of species composition or of a rare or unusual nature. 
(3)  A stand of historical or cultural significance. 
(4)  A stand with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
(c)  Density credit. In order to encourage the preservation of specimen trees and incorporation of these trees into the project design, additional density credit will be given for successful preservation of specimen trees. Credit assigned for any specimen tree saved will be two times the density unit value shown in section 105-265(d), table 1. Specimen trees shall be verified by the town manager, and shall be located on the tree protection plan. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-012), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-253. - Minimum site density standards. 
(a)  For all areas being developed, except land used for pasture land, a minimum site density of 100 units per acre, exclusive of any acreage within a zoning buffer area and any trees needed to meet buffer requirements as set forth in the zoning ordinance or as conditions of zoning approval, must be maintained on all properties subject to this article. For all areas used as pasture land for the past ten years, a minimum site density of 50 units per acre exclusive of any acreage within a zoning buffer area and any trees needed to meet buffer requirements as set forth in the zoning ordinance or as conditions of zoning approval must be maintained on all properties subject to this article. The term "unit" is an expression of basal area and is not synonymous with "tree." The density standard must be met as a condition of development permits distance whether or not a property contained trees prior to development. Trees, both existing and planted, shall be reasonably distributed throughout the site where feasible, with an emphasis on tree groupings to achieve aesthetic results in conformance with professional landscaping standards. Trees may be planted for credit within a public right-of-way, subject to approval by the town manager. 
(b)  This density may be achieved through credits for preserving existing trees, by planting new trees according to the minimum standards of this article, or through a combination of both. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all reasonable efforts must be made to save specimen trees. Reasonable efforts shall include, but not be limited to, alteration of building design; alternate location of buildings, parking areas and stormwater detention facilities; or relocation of utilities. 
(c)  Minimum site density shall be calculated and established pursuant to the formula and analysis set forth in section 105-265(b). Property owners shall be subject to the minimum site density standard set forth in this section. The density calculation shall be based on the net site area, excluding infrastructure improvements, such as roads, utility easements, detention ponds, etc. In no event, shall off-street parking areas be considered as infrastructure improvement. 
(d)  Site density credits. Credit shall be given for existing trees to be retained which are a minimum diameter of three inches; credit shall be given for trees planted which are a minimum caliper of 21/2 caliper inches. Additional credits shall be granted under the following circumstances: A total site density credit, not to exceed twice the normal credit, may be granted by the town manager for existing trees to be retained which have greater value as outstanding specimen trees, trees having historic value or being a rare or unique species. 
(e)  Trees replanted to achieve density standards are to be species selected from the tree species selection list in section 105-266 or as otherwise approved by the town manager. Replanting shall be at a minimum ratio of one canopy tree for every three understory trees. Minimum density may be met by planting all canopy trees; however, such density shall not be met by planting only understory trees. 
(f)  In addition, no more than 40 percent of any one genus may comprise the trees proposed in any replanting plan. 
(g)  Minimum size requirements for replacement trees are contained in section 105-265(e), table 2. 
(h)  Tree planting requirements may be amended by the town manager in cases where minimum site densities are not evenly distributed on the net site area and aesthetic appearances are an issue. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-013), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-254. - Tree survey inspection. 
    Following receipt of a complete tree removal application, development plan, or tree survey and supporting data, the Town engineer shall conduct an inspection of the proposed development site within ten working days. The applicant shall be notified by telephone 48 hours in advance of the date and time of inspection. Following the inspection, the town engineer shall advise the applicant of any recommended changes in the applicant's proposed tree removal, protection or replanting plans, consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-014), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-255. - Tree protection requirements. 
    The following guidelines and standards shall apply to trees proposed to be retained for credit toward the minimum density standard: 
(1)  Tree protection areas. Tree root systems are the most critical factor in tree preservation throughout the development process. The root system can easily extend beyond the drip line of the tree canopy. Disturbance of the root system can directly affect a tree's survival. The following guidelines and standards shall apply to trees proposed to be retained for credit toward the minimum site density standard and to protect the critical root zones: 
a.  The root system within the drip line is generally considered to be the critical root zone. To protect these critical root zones, a tree protection area shall be established around each tree or group of trees to be retained. 
b.  The tree protection area shall include no less than the total area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the drip line of the tree or group of trees, collectively. In some instances, an area greater than the drip line area may be required to be designated as a tree protection area as determined by the town manager. 
c.  Layout of the project site utility and grading plans shall avoid disturbance of tree protection areas. Whenever utilities must be installed within a tree protection area and such installation will encroach into the drip line of any tree to be saved, the utility shall be installed by tunneling at a minimum depth of 36 inches. Reasonable efforts shall be made to save as many trees as possible, including avoiding utility routing which would endanger the taproot of certain species. 
d.  Construction site activities such as vehicle or equipment parking, materials storage, concrete washout, burn pit placement, etc., shall be arranged so as to prevent damage to trees within tree protection areas. 
(2)  Protective barriers. 
a.  Prior to any land disturbance, all protective tree barriers shall be installed and maintained until completion of site landscaping. Authorization to remove protective barriers shall be in writing by the town manager or by issuance of a final certificate of occupancy. Inspection of tree protection barriers is required prior to any land disturbance or development activity; the town engineer shall be contacted to schedule an inspection. Signs requesting subcontractor cooperation and compliance with tree protection standards are recommended for site entrances. 
b.  Tree fencing shall be a minimum of four feet high, constructed in a post-and-rail configuration. A two-inch by four-inch wooden post and a double one-inch by four-inch wooden rail, painted orange, is recommended. Four-foot orange polyethylene laminar safety fencing is also acceptable (Figure 1). 
c.  Where approved, other forms of tree protection may be utilized to delineate tree save areas which are remote from areas of land disturbance. These areas must be completely surrounded with continuous rope of flagging (heavy mil, a minimum of four inches wide). All such tree protection must be accompanied by "Keep Out" or "Tree Save" signs (Figure 2). 
d.  All tree protection areas must be protected from soil sedimentation intrusion through the use of silt fencing or other acceptable measures placed upslope from tree protection areas. No construction of any structure or improvement or any construction activity shall encroach or place solvents, materials, construction machinery or temporary soil deposits within six feet of the drip line, as defined herein, of any specimen tree or any tree within a tree protection zone. 
e.  All tree protection measures must be maintained throughout land disturbance and construction and shall not be removed until final landscaping is installed. 
(3)  Encroachment. Most trees can tolerate only a small percentage of critical root zone loss. If encroachment is anticipated within the critical root zones of exceptional trees, stands of trees, or otherwise designated tree protective zones, the following preventive measures shall be employed: 
a.  Clearing activities. Roots often fuse and tangle among trees. Tree removal adjacent to tree save areas can cause inadvertent damage to the protected trees. Where possible, it is advisable to cut minimum two-foot trenches (e.g., using a "Ditch Witch") along the limits of land disturbance, so as to cut, rather than tear, roots. Trenching may be required for the protection of exceptional specimen trees. 
b.  Soil compacting. No parking, material storage or traffic shall be permitted within designated tree protective zones. 
c.  Utility installation. The installation of utilities through a protective zone should occur by way of tunneling rather than trenching (Figures 3 and 4). 
d.  Grade changes. A decrease in grade is best accomplished with the use of retaining walls or through terracing (Figure 5). 
e.  Where the town manager has determined that irreparable damage has occurred to trees within tree protective zones, the trees shall be removed and replaced in a manner consistent with this article. 
(4)  Trees to be retained. 
a.  Canopy trees with a drip line area within 20 feet of a proposed structure should be removed and replaced with an appropriate tree species. When such canopy trees are to be saved, special attention shall be given to protection of the drip line area. The state forestry commission should be contacted for technical assistance. 
b.  Where design constraints require placement of paved surfaces within ten feet of the drip line area of a canopy tree, such trees should be removed and replaced with an appropriate tree species. Alternately, the state forestry commission may be contacted to provide technical assistance concerning appropriate precautions that may be used to protect the tree and pavements (Figure 6). 
c.  All reasonable efforts shall be made to save specimen trees. Reasonable effort shall include, but not be limited to, alteration of building design; alternate location of buildings, parking areas and stormwater detention facilities; or relocation of utilities. 
d.  When a choice is available as to which existing trees to save, emphasis shall be given to the preservation of specimen trees, even isolated individual trees, over the retention of other trees. Non-specimen trees, however, should be saved in stands rather than as individual trees scattered over a site. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-015), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-256. - Alternate compliance to site density standard. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to ensure that a minimum site density is maintained on all developed sites. In limited cases, this intent cannot be realized as a particular site will not bear the required density. Two methods of alternate compliance may be acceptable, at the discretion of the town manager. 
(1)  Planting at a location other than the project site; or 
(2)  Contributing to the town tree bank. 
(b)  The following standards have been established for administering these alternative compliance methods: 
(1)  The town manager must review and approve all requests for alternative compliance. In no instance shall more than 50 percent of the required site density be met through alternative compliance. 
(2)  As many trees as can reasonably be expected to survive must be planted on the site proposed for development. 
(3)  No development permit shall be issued unless the town manager has approved the request for alternate compliance and received the necessary documentation and funds. 
(c)  Alternate location. Whenever trees are to be planted at an alternate location, a tree replacement plan, meeting all applicable standards, must be reviewed and approved. The following note must be shown on the approved plan: 
    A tree replacement plan addendum for this project shall be submitted to the town manager for the Town of Tyrone a minimum of 30 days prior to requesting a formal inspection. This plan shall include the species, size and location of trees to be planted off-site to conform to site density standards of this article. Release of this project is subject to approval of this plan, as well as verification of the installation of trees. 
(d)  The following conditions apply when a tree is to be removed under the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The town may, with the consent of the property owner, relocate the tree at the town's expense to town-owned property for replanting, either for permanent use at the new location, or for future use on other town property. 
(2)  Credit may be given to the property owner, for each relocated tree as though the tree was proposed to remain on the property, provided the tree is relocated to a site designated by the town at the owner's expense. 
(e)  Town tree bank. As an alternate method of compliance, the town will accept monetary donations to the town tree bank. These donations will be used for the sole purpose of planting trees on public property within the town limits. Methods of calculating contributions to the town tree bank are contained in section 105-267. 
(f)  The town tree bank will be administered by the town manager. A quarterly report shall be submitted to mayor and council indicating monies collected, funds expended, and the species, number, size and location of trees planted. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-016), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-257. - Tree species selection list for replanting. 
    A tree species selection list providing recommended canopy and understory tree species for replanting is contained in section 105-266. The town manager shall review all tree replacement plans to ensure tree species selected are appropriate native species. The following species are considered inappropriate and shall not be used to comply with the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Eastern White Pine. 
(2)  Lombardy Poplar. 
(3)  Mimosa. 
(4)  Silver Maple. 
(5)  Spruce. 
(6)  Box Elder. 
(7)  Black Willow. 
(8)  Royal Paulownia. 
(9)  Tree of Heaven. 
(10)  Keyland Cypress. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-017), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-258. - Sequence of tree planting and removal. 
    All tree protection devices shall be installed prior to any clearing, grubbing or grading. The town engineer must inspect the installation of tree protection and erosion and sedimentation control devices prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit or other development or construction permit. Tree protection must remain in functioning condition throughout all phases of development. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-018), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-259. - Removal or destruction of trees; permits. 
(a)  Tree removal. Tree removal shall be prohibited in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Soil erosion or runoff problems will result due to topography, soil type, or proximity to floodplain areas, and the removal will substantially and adversely impact the existing soils relative to runoff and/or erosion. Information provided by the town engineer or other environmental specialist may be used by the town manager. 
(2)  Specimen trees are located on site and cannot be adequately protected or replaced. Additionally, removal may be prohibited if reasonable accommodation can be made to alter the proposed project to save specimen trees and such accommodation have not been made. 
(3)  The removal will have a significant, adverse impact on property values of any adjoining property. 
(4)  Specimen trees removed with prior approval from the town manager must be replaced in addition to the minimum site density standard to compensate for their removal. Specimen trees must be replaced in an inch-by-inch basis by species with the potential for comparable size and quality. For example, removal of a 30-inch diameter tree would require replacement with 15 two-inch caliper trees of a comparable species. This tree replacement is in addition to the minimum site density. 
(5)  Any specimen tree removed without the appropriate review and approval of the town manager must be replaced by trees with a total density equal to twice the unit value of the tree removed. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of specimen quality if the tree is removed without approval and there is no evidence of its condition. 
(6)  Removal of specimen trees ten inches or greater in diameter shall be permitted only in conjunction with an approved tree protection plan, an approved tree replacement plan as appropriate, an approved grading plan, and an approved site development plan. 
(b)  Permits required. No person shall directly or indirectly remove or destroy any tree having a diameter of six inches or greater which is located on property subject to the provisions of this article without first obtaining a permit as provided herein. 
(c)  Application for permit. Permits shall be obtained through application in a form prescribed by the zoning administrator. Each application shall include: 
(1)  A written, signed statement citing the necessity for the removal or destruction of any tree; and 
(2)  The criteria set forth in subsection (e) of this section and that the applicant contends are met. 
(d)  Application review. Upon receipt of a complete application, the zoning administrator shall review said application pursuant to the requirements of this article. The zoning administrator shall either approve, deny or approve subject to conditions consistent with this article. An applicant may submit a new application at any time following denial of an application made pursuant to this article. All applications not acted upon within 30 days of the date of receipt of a complete application by the zoning administrator shall be deemed approved. An applicant may appeal the denial of a permit to the planning commission as provided under the town zoning ordinance. 
(e)  Criteria for tree removal or destruction. No permit shall be issued for removal or destruction of any tree unless: 
(1)  A tree replacement plan meeting the requirements of subsection (f) of this section has been approved; 
(2)  All other applicable requirements of this article are met; and 
(3)  One of the following conditions exists: 
a.  The tree is located within the buildable area of the lot and the applicant has concurrently filed an application for a building permit to make improvements otherwise permissible under all applicable ordinances of the town. 
b.  The tree is diseased or injured to the extent that death is imminent within two years, is in imminent danger of falling, is so close to existing or proposed structures as to endanger them, physically interferes with utility services in a manner that cannot be corrected by anything less than destruction or removal of the tree, or creates a hazardous traffic condition. 
(f)  Standards for tree replacement. Each applicant shall, to the maximum extent feasible, minimize the removal of trees from the site. In any request for a permit for tree removal in which the resulting site density present on the site will be less than 100 density units per acre, the zoning administrator shall require replacement such that the average number of trees on the site is equal to not less than 100 density units per acre. Where tree removal is unavoidable, trees replanted shall be an appropriate species mix considered native to the region. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-019), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-260. - Tree topping. 
    It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person to top any tree. Topping is defined as the severe pruning of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the crown of a tree to such an extent as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this provision at the discretion of the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-020), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-261. - Tree harvesting. 
    Selective tree harvesting may be permitted upon authorization by the town manager. Permits authorizing tree harvesting shall be in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  A 75-foot undisturbed buffer shall be provided and maintained along the entire perimeter of the property, including road frontages, except for authorized access crossings. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, no property owner shall be required to preserve an undisturbed buffer that covers more than 25 percent of the total land area of the property, excluding areas inside the 100-year floodplain. In any such case, an alternate buffer width shall be provided, as determined by the planning commission pursuant to its review of the application for a tree harvesting permit. 
(3)  The property shall be required to meet a site density standard of 100 (or 50) units per acre, not including the 75-foot buffer, upon completion of authorized tree harvesting activities. 
(4)  The owner/developer shall utilize the recommended best management practices as established by the state forestry commission. 
(5)  Once tree harvesting takes place in conformity with the regulations of this section, no development of the property within five years shall be permitted that would require either the property to be rezoned or removal of trees preserved under this section. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-023), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-262. - Tree removal and utility or construction companies. 
(a)  All provisions of this article shall apply to any person removing trees on behalf of any other person, including all tree removal companies, utility companies or persons in the business of moving trees or construction. It shall be unlawful for any person or company to remove or cause to be removed any tree, or undertake any work for which a development permit is required pursuant to this article, unless a valid permit thereof is in effect and displayed according to section 105-264. If any such work or removal is performed without the permit being displayed as required, such removal or work shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the person or company violating this article to all penalties provided herein. Utility companies may perform emergency work without formal approval; provided, however, that such emergency work is reported in writing to the town manager within three business days following completion of all emergency work. Further, the permit taken by any person, company or utility under this section shall include defined areas of tree cutting and trimming under a single permit. 
(b)  All tree removal companies, utility companies or persons in the business of removing trees or construction shall remove from the site of any trees, stumps, limbs or debris generated by activities allowed through issuance of a permit under this article. 
(c)  All utility companies shall be required to obtain an annual permit issued by the zoning administrator. All applications for an annual permit shall include a list of subcontractors with names, addresses, telephone numbers and town occupational permit numbers. Quarterly work schedules are to be submitted to the town manager indicating the proposed locations and extent of tree work to be performed. 
(d)  All tree trimming and pruning to be performed by public utilities, public agencies, and their subcontractors on trees growing on private or public rights-of-way shall be done according to the National Arborist Association Standards for Pruning of Shade Trees. 
(e)  The routing of all public and private utility easements shall be subject to review and comment by the town engineer. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-026), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-263. - Debris disposal requirements. 
    Following any land-disturbing activity, including clearing, grading or logging, all biodegradable debris, including but not limited to tree stumps, trunks, limbs or brush, shall be hauled off site to an appropriate disposal location or chipped to be used as mulch. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-027), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-264. - Display of permit and inspections. 
    The applicant shall prominently display the permit issued at the job site. Such permit shall be displayed continuously while trees are being removed or replaced or work performed as authorized on the permit. As a condition for issuance of a permit, the applicant shall agree in writing to entry onto his premises by representatives of the town as designated by the town manager to inspect the permit and activities at any time, and such entry shall be lawful. Failure to allow such entry shall be unlawful and shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, § 1-028), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-265. - Density factor analysis. 
(a)  All properties subject to this article must maintain a minimum site density of 100 units per acre. The term "unit" is an expression of basal area, and is not synonymous with "tree." The density requirement must be met as a condition of development permit issuance, whether or not a property contained trees prior to development. This density may be achieved through credits for preserving existing trees, by planting new trees according to the minimum standards of this article, or through a combination of both. 
(b)  The following formula shall apply to Site Density Standard (SDS) analysis: 
SDS=EDF+RDF 
SDS is the minimum site density to be achieved and maintained on all developed sites, 100 units per acre. 
Existing Density Factor (EDF) is the density value or credit of existing trees to be preserved on a site. 
Replacement Density Factor (RDF) is the density value of new trees to be planted on site. 
(c)  The following steps are used to calculate the required tree preservation or replacement density: 
Step 1: Calculate the Site Density Standard (SDS). SDS is calculated by multiplying the number of site acres by 100. 
EXAMPLE: A 2.5-acre site has a SDS of 2.5 × 100 = 250 
Step 2: Calculate the Existing Density Factor (EDF). EDF is determined by converting the diameter of individual, existing trees to site density units as indicated in Table 1 in subsection (d) of this section. These units are then totaled to determine the site EDF. 
EXAMPLE: Seven trees will remain on the 2.5-acre site. This includes four six-inch trees and one eight-inch tree. The following site density units are associated with the trees to be preserved: 
Number 
of Trees Size Class Density Units Site Density 4 6-inch 12 48 2 7-inch 15 30 1 8-inch 20 20 7 TOTAL      98 TOTAL  
The total site density units, 98, is the Existing Density Factor (EDF). 
Step 3: Calculate the Replacement Density Factor (RDF). RDF is determined by subtracting the EDF value from the SDS value. 
EXAMPLE: 250 (SDS) - 98 (EDF) = 152 (RDF) 
Step 4: Calculate a sample plan for achieving the required Replacement Density Factor (RDF). 
Example: Plant eight 21/2-inch, nine three-inch, seven four-inch, five five-inch and three six-inch diameter trees as presented below. 
Number 
of Trees Size class Density Units Replacement 
Density 8 21/2-inch 2.5 20 9 3-inch 3.5 31.5 7 4-inch 6 42 5 5-inch 7 35 3 6-inch 8 24 TOTAL 152.5  
(d)  Table 1 below is used to calculate site density for existing trees by diameter. 
TABLE 1. CONVERTING EXISTING TREE DIAMETERS TO SITE DENSITY UNITS 
Tree Diameter 
(inches) Density Units 3 4 4 7 5 9 6 12 7 15 8 20 9 25 10 30 12 35 14 40 16 45 18 50 20 55 22 60 24 65 28 70 32 75 36 80 40 85 44 90 48 95 50+ 100  
(e)  The density factor credit for each caliper size of replacement (new) tree is shown in Table 2. An identical credit schedule applies to existing trees which are to be transplanted within the site. Such tree relocation is subject to town manager approval. 
TABLE 2 CONVERTING REPLACEMENT TREES TO SITE DENSITY UNITS 
Tree Diameter 
(inches) Density Units 21/2 2.5 3 3.5 31/2 4.5 4 6 5 7 6 8 7 9 8 10 5 7  
(f)  Basis of site density tables. Site density is based on a reservation of 25 percent of the total area of each development site as open space. This is the Atlanta Regional Commission minimum standard for impervious ratios in groundwater recharge areas. It is accepted here as a reasonable standard for minimizing flooding potential and preserving the town's tree canopy. For a two-acre lot, this represents an area of 21,780 square feet. The town zoning ordinance requirement for landscaping is two trees for each 1,000 square feet of permanently disturbed area. The minimum planting size for canopy trees is 21/2-inch caliper. This results in 43.56 trees for the 21,780 square foot area. Accordingly, a total of 40 trees in the 21/2-inch size class, 100 density units, is the basis of the tree diameter conversion for replacement trees. As this article favors preservation of existing trees, the density credits are substantially skewed in favor of such preservation. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, app. A), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-266. - Tree species selection list. 
(a)  Understory trees. 
(1) Acer buergerianum Trident Maple (2) Amelanchier arborea Serviceberry (3) Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbean (4) Cercis Canadensis Eastern Redbud (5) Cornus species Dogwoods (6) Crataegus phaenopyrum Washington Hawthorne (7) Oxydendrum arboreum Sourwood (8) Myrtles (9) Hollies  
(b)  Canopy trees. 
(1) Acer floridanum Florida Maple or Southern 
Georgia Maple (2) Acer rubrum Red Maple (3) Acer saccharum Sugar Maple (4) Betula nigra River Burch (5) Carya species Hickories, Pecans (6) Castanea mollissima Chinese Chestnut (7) Celtis occidentalis Hackberry (8) Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsura Tree (9) Cladrastis lutea American Yellowwood (10) Cunninghamia lanceolate Common China Fir (11) Fagus grandifolia American Beech (12) Fraxinus americana White Ash (13) Fraxinus Pennsylvania Green Ash (14) Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo (15) Helesia Carolina Carolina Silverbell (16) Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar (17) Liquidambar styraciflua Sweetgum (18) Liriodendron tulipfera Yellow Tulip, Poplar (19) Magnolia grandiflora Southern Magnolia (20) Metasequoia Glyptostroboides Dawn Redwood (21) Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum, Black Tupelo (22) Pinus elliottii Slash Pine (23) Pinus virginiana Virginia Pine (24) Platanus occidentalis Sycamore (25) Quercus species Oaks, except Live oaks (26) Robinia pseudoacacia Black Locust (27) Sophora japonica Japanese Pagoda Tree (28) Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress (29) Ulmus parvifolia True Chinese Elm (30) Zelcova serrata Japanese Zelcova  
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, app. B), 5-1-2002) 
Sec. 105-267. - Appendix C, formula for determining contributions to tree bank. 
(a)  Calculations for valuing contributions to the tree bank are based on 21/2-inch caliper replacement trees with a value updated semi-annually, and on file with the town clerk, representing the average cost of materials, labor and guarantee for trees planted in the town area. 
    Example calculation: To determine the appropriate contribution to the tree bank, calculate the Density Factor Deficient (DFD) or number of density units which cannot be planted on the site. 
    Divide the DFD by 2.5 (the density unit value of a 21/2-inch caliper replacement tree from Table 1), multiply the result by $200.00 (cost of 21/2-inch caliper replacement tree). 
    A 2.5-acre site has a required Site Density Standard (SDS) of 250 units (2.5 × 100 = 250). 
(b)  As specified in the approved tree protection plan and tree replacement plan, following development, four six-inch trees, two seven-inch trees and one eight-inch tree will be preserved, totaling 98 site density units (Existing Density Factor). However, due to site limitations, only 120 density units may be planted as replacement trees, the Planted Density Factor (PDF). 
(c)  The Density Factor Deficient (DFD) is determined using the formula: DFD = SDS - (EDF + PDF) 
    In this example, DFD = 250 - (98 + 120) = 32 units 
(d)  A total of 32 density units, as calculated using Table 2, must be planted at an alternate location or the developer may elect to contribute the dollar value of these units to the town tree bank. 
(e)  The contribution amount is calculated by dividing the Density Factor Deficient (DFD) by the number of density units credited for a 21/2 tree, multiplied by $200.00. 
    That is, 32 (DFD) ;div; 2.5 (density units) × 200 (cost per tree) = $2,560.00 
(f)  The dollar amount represents the total developer contribution to the tree bank in lieu of replacement trees planted on site. 
(g)  Site density credits bear a relationship to the cost of planting the respective tree sizes, favoring planting of larger trees, which bears a relationship to survival rate, through a certain size class, as reflected below. The most economical replanting size is four-inch caliper nursery stock. 
Table A. Calculations for Compliance Cost by Tree Planting Size Classes 
Size 
(in inches) Unit Cost Compliance Cost 21/2 $ 200.00 $ 8,000.00 3   250.00   7,142.00 31/2   300.00   6,666.00 4   350.00   5,833.00 5   450.00   6,428.00 6   600.00   7,500.00 7   775.00   8,611.00 8  1,000.00  10,000.00  
(Ord. No. 423, § 1(exhibit A, app. C), 5-1-2002) 
Secs. 105-268-105-297. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 105-298. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the town or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
    Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
    Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
    Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
    Development means a land development or land development project. 
    Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land-disturbance activities. 
    Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
    Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
    Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
    Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
    Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
    Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
    Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
    Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
    Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
    Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
    Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
    Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
    New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
    Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
    Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
    Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
    On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
    Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
    Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the town to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
    Post-development means the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
    Pre-development means the time period or the conditions that exist on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan-approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
    Project means a land development project. 
    Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
    Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
    Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
    Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
    Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. The term "stormwater better site design" includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
    Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, stream bank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
    Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
    Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
    Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
    Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
    Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff, including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership, or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 485, § 1(6-10-3), 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 105-299. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the town determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the town by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the town shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten days (except that, in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the town may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop work order. The town may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The town may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The town may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the town may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the town shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the town has taken one or more of the actions described in this section, the town may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the town may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 485, § 1(6-10-8), 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 105-300. - Findings and purposes. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)  Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
(3)  The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
(4)  These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or "credits." The Georgia Greenspace Program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas which provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; 
(5)  Localities in the state are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution. 
(b)  Therefore, the town has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 485, § 1(6-10-1), 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 105-301. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the town to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(c)  Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the town engineer. 
(d)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The town engineer or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(e)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(f)  Stormwater design manual. The town will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 485, § 1(6-10-2), 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 105-302. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the town a permit application on a form provided by the town engineer for that purpose. Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection (b) of this section; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection (c) of this section; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, if applicable; 
(4)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with subsection (f) of this section. 
(b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, at the landowner or developer shall meet with the town for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place prior to the submission of a preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. To accomplish this goal, the following information should be included in the concept plan which should be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
(c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 105-303. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklists found in the stormwater design manual. The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 105-303; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters; and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 105-303 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: 
a.  A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; 
b.  A narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; 
c.  Cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; 
d.  A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); 
e.  Documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 105-303; 
f.  Drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catchbasins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow, and, where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  Erosion and sedimentation plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the town erosion and sedimentation regulations or the NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: 
a.  The arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; 
b.  Information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; 
c.  Descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; 
d.  Descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and 
e.  A description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the town as provided in subsection (d) of this section, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance subsection (d) of this section. 
(12)  Evidence of other applicable permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the (local permitting authority) that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(d)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the town requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the town, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, as follows: 
(1)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the town prior to plan approval and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(2)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the persons responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate, for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(3)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance activities and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(4)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the town may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 105-305. 
(5)  The town, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(e)  Application procedure. Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the town a permit application on a form provided by the town engineer for that purpose. The application procedure shall be as follows: 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the town engineer. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  The town engineer shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan, and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the town engineer shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (e)(3) of this section and this subsection (e)(4) shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the town engineer that the permit application, stormwater management plan, and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the town may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The town shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the town; and 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 105-304(b). 
(f)  Application review fee. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the town and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT APPLICATION REVIEW FEE 
Total Project Area Application Review Fee 
0<2 acres $  500.00 2<5 acres  1,000.00 >5 acres        200.00/acre  
(g)  Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(1)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices, and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the town which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(2)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the town that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
a.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
b.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
c.  Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
d.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
e.  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 485, § 1(10-164), 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 105-303. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
    The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
a.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
b.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
c.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the town are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(2)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
a.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer. 
b.  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the town for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a manmade channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream stream bank or channel integrity. 
c.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(3)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection (2) of this section is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the town for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(4)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the town for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(5)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the town before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the town may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(6)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (1) of this section. The applicant may, if approved by the town, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(7)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catchbasins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
b.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
c.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(8)  Dam design guidelines. Any land-disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 485, § 1(6-10-5), 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 105-304. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
(1)  Monthly inspections or more frequently as required by the town of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the applicant and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the town. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the town staff to insure compliance during construction. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
a.  The date and location of the inspection; 
b.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
c.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
d.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(2)  If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as-built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the town is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 485, § 1(6-10-6), 2-14-2006) 
Sec. 105-305. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(1)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(2)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the town shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the town may correct the violation as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(3)  Inspection programs by the town may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Reviewing maintenance and repair records; 
b.  Sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and 
c.  Evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the town to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the town. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the town, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The town may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 485, § 1(6-10-7), 2-14-2006) 
Chapter 107 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 107-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's or his designee's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This term includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other floodprone areas as referenced in section 107-3(d). All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
    Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 16, 1987. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before July 16, 1987. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map or FHBM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
    Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
    Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-condition flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
    Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
    Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term "manufactured home" also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure (see definition Structure ) for which the start of construction commenced after July 16, 1987 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is or is to be completed on or after July 16, 1987. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
    Permit means the permit, issued by the Town of Tyrone Building Department to the applicant, which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
    Start of construction means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale or other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. 
(2)  The term "market value of the building" means: 
a.  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
b.  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(4)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 500, § I(10-183), 5-17-2007; Ord. No. 2008-514, §§ 2-5, 4-3-2008) 
Sec. 107-2. - Findings. 
(a)  The mayor and town council have determined that the flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  The mayor and town council have determined that flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(c)  The mayor and town council have determined that effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to private property; 
(3)  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure, such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(d)  Article IX, section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section O.C.G.A. § 36-35-23(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and town council do hereby ordain this chapter and establish this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 500, § I(10-181), 5-17-2007) 
Sec. 107-3. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the town. 
(c)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The town manager or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Basis for area of special flood hazard; flood area maps and studies. For the purposes of this chapter, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated March 18, 1996, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, the last revision being March 18, 1996, are hereby adopted by reference. For those land areas annexed into the town either before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the current effective FIS and data for Fayette County, dated January 5, 1983, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, the last revision being March 18, 1996, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the town; or 
b.  Any base flood study authored by a professional engineer registered in the state which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the town building official or his designee. 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the town; or 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a professional engineer registered in the state which has been prepared by FEMA-approved methodology approved by the town manager or his designee. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the town hall. 
(e)  Compatibility with other regulations. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(f)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 500, § I(10-182), 5-17-2007; Ord. No. 2008-514, § 1, 4-3-2008) 
Sec. 107-4. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described in this section shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the town manager or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the town manager or his designee by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(c)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the town manager or his designee shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the town manager or his designee may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The town manager or his designee may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein; provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The town manager or his designee may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The town manager or his designee may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein; provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the town manager or his designee may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the town manager or his designee shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the town manager or his designee has taken one or more of the actions described above, the town manager or his designee may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the town manager or his designee may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the town municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 500, § I(10-188), 5-17-2007) 
Secs. 107-5-107-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 107-27. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. 
(1)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(2)  Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the town manager a permit application on a form provided by the town building department for that purpose. 
(3)  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(b)  Floodplain management plan requirements. An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in section 107-61(b)(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in section 107-61(a)(5); 
e.  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structures. 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any; copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations; future-conditions flood elevation; flood protection elevations; special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths; flood profiles; and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter; 
(7)  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(c)  Construction stage submittal requirements. 
(1)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the town manager or his designee a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(2)  Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The town manager or his designee shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the manager or his designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the town manager or his designee shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of sections 107-60 and 107-61; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the town manager or his designee shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the town manager or his designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the town manager or his designee and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 500, § I(10-184), 5-17-2007) 
Sec. 107-28. - Variance procedures. 
    The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the town manager or his designee, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated hereinabove. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the town manager or his designee. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the town manager or his designee. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the town manager or his designee shall have the right to appeal such decision to the mayor and town council in accordance with the procedures set out in the town's zoning ordinance. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and town council may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county as provided in O.C.G.A. title 5, ch. 4 (O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1 et seq.). 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure; and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the town manager or his designee and mayor and town council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(8)  Conditions for variances. 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The town manager or his designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the town manager or his designee and mayor and town council shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the town manager or his designee and the mayor and town council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 500, § I(10-187), 5-17-2007) 
Secs. 107-29-107-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 107-60. - Standards for development. 
(a)  Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the town manager or his designee. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the town manager or his designee, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the town manager or his designee. 
(b)  Definition of floodway boundaries. The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA-approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the town manager or his designee. If floodway data is not available from the town manager, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the town manager or his designee. 
(c)  General standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection(a)(1) of this section shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and either lie within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed or shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 107-61(d); 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the town manager or his designee using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(d)  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachment. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 107-61(d) apply. This study shall be prepared by a professional engineer currently registered in the state and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the town manager or his designee prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the town manager or his designee. Cross sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(e)  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (e)(2) of this section; 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the town manager or his designee until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the town manager or his designee. 
(f)  Maintenance requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The town manager or his designee may direct the property owner (at no cost to the town) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 500, § I(10-185), 5-17-2007; Ord. No. 2008-514, § 6, 4-3-2008) 
Sec. 107-61. - Provisions for flood damage reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 107-60(c), (d) and (e) have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions; 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; and 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(b)  Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. The following provisions, in addition to those in section 107-61(a), shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 107-60(c), (d) and (e) have been met. If all of the requirements of section 107-60(c), (d) and (e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5) of this section. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5) of this section. 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 107-60(c), (d) and (e) have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of section 107-60(c), (d) and (e) may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the town manager or his designee. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the town manager or his designee to be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the town manager or his designee. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar nonhabitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection (a)(5) of this section and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type of utilities and security devices, and have no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings-substantial improvements in subsection (b)(1)b of this section, including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 107-60(c), (d) and (e) have been met. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(7) of this section. 
(c)  Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(d)  Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
(1)  For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the town manager or his designee shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
(2)  If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
b.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with subsection (a)(5) of this section. 
(e)  Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-Zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5) of this section; 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 107-27(b); 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(6)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the town to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 500, § I(10-186), 5-17-2007) 
Chapter 109 - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 109-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Development Regulations of the Town of Tyrone, Georgia." 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-1; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    As-built drawing means amended site plans specifying the locations, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of road and drainage structures and facilities as they have been constructed. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Buffer means an area to set aside and separate different use districts or to separate a special use from other property by diminishing sound transmission and interrupting vision by landscaping or fencing; not to be used for other structures. 
    Conceptual plat means a plat made preparatory to the preliminary plat to enable the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the planning commission and town engineer as to the form of the plat and the objectives of this chapter. 
    Construction means any alteration of land for the purposes of achieving its development or changed use, including particularly any preparation for, building of, or erection of a structure. 
    Developer means any person who acts in his own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
    Development means any action in preparation for construction activities which results in alteration of either land or vegetation. 
    Drainage means a general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water. 
    Drainage plan means a plan using appropriate and commonly accepted engineering standards which specifies the means for alteration or development of a drainage system, as may be required by the town engineer. 
    Drainage system means the surface and subsurface systems for the removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams, marshes, swales and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the manmade element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, retention facilities and the storm sewer system. 
    Driveway means a vehicular access corridor privately owned and maintained. Residential driveways shall not serve more than two single-family residential lots. 
    Erosion means the general process whereby earth is moved by flowing surface or subsurface water, wind, or other naturally occurring forces. 
    Flood means a temporary rise in the level of rivers, streams and lakes which results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
    Flood hazard boundary map means a map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the report entitled the Flood Insurance Study for the Town of Tyrone and any revisions thereto where the boundaries of the area of special flood hazard have been defined as "zone A." 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, containing flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary flood map and the water surface elevation of the base flood (IRF), without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Intermediate regional flood (IRF) means a 100-year frequency flood as defined on the flood hazard map which has a probability of occurring once every 100 years or having a one percent chance of occurring each year. 
    Lot. 
(1)  The term "lot" means a tract, portion, or parcel of land separated from other tracts, portions, or parcels by description of a subdivision plat of record or survey map or described by metes and bounds, and intended to be used to facilitate transfer of ownership or for building development. 
(2)  For the purposes of this chapter, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
    Owner means the person in whom is vested the fee ownership, dominion or title of property, by proprietor; this term may also include a tenant, if chargeable under his lease for the maintenance of the property, and any agent of the owner or tenant, including a developer. 
    Resurface means installing one or more courses of asphalt construction over existing pavement. 
    Retention facility means a facility which provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
    Right-of-way means a strip or parcel of land occupied by or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, utility system, water main, sanitary sewer or storm drain sewer main, drainage ditches and watercourses or any other valid public use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a record or final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way, and not included within the dimensions or areas of such other lots or parcels. Right-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains or other use involving maintenance by a public agency, shall be dedicated or deeded to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
    Runoff means the portion of precipitation on the land which reaches the drainage system. 
    Runoff coefficient means the ratio of runoff to rainfall. 
    Sedimentation facility means natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground. 
    Street means a way for vehicular traffic whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley, or other way, and for the purposes of this division, streets are divided into the following categories: 
(1)  An "arterial street" is intended to provide higher travel speeds between or within communities, or to and from collectors and expressways. Access is controlled so that only community significant land use may have direct access to these streets. 
(2)  A "collector street" connects residential streets to the highway system's major and higher arterials or provides access to nonresidential uses and arterials. Collectors form barriers between neighborhoods and are designed for higher speeds and traffic volumes than are residential streets. Collectors are classified as major collectors and minor collectors: 
a.  The term "major collector" means the primary function is to carry traffic for most major intraurban trips over one mile, particularly during peak hours. These streets provide only limited direct access to adjacent land. This direct access is usually focused on major facilities, shopping centers or other significant traffic generators. Major collectors are usually designed with four travel lanes and may be either divided or undivided. 
b.  The term "minor collector" means the primary function is to carry traffic for short to medium (one-half-mile to one-mile) intraurban trips. These streets receive traffic from residential streets and transmit it to major collectors and arterials. Minor collectors, spaced to relieve excessive traffic volumes on local streets, are commonly designed with two travel lanes. 
(3)  The term "divided street" means any street with a median greater than 100 feet in length separating the travel lanes. A divided street may be a major collector, minor collector, industrial, commercial or residential street. 
(4)  The term "private street" means any parcel of land set aside to provide access to a development and which will not be dedicated or deeded to the town. These streets shall be constructed to standards adopted by the town. 
(5)  The term "public street" means any right-of-way dedicated or deeded to and accepted by the town for purposes of public travel. Public streets shall be constructed to standards adopted by the town. 
(6)  A "residential street" functions primarily to provide access to residential areas. All residential streets are intended to accommodate relatively low traffic volumes to ensure safety in residential areas. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to, tennis courts, fences, swimming pools and buildings. 
    Subdivider means any person, persons, partnership, corporation or other entity or the estate of such entity, having a proprietary interest in the land to be divided. 
    Subdivision means and includes all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purposes, whether immediate or future, of sale, gift, or building development and includes all division or development of land involving a new street or a change in an existing street. It shall also include resubdivision, the process of subdividing and the land or area subdivided; provided, however, division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved are not included in this definition. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started, or if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
    Tree means a woody plant which has a single or combined trunk with a caliper (diameter) of eight or more inches five feet above the ground, or any flowering ornamental woody plant having a caliper of two or more inches five feet above the ground. 
    Vegetation means all plant growth especially trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, mosses and grasses. 
    Wetlands means areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, as determined by the Army Corp of Engineers. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-3; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-3. - Purpose and intent. 
    This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(2)  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services of land developments; 
(3)  To assure adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land development; 
(4)  To assure the provision of needed public areas and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; 
(5)  To assure that land development conforms with the currently approved comprehensive land use plan for the town; 
(6)  To assure that the aesthetically pleasing atmosphere presently existing in the town will be maintained in order to promote the health, safety and welfare of all citizens of the town; and 
(7)  To assure the preservation of the historic character of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-2; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Secs. 109-4-109-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 109-25. - Enforcement. 
    The town engineer and other town staff shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-73; Ord. No. 406, 9-6-2001) 
Sec. 109-26. - Inspection and right of entry. 
    Upon presentation of identification to the developer, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, employees of the town may enter during all reasonable hours any property under proposed or existing development and construction. These employees may make inspections of the facilities for the purpose of determining plan requirements or compliance with ordinance provisions. These designees may inspect any drainage system within or outside of an existing drainage easement. All drainage facilities located on private property, whether dedicated to the town or not, shall be accessible at all times for town inspection. Where drainage facilities are accepted by the town for maintenance, public access easements shall be provided. Reasonable access shall be provided to all drainage easements for inspection and maintenance functions. Where an easement does not exist for the drainage system, the permission of the owner shall be obtained before entrance; however, in the event of emergency maintenance requirements, permission of the owner shall not be mandatory. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-74; Ord. No. 406, 9-6-2001) 
Sec. 109-27. - Emergency maintenance. 
(a)  The town may conduct emergency maintenance operations on private land and on drainage systems where emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance shall constitute the removal of trees and other debris, which in the judgment of the town engineer create a condition potentially injurious to life, property, or the public road system. 
(b)  Emergency maintenance conducted on any drainage system shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-75; Ord. No. 406, 9-6-2001) 
Sec. 109-28. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever the town engineer/staff determines that activity on a property does not comply with the approved development and construction plan, he may issue a notice of violation. Whenever he determines that the drainage system has been unlawfully altered, causing inadequate drainage, he may issue a notice of violation. The notice of violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall be to the owner of the property or his agent and shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred; 
(3)  List the specific provisions of this chapter which have been violated; and 
(4)  State that, if these repairs, construction or alterations are not completed within a reasonable time period specified by the inspector, summons shall be issued for the owner to appear in municipal court. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. However, in the judgment of the town engineer, where the violation is willful, and in wanton disregard of the provisions of this chapter or constitutes a public health and safety hazard, he may obtain a court summons in lieu of a notice of violation. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-76; Ord. No. 406, 9-6-2001) 
Sec. 109-29. - Appeals. 
    These land development regulations shall be administered by the town council, along with the planning commission and town staff. However, should an issue concerning these regulations remain unresolved by the town staff and planning commission, or if a written request for appeal should be filed with the town clerk or by any interested party within five working days of any action, a hearing shall be held by the town council for final resolution of the dispute. Sufficient information shall be provided by the applicant, affected town staff members, and the planning commission to ensure a timely decision by the town council. For purposes of this section, an interested party shall be an applicant or a town resident who lives within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision or development at issue on appeal. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-71; Ord. No. 406, 9-6-2001) 
Sec. 109-30. - Variance. 
    Application for a variance shall be filed with the town clerk. No variance is permitted from section 109-171. Variances from other provisions set forth in these rules and regulations may be authorized by the town council if all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  There are extraordinary, exceptional, or peculiar conditions pertaining to the particular piece of land, structure or building in question which are not applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district; 
(2)  The application of these regulations to a particular piece of property would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; 
(3)  Relief granted would not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare or impair the purposes and intent of these regulations; 
(4)  A literal interpretation of this chapter would deprive the applicant of any rights that others in the same district are afforded; 
(5)  The special conditions and circumstances are not a result of any actions of the applicant; and 
(6)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-72; Ord. No. 406, 9-6-2001) 
Secs. 109-31-109-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISIONS AND SITE PLANS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 109-49. - Platting authority. 
(a)  The town council along with the planning commission and town engineer shall be the official platting authorities of the town, and no plat of a subdivision shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county unless it shall have the approval of the town as delineated in section 109-115 inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without prior approvals as required by this article is hereby declared a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The provisions of this article may change from time to time. Only those portions of the article in effect at the time a given plat/site plan is accepted by the town shall apply to development of the lots or site as depicted on the plat/site plan. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-4; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-50. - Use of plat. 
    The transfer of title or sale of land by reference to a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county is prohibited. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-5; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-51. - Erection of building. 
    No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any subdivided lot in the town unless the final plat or final site plan has been approved in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-6; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-52. - Review and inspection. 
(a)  In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town, and in order to offset some of the cost for review and inspection of public improvements required, a fee shall be collected for the development of all land within the town, as set forth by a schedule adopted by the mayor and town council. 
(b)  In phased developments, the fee shall be paid for each respective phase prior to the issuance of any development permit. 
(c)  Development fees shall not be collected for additions to existing buildings or subdivisions so long as no additional acreage is involved. If additional acreage is involved, development fees shall be paid for that additional acreage in the amounts set by the mayor and town council. 
(d)  No development fee shall be charged for any recreation land included in any development which is to be dedicated to the town for public use. 
(e)  This fee shall be collected for each review performed with the exception of reviews requested by the town. 
(f)  The fee schedule for this chapter is as follows: 
(1)  Conceptual plat: $20.00 per lot with minimum of $200.00. 
(2)  Preliminary plat: $30.00 per lot with minimum of $300.00. 
(3)  Final plat: $50.00 per lot. 
(4)  Site plan: 
a.  Zero to two acres: $500.00; 
b.  Two to five acres: $1,000.00; 
c.  Five or more acres: $1,000.00 plus $100.00 per acre, or portion thereof, over five acres. 
(5)  Construction inspection: Four percent of estimated costs of construction of public improvements with a minimum of $200.00. 
(6)  Land development permit: 
a.  One acre or less: $50.00; 
b.  One to five acres: $100.00; 
c.  Five to ten acres: $250.00; 
d.  Over five acres: $500.00. 
(7)  Application for street name change: $250.00. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-7; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Secs. 109-53-109-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLAT APPROVAL AND CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 109-78. - General requirements. 
    If a proposed development includes land to be subdivided, the development shall be subject to all the requirements of the zoning ordinances and shall be subject to these land development regulations and other applicable town regulations. The proposed development shall also conform to the purpose and intent of these land development regulations and the goals and objectives of the town's land use plan. For those developments within the 74 Quality Development Corridor the developer in addition to the procedures set out in this division shall obtain a certificate of appropriateness for that development. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-8; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-79. - Conceptual plat approval. 
(a)  This plat, if submitted, must be submitted by the third Monday of the month in order to be heard by the planning commission on the last Thursday of the following month. Fifteen copies of a conceptual plat meeting the specifications set out in section 109-112 of these regulations must also be submitted. 
(b)  This conceptual plat will be reviewed by the town staff. If the conceptual plat does not meet the requirements of section 109-112, the town clerk will return the plat to the developer for corrections. If the plat meets the requirements of section 109-112, the town clerk shall place the conceptual plat on the next scheduled planning commission agenda. 
(c)  The town clerk shall submit the results of the town staff's review in writing to the planning commission prior to their meeting. 
(d)  The planning commission will review the conceptual plat, taking into consideration the requirements of section 109-78 and the town staff report. During the meeting, the planning commission and the town engineer/planner will discuss the results of their review with the subdivider and if necessary make recommendations for improvements, modifications or changes. 
(e)  The planning commission shall then vote either approval or disapproval on the conceptual plat. 
(f)  When a concept plat has been approved by the town planning commission, this approval shall remain valid for one year from the date of the approval. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-9; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997; Ord. No. 2008-517, § 1, 5-1-2008) 
Sec. 109-80. - Preliminary plat approval. 
(a)  Upon approval of or in lieu of the conceptual plat, an application for preliminary plat shall be submitted to the town along with 15 copies of the preliminary plat, meeting the specifications of section 109-113. The preliminary plat must be submitted by the third Monday of the month in order to be heard by the planning commission on the last Thursday of the following month. 
(b)  This preliminary plat will be reviewed by the town staff and by the county's emergency services division. If the conceptual plat does not meet the requirements of section 109-112, the town clerk will return the plat to the developer for corrections. If the plat meets the requirements of section 109-112, the town clerk shall place the preliminary plat on the next scheduled planning commission agenda. 
(c)  The town clerk shall submit the results of the town staff's review in writing to the planning commission prior to their meeting. 
(d)  The planning commission, if they find that the preliminary plat conforms to the conceptual plat and meets all relevant regulations, ordinances, rules and laws, shall sign the preliminary plat. If the planning commission determines that the preliminary plat does not reasonably conform to the conceptual plat or meet all relevant regulations, ordinances, rules and laws, it shall not approve the preliminary plat. The developer may resubmit following the procedures in section 109-79(a) or may appeal using section 109-80(e). 
(e)  If the applicant disagrees with the action of the planning commission, as provided above, he may appeal as follows: 
(1)  Submit to the town clerk within seven working days after recommendation of disapproval or approval with modifications by the planning commission, a written statement clearly defining the nature of disagreement and the applicant's opinion of error. 
(2)  If within ten working days after receipt of such written statement, the planning commission chairman concludes that the applicant's objection is justified, he shall place the site plan on the next planning commission's agenda. If the planning commission chairman concludes that the original action was correct, that action shall stand. 
(f)  Upon approval of the preliminary plat, within 30 days the subdivider shall provide the town with a development schedule showing completion dates for the subdivision or subdivisions depicted on the approved preliminary plat. If the town engineer/planner finds that the submitted development schedule is reasonable, he shall attach same to the preliminary plat. The certificate of preliminary plat approval shall remain in effect so long as the developer follows the development schedule. In no case shall the development schedule extend beyond five years. If the subdivision or subdivisions given preliminary plat approval are not completed within the time periods shown on the development schedule, a new certificate of preliminary plat approval shall be required. Compliance with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of the new certifications shall be required. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-10; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997; Ord. No. 2008-517, § 2, 5-1-2008) 
Sec. 109-81. - Construction authorization. 
(a)  Following approval of the preliminary plat and prior to defoliating or altering of a platted site in any manner, two copies of construction drawings, soil sedimentation and erosion control plans and a copy of the state's approval of the erosion control plan shall be submitted by the applicant to the town engineer for approval. Said plans must comply with all town design and environmental standards. That submission shall include a grading plan and other engineering documents as may be required by the town engineer including, but not limited to, a hydrological study, soil sedimentation and erosion controls to be utilized while the project is under development, and provisions for water facilities if required. All such plans shall clearly show the limits of construction activity on the site. The town engineer shall have 15 working days to respond to requests for construction authorization. 
(b)  Following approval of construction drawings by the town engineer and soil sedimentation and erosion control plans approved by the soil and water conservation service, a development permit shall be issued by the town engineer. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a development permit an applicant may begin development. 
(d)  All required soil and erosion control structures or measures shall be installed prior to the initial grading operation. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-11; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-82. - Application for final plat approval. 
(a)  Upon satisfying the requirements of these regulations, the developer shall apply to the town for final plat approval and shall submit all documents required by section 109-114. 
(b)  After receipt of the application for final plat approval, the town planner/engineer shall determine whether all required documents have been filed with the application. A completed application is required before the application can be processed. 
(c)  Final plat approval will not be given until all requirements of these rules and regulations have been met, and the town clerk has received, a legally binding bond or other satisfactory instrument or assurance of financial security providing for the maintenance of all improvements required by these rules and regulations for a period of two years following the date of final acceptance of streets by the town and either: 
(1)  All improvements required for final plat approval under the rules and regulations of the town have been properly completed; or 
(2)  All required drainage and retention facilities, grading, water and sewer utilities, street base and curbing construction have been completed, and a cash deposit, escrow account or other legally binding instrument of financial security in an amount equal to 110 percent of the projected costs of completion as determined by the town engineer has been deposited with the town clerk for any required improvements not yet completed. Said cash deposit or escrow account may be withdrawn in direct proportion to the amount of work completed as approved by the town engineer provided that sufficient funds are retained in said cash deposit or escrow account to complete construction of all required improvements. All improvements must be completed within one year after approval of the final plat. Upon final acceptance of all improvements and upon the expiration of the warranty period provided for herein, any funds remaining in said deposit or account shall be returned to the depositor. 
(d)  The following officials must sign the final plat: 
(1)  Mayor; 
(2)  Town clerk; 
(3)  Town engineer. 
(e)  After approval of the final plat, the final plat shall be recorded by the town in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. All costs for this recording are the responsibility of the applicant. As-built drawings shall be submitted no later than ten working days to the town after the recording of the final plat or within ten working days after completion of those requirements bonded in accordance with subsection (c)(2) of this section. Upon recording, the applicant shall provide the town 16 copies of the final plat (two on Mylar drafting film), with all certificates required by this article endorsed thereon. 
(f)  If action on a final plat is not taken within 45 calendar days after the date that a completed application is submitted to the town, the final plat shall be deemed approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-12; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-83. - Re-platting. 
    Replatting shall follow the process outlined in section 109-80. If the manifest purpose of a replatting is to circumvent the terms and conditions of this article, that replatting shall not be approved. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-13; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-84. - Certificate of appropriateness. 
    Prior to the first submission to the planning commission, for any development located within the 74 Quality Development Corridor the developer must first submit a concept of the proposed development for review and approval by the town council. The developer should provide sufficient information to show how the proposed development relates to the surrounding environment to ensure visual continuity and how the development will if approved be in compliance with the 74 Quality Growth Development District special requirements as contained in the town zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-14; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Secs. 109-85-109-111. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 109-112. - Conceptual plat specifications. 
    A conceptual plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Proposed name of subdivision and streets. 
(2)  Name and address of record owner of property. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the subdivider of property. 
(4)  Vicinity map showing the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to surrounding development. 
(5)  Location of property by land lot and district, graphic scale, approximate total acreage, north arrow and date. 
(6)  Approximate location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, existing wooded areas, and location, width and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract to be subdivided. 
(7)  Approximate topography. 
(8)  The approximate location and widths of proposed streets. 
(9)  The approximate location of all proposed or existing lots. 
(10)  The approximate location and size of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for recreation use or other public use, or for the exclusive use of property owners in the proposed property. 
(11)  The location of temporary stakes, if required by the planning commission and town staff. 
(12)  Location of sanitary sewage disposal areas, if applicable. 
(13)  The zoning of the property to be subdivided. 
(14)  The location of greenbelts and other areas to be landscaped. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-15; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-113. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
    The preliminary plat shall be clearly drawn at a scale of no less than 100 feet to one inch on a sheet which measures 17 inches by 22 inches and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Proposed name of subdivision, proposed street names and address of the owner of record. 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of the subdivider. 
(3)  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plat drawing, and space for revision dates. 
(4)  Preliminary certificates and statements specified in section 109-115. 
(5)  Location (land district and land lot) and acreage. 
(6)  Location sketch locating the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area showing the relationship to well known landmarks. Location sketches may be drawn in freehand and must be at a scale not less than one inch to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
(7)  Name of former subdivision if any or all of the land in the preliminary plat has been previously subdivided, showing boundaries of same. 
(8)  Preliminary boundary lines of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths and bearings. The boundary lines shall include the entire tract to be subdivided and data as required herein shall apply to the entire tract. 
(9)  Contour lines based on sea level datum shall be included and shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet. Contour lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs, and the basis for the topographic contour shown shall be specified. 
(10)  Natural features within the proposed subdivision, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wetlands and other significant features. On all watercourses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated, and for all watercourses entering the tract the direction and acreage of the drainage area above the point of entry shall be noted. The 100-year floodplain as depicted on the FEMA flood study shall be indicated if any portion of the proposed subdivision is within the boundaries of said floodplain. 
(11)  Cultural features within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision including right-of-way and pavement widths, names of existing and platted streets, all easements, town and county lines, location and dimensions of bridges, utility lines and structures, buildings, and culverts, should also be indicated. 
(12)  Proposed layout of the subdivision including lot lines with rough dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, street and alley lines with street names, cart path locations, right-of-way widths, greenbelts, setback lines, zoning district, easements, or other dedications for public uses. 
(13)  Unit division, phasing, or stage development, if any, as proposed by the subdivider. 
(14)  Location of all existing and proposed utilities. 
(15)  Street lighting plan. 
(16)  Location of any public or private recreation areas. 
(17)  Soil delineation performed by a soil scientist. 
(18)  Development schedule showing completion dates for subdivision. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-16; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-114. - Final plat specifications and application requirements. 
(a)  The application for final plat approval shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Sixteen print copies including two Mylar copies of the final plat, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not less than 100 feet to one inch (one inch equals 100 feet) on a sheet which measures 17 inches by 22 inches. 
(2)  The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the staging established in preliminary plat procedure (section 109-80(f)) and to other requirements of these rules and regulations. 
(3)  Lots or sites shall be numbered in numerical order and blocks shall be lettered alphabetically. 
(4)  Location, dimensions, invert elevations of piped segments and control weirs, maximum water surface elevations of retention ponds; location of any easements, public service utility right-of-way lines, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use; location of sites to be used for purposes other than residential with notes stating their purpose and limitations, and any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for the common use of all property owners shall be shown. 
(5)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers shall be shown. Monuments to be placed after final street improvements shall be designated as "future." 
(6)  Spaces for certificates and statements specified herein. 
(7)  All information required for the recording of maps, plats, etc., by O.C.G.A. title 15, ch. 6, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-50 et seq.) must be shown. All requirements specified by state law shall apply. 
(8)  That approval has been provided for any required landscaping. 
(9)  If a septic tank is proposed to be used on any lot in a subdivision, the following shall be required as a part of the final plat review process: 
a.  The applicant shall submit a copy of the soils delineation performed by a soil scientist. 
b.  The final plat shall contain a certification signed and dated by the county environmental specialist assigned to the county public health department that the property has been reviewed and, in general, approved for septic tank use. 
(10)  Two complete sets of "as-built" drawings signed and sealed by a professional engineer, registered in the state, and including the following: 
a.  "As-built" plans of all streets showing the actual location of all utility lines. 
b.  "As-built" spot elevations every 100 feet of all streets where final grades vary more than 12 inches from the approved construction drawings. 
c.  "As-built" horizontal and vertical alignment, including profiles and invert elevations of all sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Areas of lots, streets, and all other parcels of land, as shown on the final plat, and shall be tabulated as follows: 
Item Square Feet Acres Lots (number)      ____________ ____________ Streets      ____________ ____________ Green Belt      ____________ ____________ Other (specify)      ____________ ____________ TOTAL     ____________ ____________  
(c)  Each lot and other parcel of land shall have the area, expressed to the nearest square foot, shown within the boundary of the same. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-17; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-115. - Plat certificates. 
(a)  Each application for preliminary plat submitted shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped on the plat: 
(1)  Certificate of design. 
I hereby certify that the design and layout of the proposed lots, blocks, streets, and other planned features included in this proposed Preliminary Plat have been prepared by me or under my direct supervision. 
By ____________ Registered Landscape Architect No. ____________ Or ____________ Registered Land Surveyor No. ____________ Or ____________ Registered Civil Engineer No. ____________  
(2)  Certificate of preliminary plat approval. 
All requirements of the Tyrone Land Development Ordinance relative to the preparation and submission of a Preliminary Plat having been fulfilled, approval of this plat is hereby granted by the Mayor and Town Council. 
_____
Date _____
Town Engineer This Certificate Expires _____ 
Approved for development as shown: 
_____
Date _____
Fayette County Health Department  
(b)  Each final plat submitted for approval shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped thereon: 
(1)  Final surveyors certificate. 
By:  _____ Registered Land Surveyor No.  ____________ _____
Date  
(2)  Final plat approval. 
_____
Town Engineer _____
Date _____
Mayor _____
Date _____
 (Owner) _____
Town Clerk _____
Date  
(3)  Maintenance guarantee. 
(4)  Certificate of dedication. 
THE TOWN OF TYRONE, GEORGIA 
By:  ____________ 
    Mayor 
Attest:  ____________ 
        Town Clerk 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-18; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-116. - Conceptual site plan specifications. 
    The applicant shall submit 15 copies of a conceptual site plan to the town. This sketch shall contain sufficient information for a conceptual review of the proposed development and need not be a complete site plan. As a minimum, the following shall be shown: 
(1)  Proposed name of development and streets. 
(2)  Name and address of the record owner of the property. 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of the developer. 
(4)  Vicinity map showing the location of the proposed development in relation to surrounding development. 
(5)  Location of property by land lot and district, graphic scale, north arrow, approximate total acreage, and date. 
(6)  Approximate location of property line; existing easements, burial grounds, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, existing wooded areas, and location, width and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract to be developed. 
(7)  Approximate topography. 
(8)  The approximate location and widths of proposed streets. 
(9)  The approximate location and size of any parcels of land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public use, or for the exclusive use of property owners in the proposed property. 
(10)  The location of temporary stakes, if required by the planning commission and town staff. 
(11)  The zoning of the property to be developed. 
(12)  The location of greenbelts and other areas to be landscaped. 
(13)  Setback lines. 
(14)  Approximate location and size of building. 
(15)  Height of proposed building and building elevations (all sides) including exterior materials to be used. Elevations to show any mechanical equipment and proposed screening. 
(16)  Proposed parking area and number of spaces. 
(17)  Distance between buildings. 
(18)  Proposed use of building. 
(19)  Tree lines. 
(20)  Proposed limit of construction. 
(21)  Location of sanitary sewage disposal areas if applicable. 
(22)  Location, type, height, and wattage of any proposed on-site lighting. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-19; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-117. - Final site plan specifications. 
    In addition to the information on the conceptual site sketch, the following information shall be required as part of final site plan review: 
(1)  Fire hydrant locations. 
(2)  Exact legal boundary lines of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving lengths and bearings. Date of survey, north point, graphic scale and source of datum. 
(3)  Contour lines based on sea level datum. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet. Contour lines shall be based on field surveys, and basis for the topographic contour shown shall be specified. 
(4)  Natural features within the proposed development, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas, and other significant features. On all watercourses leaving the tract, the direction of flow shall be indicated, and for all watercourses entering the tract the direction and acreage of the drainage area above the point of entry shall be noted, and the 100-year floodplain shall be outlined. 
(5)  Proposed unit division or stage development, if any, as proposed by the applicant. 
(6)  The applicant shall submit information sufficient to permit an adequate evaluation of the development proposal in conformance with these and all other regulations and in conformance with the town's comprehensive land use plan. Specifically, the applicant shall provide the areas in square feet and acres of the various components of the development, including streets, buildings, and other property to be dedicated to the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-20; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Secs. 109-118-109-147. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SITE PLAN APPROVAL AND CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 109-148. - General requirements. 
    If a proposed development includes land that is zoned for other than single-family residential, the development shall be subject to all the requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance and shall be subject to all the requirements of this chapter, other applicable town regulations, and shall conform to the goals and objectives established in the town's land use plan. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
(1)  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in size and shape to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
(2)  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be provided in accordance with town specifications. 
(3)  The town engineer may, with the approval of the town council, impose additional requirements regarding design and construction of streets, curbs, gutters, cart paths and sidewalks. 
(4)  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from a potential nuisance created by a proposed commercial or industrial development including provision of extra depth in parcels backing up to existing or potential residential development and provisions for permanently landscaped screening when necessary. 
(5)  All new commercial structures within the town limits must conform to the historic nature of the town. 
(6)  For any structure proposed within the 74 Quality Development Corridor the developer must first obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the town council. To obtain this certificate the following procedures must be followed: 
a.  Prior to submission of a concept site plan the developer must present the project to the town council for review and approval. The developer should provide sufficient information to show how this proposed development relates to its surrounding environment to ensure visual continuity and how this development will, if approved, be in compliance with the quality growth development district special requirements as contained in the town zoning ordinance. 
b.  Once the project has obtained a certificate of appropriateness the developer shall follow the procedure in section 109-149 with the exception that the conceptual site plan will be approved by the town council. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-21; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-149. - Conceptual site plan approval. 
(a)  A developer shall submit to the town 15 copies of a conceptual site plan, meeting the specifications set out in section 109-116, by the third Monday of the month in order to be heard by the planning commission on the last Thursday of the following month. 
(b)  This conceptual site plan will be reviewed by the town staff. If the conceptual site plan does not meet the requirements of section 109-116, the town staff will return the plan to the developer for corrections. If the plan meets the requirements of section 109-116, the town clerk shall place the conceptual site plan on the next scheduled planning commission agenda. 
(c)  The town clerk shall submit the results of the town staff's review in writing to the planning commission at their next meeting. 
(d)  The planning commission will review the conceptual site plan, taking into consideration the requirements of section 109-148 and the town staff report. During the meeting, the planning commission will discuss the results of their review with the developer and will, if necessary, make recommendations for improvements, modifications or changes. 
(e)  The planning commission shall then vote to either approve or disapprove the conceptual site plan. 
(f)  If the planning commission does not recommend approval of the conceptual site plan, the developer may resubmit with necessary changes, following the procedures set out in this section. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-22; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997; Ord. No. 2008-517, § 3, 5-1-2008) 
Sec. 109-150. - Final site plan approval. 
(a)  Upon approval of the conceptual site plan, an application for final site plan approval shall be submitted to the town clerk along with seven copies of the final site plan, meeting the specifications of section 109-117. 
(b)  The town staff shall review the final site plan. The town staff shall have 15 working days after an application for final site plan approval is filed to give the applicant written notice of recommendation for approval, disapproval, or approval with modifications. 
(c)  If the town staff determines that the final site plan meets all relevant regulations, ordinances, rules and laws, and conforms to the conceptual site plan, the town engineer and the zoning administrator shall issue an approval, disapproval or approval with modifications. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-23; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-151. - Construction authorization. 
(a)  Following approval of the final site plan, four copies of the final site plan, soil sedimentation and erosion control plan, hydrological study and a copy of the state's approval of the erosion control plan shall be submitted to and approved by the town engineer prior to any defoliation or alteration of the site. Said plans shall be in compliance with all design standards and environment and land development regulations as adopted by the town, and shall include a grading plan and such other engineering documents as may be required by the town engineer. The town engineer shall have ten working days to respond to requests for construction authorization. 
(b)  Following approval of final engineering plans by the town and soil sedimentation and erosion control plans by the soil and water conservation service, a development permit will be issued by the town engineer. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-24; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Secs. 109-152-109-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 109-171. - Suitability of land. 
    Land that is subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for development use shall not be platted for any use that will continue or increase the danger to health or safety, unless the hazards are first corrected. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-25; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-172. - Name of subdivision. 
    The name of the subdivision must be approved by the town planning commission and it shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-26; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-173. - Access. 
    Access to every subdivision shall be provided by way of a public or private street. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-27; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-174. - Required street improvements. 
    Any proposed development contiguous to an existing unpaved public town street will be required to bring that portion of the unpaved street adjacent to the development up to current town standards. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-28; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-175. - Conformance to adopted thoroughfare plan and other plans. 
    No collector or arterial street shall be constructed unless it conforms to the thoroughfare plan of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-29; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-176. - Parks, playgrounds and recreation areas. 
    The town encourages land be reserved for parks and playgrounds or other recreation purposes by the developer of each single-family subdivision or multifamily development at locations designated on the master plan or where such reservations would otherwise be appropriate. Each reservation shall be of suitable size, dimension, topography, and general character and shall have adequate street access for the particular purposes envisioned. Those areas shall be shown and marked on the final plat, "Reserved for park and/or recreation purposes." When recreation areas are provided the developer can dedicate all such recreation areas to the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-30; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-177. - Special screening. 
    Special screening shall be required of all commercial, mobile home, industrial and multifamily subdivisions or developments on the sides that abut streets or single-family residential subdivisions, and the applicable setback areas of multiple frontage lots in single-family residential subdivisions. The intent of this special screening requirement is to hinder the view of the screened structure from the abutting single-family residential subdivision and/or to provide an area between street and developed area. The area between street and commercial/industrial area shall be at least 20 feet wide and shall run from property line to property line except for the ingress and egress areas and shall be included on the landscape plan. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-31; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-178. - Greenspace buffers. 
    In residential subdivisions a greenspace buffer area shall be reserved between the right-of-way of arterial thoroughfares, major collector thoroughfares, minor collector thoroughfares and subdivision property lines, as follows: 
(1)  Along arterials and major collectors, the greenspace area shall be no less than 60 feet between the street right-of-way and property line. 
(2)  Along minor collectors, the greenspace area shall be no less than 25 feet between the street right-of-way and property line. 
(3)  The greenspace area will be designated on all plats as "Town Greenspace Area" to be dedicated to the town. 
(4)  The greenspace area shall be shown on the landscape plan. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-32; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-179. - Reserve strips. 
    Reserve strips controlling access to street and public grounds shall not be permitted unless approved by the town council. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-35; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-180. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements, where required, shall have a minimum width of 20 feet. 
(b)  The town engineer may require sewer easements in subdivisions not currently served by a sewer system if, in his opinion, the subdivision may some day be served by a sewer system. 
(c)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage easement subject to approval by the town engineer. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-36; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-181. - Electrical street lighting. 
(a)  Electrical street lighting shall be installed in all subdivisions. 
(b)  Adequate street lighting shall be determined and approved by the town during the approval of a preliminary plat. One copy of the approved street lighting plan shall be forwarded to the electrical utility company servicing the subdivision. 
(c)  The developer shall provide adequate lighting at street intersections and dead-end streets including cul-de-sacs, and at all at-grade pedestrian crossings. 
(d)  As a minimum, luminaries are to be mounted at least 16 feet above grade. As a maximum, luminaries are to be mounted not more than 28 feet above grade. Adjustment in spacing and luminaries height may be made due to street curves, topography and natural foliage and type of equipment. A design within the range of the minimum and maximum shall be considered for approval that produces the effective horizontal illumination of 0.2 footcandle. 
(e)  Poles, fixtures and all related materials must be available standard stock items through the electric utility company servicing the subdivision or must be approved by the town. 
(f)  The developer shall pay the cost of installing the street lights before final plat approval. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-38; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-182. - Fire protection. 
(a)  Single-family residential developments. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all single-family residential developments which are served by a public water supply at locations shown on the preliminary plat as approved by the county emergency service. In no case shall the distance between fire hydrants exceed 500 feet. 
(b)  All other developments. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all other developments which are served by a public water supply main. Accessibility for firefighting equipment shall be maintained through all stages of construction. Fire hydrants and water service shall be installed to within 300 feet of the units under construction. If the units are of wood framing, the fire hydrants shall be installed before framing begins. The location and number of fire hydrants shall be approved by the county emergency services. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-40; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-183. - Off-street automobile parking. 
    Off-street automobile parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable provisions of this article and the town zoning ordinance. 
(1)  Plans required. A detailed parking plan for all uses other than single-family residential uses shall be submitted to the town as part of the final site plan. 
(2)  Design standards. All parking facilities, including entrances, exits and maneuvering areas, shall comply with the following provisions: 
a.  Shall have access to a public or private street; 
b.  Shall have all spaces marked with paint lines, curb stones or other similar designations; 
c.  Each space shall have not less than 162 square feet, and shall be not less than nine feet wide and 18 feet deep, exclusive of passageways. There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a public street; 
d.  Shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets; 
e.  Design of the parking area including space and driveway arrangement shall conform to the geometric design standards of the Institute of Traffic Engineers; 
f.  Adequate lighting as determined by the town engineer shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night; 
g.  The parking area shall be permanently maintained by the owners or the occupants; 
h.  Parking lots in developments permitted by the town and used by the public shall be constructed of a minimum of four inches of dense aggregate base and 11/2 inches of type "E" or "F" surfacing; 
i.  Handicap parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable state and federal standards. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-41; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-184. - Utility lines. 
    All utility lines within the town shall be placed underground with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Those lines which were in place above ground prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this division; 
(2)  Those lines, temporary in nature, which are intended to provide immediate service to an area for a period not to exceed 180 days, subject to the approval of the town engineer; and 
(3)  Major transmission lines which do not provide service to adjoining properties, but are intended to distribute service between substations, subject to the approval of the town engineer. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-42; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-185. - Sewage disposal. 
(a)  Each development shall include an adequate sewage disposal system. Such system must meet all regulations of the town which may be amended from time to time. The design of any system to be dedicated to the town must be approved by the town council and the town engineer prior to beginning any construction. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the town, the applicant shall secure a permit from the county health department or the state environmental protection division for the installation of the sewage disposal system and such system shall be maintained and operated in accordance with the requirements established by the county board of health and the state. 
(b)  Individual on-site sewage disposal systems (septic tank with drain field) shall not be installed on lots of less than one acre. 
(c)  If the sewage disposal system proposed for a single-family development will serve more than one lot and utilize land application for effluent disposal, the disposal area shall either be deeded to a municipality or authority in fee simple and such system shall be approved by the state EPD. This system is only allowed where soil conditions on 80 percent of the lots meets the criteria for a conventional septic tank system. The developer shall also provide the owner with suitable ingress and egress to the site by the transfer of the title or by permanent easement. Those areas dedicated for effluent disposal that serve more than one single-family residential lot cannot be contained as part of the lot. 
(d)  In all developments with sewer service the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Sanitary sewers shall be laid in all streets, service connections installed to property lines, and connections made to trunk line sewers. 
(2)  In all subdivisions with private disposal systems, lines shall be laid and temporarily plugged or capped at the points of service connections to the proposed trunk sewer line and individual lot lines. 
(3)  The proposed subdivision sewer system shall be designed by a registered civil engineer and the design shall be in accordance with the following: 
a.  Pipe shall be either concrete or PVC unless the use of ductile iron pipe is indicated, and the minimum size shall be eight inches for mains, four-inches for force mains, and six-inches for stub-outs. 
b.  Ductile iron pipe shall be used as follows: 
1.  At all points where the sewer crosses drainage structures or open streams. 
2.  For the influent joint of pipe at all drop manholes. 
3.  For sewers at depths less than four feet. 
4.  For stub-outs at depths of less than 51/2 feet. 
5.  For all force mains (must be polyurethane lined). 
c.  The sewer shall be located as near the center of the street as practical, and shall not be located less than four feet from the curb. Outfall lines shall not be located less than four feet from property lines. 
d.  Minimum depths for sewers located in streets shall normally be seven feet for mains and 51/2 feet for stub-outs. 
e.  Manholes shall be located not further than 400 feet apart; however, manholes shall be constructed at all turns and at all points where a grade change occurs. 
f.  Minimum slope for sewer pipes shall be 0.40 percent and maximum grade shall be ten percent. 
g.  A horizontal separation of at least ten feet must be maintained between the water main and any sewer line. When sewer mains cross water mains, a minimum vertical separation of 18 inches must be provided (measured edge to edge). 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-43; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-186. - Water supply. 
    All development in the town shall be connected to the county water system and the developer shall bear the total expense for extending water mains to the area proposed for development. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-44; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-187. - Site lighting. 
    All development in the town where on-site lighting is proposed shall place such lighting and use such fixture types which will direct the light downward and inward. High-pressure sodium lighting is the preferred lighting type. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-45; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-188. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be constructed within all residential developments, unless excluded below. Sidewalks are required on both sides of streets no closer than three feet from back of curb and shall not be constructed over any underground utility line. Sidewalks and curbs at street intersections shall be designed to meet Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) guidelines for access. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width. 
(b)  The requirement for sidewalks may be waived or modified by the planning commission in single-family residential subdivisions where the minimum lot size is three acres or larger or where the developer can demonstrate that alternate pedestrian paths will provide for adequate circulation. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-46; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-189. - Development impact. 
(a)  All persons proposing a development or construction project which either contains 50 or more acres of residential use or five or more acres of nonresidential use shall submit a study of the potential impacts of the development. The study should contain as a minimum the following information: 
(1)  A comprehensive description of the proposed development or construction; 
(2)  A description of the probable impact (schools, traffic, environment, water quality, air, wildlife, roads, etc.); 
(3)  A description of any adverse effects unavoidable if the project is implemented; 
(4)  A description of alternatives, including no action, to be considered; 
(5)  An analysis both of the short-term and long-term impact of the development or construction project; 
(6)  A description of any irreversible or irretrievable impacts if the development or construction goes forward; 
(7)  A description of the proposed management practices to minimize the impacts of the proposed development including a fiscal analysis of necessary capital and O&M expenditures needed to implement these practices. 
(b)  This study shall be submitted with the preliminary plat/site plan. The town engineer may require the submission of a study on property not meeting the size thresholds if in his opinion the proposed development is located in an environmentally sensitive area or has the potential to create a significant environmental impact. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-48; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Secs. 109-190-109-216. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Streets 

Sec. 109-217. - Continuation of existing streets. 
    Existing streets shall be continued at the same width, unless other width is approved by the town council. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-33; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-218. - Street jogs. 
    Street jogs shall have centerline offsets no less than 125 feet. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-34; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-219. - Permits for street cuts. 
    Prior to cutting a town street, the person or entity seeking that street cut must obtain a street cut permit from the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-37; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
See. 109-220. - Cul-de-sacs. 
    Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length desirable or unavoidable, cul-de-sacs should not be greater in length than 1,200 feet. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-39; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-221. - Street name changes. 
(a)  The following procedure shall be used for changing an existing street name. 
(1)  An application requesting a street name change shall be submitted to the town clerk and contain the following: 
a.  A written petition bearing the signatures of a minimum of 51 percent of the property owners fronting the street. The property owners signing shall also constitute a minimum of 51 percent of the linear street frontage. Linear street frontage shall include frontage of properties that abut both sides of the street right-of-way; 
b.  Existing and proposed street names; 
c.  Reason for requesting the change; 
d.  Map showing street or portion of street affected by change; 
e.  Filing fee. 
(2)  The application shall be processed and scheduled for public hearing as follows: 
a.  The proposed name shall be checked by the county emergency management agency for acceptability; 
b.  Public hearing before the mayor and council; 
c.  The town clerk shall notify, by regular mail, all owners of record who have property fronting on the affected street, according to tax records available to the department, of the time and place of the public hearing. The postmaster shall also be notified or the hearing by regular mail; 
d.  Legal notice of the application and date, time and place of the public hearing shall be published in the official legal organ of the town at least 15 days prior to the public hearing; 
e.  The application shall be reviewed by the planning commission for recommendation and then forwarded to the town council; 
f.  The final decision on the proposed change shall be made after the town council holds a public hearing. 
(b)  For any street name change initiated by the town, the above process shall be followed with the exception of the application fee and the requirement for a written petition. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-47; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-222. - Street names. 
    The developer shall, to the maximum extent possible, utilize street names which reflect the town's Irish heritage. The town will provide a list of suggested street names. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-49; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-223. - [Oversight of street naming.] 
    The 911 communications board is hereby granted oversight, by the mayor and council of the Town of Tyrone, over the future naming of streets within municipal limits of the town for the limited purpose of determining that no duplicate street names are created across the various jurisdictions participating in the county's 911 communications center. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-2-2014) 
Secs. 109-224-109-252. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Blocks and Lots 

Sec. 109-253. - Block lengths and widths. 
    Block lengths and widths shall be determined by design considerations. It is suggested that blocks shall not be greater than 1,800 feet, nor less than 600 feet in length. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-53; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-254. - Lot sizes. 
(a)  Lots shall meet the lot width and lot area requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Where individual septic tanks are used, the county health officer shall prescribe the minimum lot sizes to conform to health standards, but in no case shall it be less than one acre. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-54; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-255. - Multiple and reverse frontage lots. 
    Multiple frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. Review section 109-177, special screening, and chapter 105, article V, division 4, landscape plans, for possible requirements if multiple or reverse frontage lots are located in town greenspace areas. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-55; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Secs. 109-256-109-273. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CONSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 109-274. - Purpose. 
    This division is enacted to provide standards and procedures for construction of streets in the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-50; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-275. - Plan submission requirements. 
    Prior to receiving a development or building permit, any person proposing development or construction in the town shall submit the following documents and plans to the town engineer for his approval: 
(1)  Grading, erosion control, sedimentation control and drainage plans, prepared by a professional engineer, architect or landscape architect currently registered and licensed in the state, which show compliance with this division. 
(2)  Statement of projected work sequence for the proposed project. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-51; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Sec. 109-276. - Design standards. 
(a)  Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction and workmanship for street and drainage installation shall conform to or be equal to standards published by the town. 
(b)  If no town-published standard exists, the work shall conform to the latest specifications of the state department of transportation. 
(c)  Access. 
(1)  All entrances or exits of any public or private street or drive onto any state highway must be approved by the state department of transportation and the town council prior to the issuance of a town development permit. 
(2)  Curb cuts on all nonresidential streets shall be located no less than 50 feet, measured from back of curb, from any intersection. 
(3)  In all nonresidential zoning districts, curb cuts shall not be less than 40 feet apart, measured between back of curbs. 
(4)  Curb cuts onto arterial and collector streets shall not be closer than 20 feet, measured from back of curb, to any property line in all zoning districts. 
(5)  All curb cuts onto arterial roads must include a deceleration lane constructed to standards of the state department of transportation. 
(6)  No direct residential access (drive cuts) onto arterial and collector thoroughfares shall be allowed unless a variance is first granted by the town council in accordance with section 109-30. 
(d)  Minimum right-of-way widths. 
(1)  Divided street: 130 feet. 
(2)  Major collector street: 80 feet. 
(3)  Minor collector street: 60 feet. 
(4)  Major industrial street: 80 feet. 
(5)  Minor industrial street: 60 feet. 
(6)  Commercial street: 60 feet. 
(7)  Residential street: 50 feet. 
(8)  Cul-de-sac right-of-way radius shall be the outside pavement radius plus ten feet. 
(e)  Design speed and grade. 
Street Type Maximum 
Grade 
(percent) Minimum 
Design 
Speed Minimum 
Grade 
(percent) Major collector street 6 45 1 Industrial/commercial street 6 (8)* 40 1 Minor collector street 8 (10)* 35 1 Residential street 10 (15)* 30 1  
*Allowed only where site topography does not allow flatter grades and only with approval of the town engineer. 
(f)  Street paving widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Divided street: 48 feet of pavement (four lanes), minimum median width 24 feet. 
(2)  Major collector street: 32 feet, if two lanes, 48 feet if four lanes; minimum median width for divided street 24 feet. 
(3)  Industrial street: 32 feet. 
(4)  Minor collector street: 28 feet. 
(5)  Commercial street: 28 feet. 
(6)  Residential street: 24 feet. 
(7)  Residential cul-de-sac: 
a.  40-foot radius without an island. 
b.  50-foot radius with an island with a 20-foot minimum pavement width. 
(8)  Commercial cul-de-sac: 
a.  50-foot radius without an island. 
b.  60-foot radius with an island with a 30-foot minimum pavement width. 
c.  One-way cul-de-sacs, 60-foot radius with an island with a 30-foot pavement width. 
(9)  Industrial cul-de-sac: 60-foot radius with or without an island with a 30-foot minimum pavement width. 
(g)  Street pavement section. All streets shall be constructed as follows: 
(1)  Residential street: 
a.  Six-inch compacted graded aggregate base. 
b.  Two-inch type "B" asphaltic concrete binder. 
c.  One-inch type F" asphaltic concrete topping. 
(2)  Commercial/minor collector: 
a.  Eight-inch compacted graded aggregate base. 
b.  Three-inch type "B" asphaltic concrete binder. 
c.  11/2-inch type "E" asphaltic concrete topping. 
(3)  Industrial/major collector: 
a.  Eight-inch compacted graded aggregate base. 
b.  Three-inch asphaltic concrete base. 
c.  Two-inch type "B" asphaltic concrete binder. 
d.  11/2-inch type "E" asphaltic concrete topping. 
(h)  Alignment. 
(1)  Vertical arterial road profile grades shall be connected by vertical curves of a minimum length in accordance with standards published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. Further, in approaches to intersections, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street for a distance of not less than 50 feet from the edge of pavement of an existing street. 
(2)  Horizontal minimum radii or centerline curvature shall be: 
a.  Major and minor collector streets: 400 feet. 
b.  Industrial/commercial streets: 400 feet. 
c.  Residential streets: 250 feet. 
(3)  Visibility requirements. Minimum horizontal and vertical sight distances shall be as follows: 
a.  Major collector streets: 350 feet. 
b.  Industrial/commercial streets: 350 feet. 
c.  Minor collector streets: 275 feet. 
d.  Residential streets: 250 feet. 
Vertical distance measured between two points shall be based on height of eye at 3.75 feet above pavement level and height of object at 0.5 foot. 
(i)  Other design requirements. 
(1)  Curb and gutter sections. All new public streets constructed within the town limits shall have curbs and gutters constructed in accordance with standards adopted by the town. 
(2)  Curb inlets. Curb opening inlets shall be spaced to intercept 85 percent of the storm flows in the gutter section, based on a ten-year storm. Maximum inlet spacing should not exceed 600 feet unless drainage calculations by a professional engineer can show that gutter flow would not be excessive for proper design performance. The designer shall provide for inlets to prevent a significant amount of storm flow from crossing an intersection. 
(3)  Traffic control devices. If the traffic to be generated by a use within a district will necessitate traffic control devices to ensure public safety, the developer shall install such devices as are necessary to move the traffic generated by the development. This determination shall be made by the town engineer based upon standard traffic planning procedures of the Institute of Traffic Engineers, using traffic warrants of the federal highway administration and the state department of transportation. 
(4)  Drainage system. 
a.  The street or road construction drainage system shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream areas for a storm of 100-year design frequency based on the existing town land use plan. 
b.  An appropriate class of reinforced concrete, corrugated plastic pipe or gauge of corrugated metal or pipe arch will be used for drainage systems. All storm drains within the street pavement and curb and gutter shall be fully coated with asphalt (if CMP is used) or aluminized steel type 2 pipe or its equivalent. Plain metal may be permitted outside of street areas. 
c.  All drains shall have headwalls or tailwalls installed as part of the overall system. Smaller culverts may use beveled end sections in lieu of headwalls if permitted by the town engineer. 
d.  In residential outfall culverts shall extend a minimum of 25 feet to the rear of the proposed dwelling or structure. 
e.  Continuous length of storm drains without an inlet, manhole or junction box access, shall not exceed 300 feet. 
f.  Maintenance easements for all drainage systems at least 20 feet wide shall be shown on the final plat and shall be dedicated to the town. 
(5)  Street cuts. All street cuts shall be constructed in accordance with standards adopted by the town. 
(6)  Private streets. Private streets shall be constructed in accordance with the public street specifications with the exception of requirements of subsection (d) of this section, street right-of-way widths; subsection (h)(2) of this section, horizontal minimum radii or center line curvature; and subsection (h)(3) of this section, visibility requirements, and shall be permitted in multifamily or commercial zoning districts only. However, horizontal and visibility requirements shall apply to private streets where such street intersects with a public street right-of-way. Private streets cannot become public streets until all requirements of this section have been met. 
(7)  Every single-family residential subdivision containing 100 lots or more shall be served by at least two ways of ingress and egress. 
(8)  Street signs. The town's standard street name signs shall have four-inch high green reflective letters with a shamrock at the left end of the sign. These letters shall be mounted on an anodized aluminum blank not less than 0.08 inch thick, six inches high, and a minimum of 36 inches in length covered with white background. The sign shall be coated with a clear acrylic coating. Nameplates shall be mounted parallel or nearly parallel to the street. The names shall be marked and visible from both sides. Street signs shall be installed at all street intersections on standard street sign poles. 
(Code 1984, § 6-7-52; Ord. No. 340, 6-3-1997) 
Secs. 109-277-109-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER/SANITARY SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 109-301-109-318. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MATERIALS 

Sec. 109-319. - Pipe materials. 
(a)  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. 
(1)  PVC sewer pipe and fittings shall be plastic gravity sewer pipe with integral wall bell and spigot joints for the conveyance of domestic sewage. Pipe and fittings shall meet extra strength minimum of SDR-35 of the requirements of ASTM D 3034, latest revision, for four inches through 15 inches and ASTM F 679 for 18 inches through 27 inches. Minimum wall thickness shall be as follows: 
Inches Inches 4 0.120 6 0.180 8 0.240 10 0.300 12 0.360 15 0.437 18 0.536 21 0.632 24 0.711 27 0.801  
(2)  Each length of pipe shall be marked with the manufacturer's name, trade name, nominal size, class, hydrostatic test pressure, manufacturer's standard symbol to signify it was tested, and date of manufacture. Each rubber ring shall be marked with the manufacturer's identification, the size, the year of manufacture and the classes of pipe with which it can be used. 
(3)  Under no circumstances shall PVC pipe ever be installed above ground. 
(b)  Ductile iron pipe (DIP). 
(1)  Ductile iron pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of ANSI: A21.51 (centrifugally cast in metal or sand lined molds). Pipe shall be thickness Class 50 for eight-inch diameter pipes and smaller, and class 51 for ten-inch diameter pipes and larger. The pipe shall be lined with Polybond or Polyline, or approved equal. The lining shall have a minimum thickness of 40 mils. 
(2)  The exterior of the pipe shall be seal coated with an approved bituminous seal coat in accordance with ANSI: A21.4. 
(c)  High density polyethylene (HDPE) pipe. High density polyethylene pipe and fittings shall be made of high density, high molecular weight polyethylene pipe material meeting the requirements of type III, class C, category 5, grade P34, as defined as ASTMD 1248 Standard Specification for Polyethylene Plastics Molding and Extrusion Materials. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-40; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-320. - Joint materials. 
(a)  Joints between DIP. Ductile iron pipe shall be of the bell and spigot type with push-on joints, conforming to ANSI Specification A21.11 or mechanical joints. 
(b)  Joints between PVC. PVC pipe shall be jointed with a rubber or PVC ring or gasket designed to prevent inflow or exflow. Mechanical compression joint or molded plastic or similar material (with or without the use of rubber or elastic plastic compression rings) as described in ASTM Specifications C-425 for Polyvinyl Chloride (Slip Joint). Precast joints or rubber pushtype gaskets for compression joint sealing (ASTM D 3312 or F 477) are all acceptable. (PVC pipe shall not be joined by a solvent cement joint in which the pipe spigot wedges into the tapered socket and the surfaces fuse together.) 
(c)  Joints between HDPE. HDPE pipe shall be joined by bell and spigot gasket style or thermal weld type connections in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations and shall show no sign of leakage. In the case of gasket type, all surfaces of the joint upon which the gasket may bear shall be smooth and free of such imperfections, ridges, fractures or cracks that could adversely affect sealability. 
(d)  Joints between sewer pipes of different materials. Transition joints between sewer pipes of different materials shall be accomplished by the use of adapters made especially for that purpose. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-41; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-321. - Precast concrete manholes. 
(a)  Precast concrete manholes shall consist of precast reinforced concrete sections with eccentric, (or flat slab for shallow manholes) top section and a base section conforming with the typical manhole details as shown on the Standard Detail Drawings. 
(b)  Precast manhole sections shall be manufactured, tested, and marked in accordance with the latest provisions of ASTM Standard Specifications, Serial Designation C 478. 
(c)  Joints of the manhole sections shall be of the tongue-and-groove type, sections shall be joined using O-ring rubber gaskets, flexible plastic gaskets conforming to the applicable provisions of ASTM Standard Specification, Serial Designation C 443, latest revision, or an approved bituminous mastic joint material. 
(d)  Each section of the precast manhole shall have not more than two holes for the purpose of handling and laying. These holes shall be sealed with cement mortar using one part Portland cement to two parts clean sand, meeting ASTM Standard Specifications, Serial Designation C 144, latest revision. 
(e)  Manhole steps conforming to the applicable provisions of ASTM Specification C 478, latest edition, such as aluminum 14967 as manufactured by Alcoa Inc., or equal, shall be factory built into the precast sections. 
(f)  Holes in precast bases to receive sewer pipe shall be precast at the factory at the required locations and heights. Knocking out of holes in the field will not be permitted. All manholes shall have Kor-N-Seal (or equal) rubber boots for all pipe entries/exits. 
(g)  Manhole bases and inverts shall be constructed of 2,500 psi concrete in accordance with details on standard detail drawings and inverts shall have the same cross-section as the invert of the sewers which they connect. The manhole base and invert shall be carefully formed to the required size and grade by gradual and even changes in sections. Changes in direction of flow through the sewer shall be made to a true curve with as large a radius as the size of the manhole will permit. 
(h)  The manhole base shall be set upon a six-inch (minimum thickness) mat of No. 57 crushed stone. 
(i)  Brickwork required to complete the precast concrete manhole shall be constructed using one part Portland cement to two parts clean sand, meeting ASTM Specifications, Serial Designation C 144, thoroughly mixed to a workable plastic mixture. Brickwork shall be constructed in a neat and workmanlike manner. Cement mortar shall be used to grout interior exposed brick joints and faces. 
(j)  The cast iron frame for the manhole cover shall be set at the required elevation and properly anchored to the masonry. Frames and covers shall be Vulcan VM-3MOD or equal. Where manholes are constructed in paved areas, the top surface of the frame and cover shall be tilted to conform to the exact slope, crown and grade of the existing adjacent pavement. Manholes on all outfall sewers shall have bolt-down, watertight lids and shall be 18 inches above grade. 
(k)  Masonry work shall be allowed to set for a period of not less than 24 hours. All loose or waste material shall be removed from the interior of the manhole. The manhole cover then shall be placed and the surface in the vicinity of the work cleaned off and left in a neat and orderly condition. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-42; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-322. - Casings. 
(a)  Steel casing pipe shall be used for all cased piping. 
(b)  Steel casing pipe shall have a minimum yield strength of 35,000 psi and shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A139. It shall be fully coated on the exterior and interior with a coal tar coating. The casing pipe diameter shall be six to eight inches greater than the "bell" diameter of the carrier pipe. Minimum wall thickness shall be as follows: 
Nominal Diameter 
(inches) Nominal Thickness 
(inches) Under 14 0.188 14 0.219 16 0.219 18 0.250 20 0.281 22 0.312 24 0.344 26 0.375 28 0.406 30 0.406 32 0.438 34 0.469 36 0.469 42 0.500 48 0.625 54 0.750  
(Code 1984, § 6-9-43; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Secs. 109-323-109-347. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWER SYSTEM EXCAVATION AND CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 109-348. - Trench excavation. 
(a)  Trench excavation shall conform to OSHA regulations, 29 CFR Part 1926, Subpart P, Paragraphs 1926.650 through 1926.653. 
(b)  Trenches shall be cut true to the lines and grades shown on the plans. The bottom of the trench shall be cut carefully to the required grade of the pipe except where bedding materials or cradles are shown in which case the excavation shall extend to the bottom of the bedding or cradles as shown on the plans. Minimum pipe cover shall be as shown on the approved plans. 
(c)  Bell holes shall be excavated at proper intervals so the barrel of the pipe will rest for its entire length upon the bottom of the trench. Bell holes shall be large enough to permit proper installation of all joints in the pipe. 
(d)  Pipe trenches shall not be excavated more than 100 feet in advance of pipe laying, and all work shall be performed to cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. Adequate temporary bridges or crossings shall be constructed and maintained where required to permit uninterrupted vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(e)  All excavations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights in compliance with all OSHA and state department of transportation requirements so as to protect the public from hazard. 
(f)  Excavations adjacent to existing or proposed buildings and structures, or in paved streets or alleys shall be sheeted, shored and braced adequately to prevent undermining or subsequent settlement of such structures or pavements. Underpinning of adjacent structures shall be done when necessary to maintain structures in safe condition. 
(g)  Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to as near original condition as possible in a manner satisfactory to the county. 
(h)  Whenever water is present in the trench, it shall be removed in a manner satisfactory to the county and enough backfill shall be placed on the pipe to prevent floating. Any pipe that has floated shall be removed from the trench and relaid later during dry conditions. No pipe shall be laid in wet trench conditions that preclude proper bedding, or on frozen trench bottom, or when, in the opinion of the county, the trench conditions or the weather are unsuitable for proper installation. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-44; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-349. - Rock excavation. 
(a)  Drilling and blasting operations shall be conducted with due regard for the safety of persons and property in the vicinity and in strict conformity with the requirements of all ordinances, laws and regulation governing blasting and the use of explosives. Rock excavation near existing pipelines or other structures shall be conducted with the utmost care to avoid damage. Injury or damage to other structures and properties shall be promptly repaired to the satisfaction of the county and the property owner. 
(b)  Rock in trenches shall be excavated over the horizontal limits of excavation and to depths as follows: 
Size of Pipeline 
(inches) Bottom of Sewer Pipe 
(inches) 4 and less 4 4 to 6 6 8 to 18 8 18 to 30 10 Over 30 12  
(c)  The space below grade for pipe lines shall then be backfilled with No. 57 and smaller crushed rock, gravel, or other approved bedding material. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-45; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-350. - Backfilling trenches. 
(a)  General. Backfill material shall consist of fine, loose earth containing sufficient but not excessive moisture content for thorough compaction. Material that is too dry for adequate compaction shall receive a prior admix of sufficient water to secure adequate moisture content. Material having excessive water content shall not be placed at any time. Backfill material shall be free of large clods, stones, vegetable matter, debris, and other objectionable material. 
(b)  Backfilling beneath roads, sidewalks or other critical areas. All backfill beneath roads, sidewalks or other critical areas shall be compacted to 95 percent standard proctor or as otherwise required by the state department of transportation (DOT) or other such agency having jurisdiction using mechanical tamping equipment in six-inch lifts. It shall be the responsibility of the contractor to demonstrate to the county that 95 percent compaction has been obtained. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-46; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-351. - Installation of sewer pipe. 
(a)  Pipes and accessories shall at all times be handled with care to avoid damage. Whether moved by hand, skidways or hoists, material shall not be dropped or bumped. The interior of all pipe shall be kept free from dirt and foreign matter at all times. Each joint of pipe shall be unloaded opposite or near the place where it is to be laid in the trench. 
(b)  All such material that is defective in manufacturer or has been damaged in transit or after delivery shall be removed from the job site. 
(c)  Sewer pipes shall be joined by "push-on" joints using elastomeric gaskets to affect the pressure seal. The ends of pipe to be jointed and the gaskets shall be cleaned immediately before assembly, and the assembly shall be made as recommended by the pipe manufacturer. Lubricant used must be nontoxic and supplied or approved for use by the pipe manufacturer. Sewer pipes shall be laid in the uphill direction with the bells pointing upgrade. Any variation from this procedure shall require approval from the county. 
(d)  When pipe laying is not in progress, the open ends of installed pipe shall be plugged by approved means to prevent the entrance of trench water into the line. 
(e)  No special laying conditions are required for ductile iron pipe (DIP) other than haunching and soil compaction to 12 inches above the spring line and any other conditions which are stipulated elsewhere in these specifications. 
(f)  The following laying conditions shall be followed with PVC pipe: 
(1)  By embedding PVC pipe in sand or graded gravel, no special compaction requirements will be necessary. However, the sand or gravel must extend from six inches below the pipe to 12 inches above the pipe and the material must be firmly placed under the pipe haunches. (See Standard Detail Drawing.) 
(2)  When embedding PVC pipe in friable, compressible soils (e.g., silt, clay, sandy clay, silty clays, etc.), special care must be exercised to provide a uniform (undisturbed or fully compacted) trench bottom. Additionally, the backfill must be compacted to 95 percent standard proctor in six-inch to eight-inch lifts to 12 inches above the top of the pipe. 
(3)  All PVC pipe must pass a 7.5 percent deflection test as follows: Not before 30 days after pipe is laid and backfill placed, the contractor shall, in the presence of the town water system representative, test the pipe for deflection. A mandrel, sized to permit up to 7.5 percent deflection, shall be used. The sequence for testing is as follows: 
a.  Completely flush the line making sure the pipe is clean of any mud or debris that would hinder the passage of the mandrel; 
b.  During the final flushing of the line, attach a floating block or ball to the end of the mandrel pull rope and float the rope through the line; 
c.  After the rope is threaded through the line, connect the pull rope to the mandrel and place the mandrel in the entrance of the pipe; 
d.  Connect a retrieval rope to the back of the mandrel to pull it back if necessary; 
e.  Remove all the slack in the pull rope and place a tape marker on the rope at the ends of the pipe where the mandrel will exit, determining the location of the mandrel in the line; 
f.  Draw mandrel through the sewer line; 
g.  If a section with excessive deflection is found, locate it; dig down and uncover the pipe; inspect the pipe, if any damaged pipe is found, replace it; if pipe is not damaged, replace and thoroughly tamp the haunching and initial backfill; replace remainder of backfill. 
(g)  Bell holes shall be provided of sufficient size to allow ample room for making the pipe joints properly. The bottom of the trench between bell holes shall be carefully graded so that the pipe barrel will rest on a solid foundation for its entire length as shown on the plans. Each joint shall be laid so that it will form a close concentric joint with adjoining pipe and in order to avoid sudden offsets or inequalities in the flow line. 
(h)  Water shall not be allowed to run or stand in the trench before the trench has been backfilled. The contractor at no time shall open up more trench than his available pumping facilities are able to dewater. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-47; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-352. - Connections. 
(a)  Service connections, generally. 
(1)  A sewer service stub-out with plugged stub shall be provided for every existing or proposed lot or building. (See Standard Detail Drawings.) All services shall be shown on the construction drawings. Wye branches of the same material as the collector sewer shall be installed on the collector sewer lines at the locations shown on the construction drawings for each service connection. A single service stub shall be provided for each residence being served. The service stub shall extend from the wye to the property line of the lot being served. 
(2)  The developer shall be responsible for serving all lots developed. On any lot where the service stub cannot be found, the developer shall install or be responsible for the payment of the cost of installation of the service stub. Also, unless otherwise noted on the final plat, the service stub shall be low enough to serve the first ground level floor elevation, and where grades permit it shall be low enough to serve the basement. 
(3)  For new construction, the builder shall be responsible for the location of the service line and checking its elevation prior to the pouring of the foundation, driveway or other appurtenance. The county will not be responsible for any house built too low to be served nor for any service covered by construction. 
(4)  Riser connections shall be installed on service lines which are greater than nine feet deep. 
(5)  Service stubs shall be laid in compacted or undisturbed soil from the main sewer to the property line. The slope shall be 2.0 percent or greater. 
(6)  No plumber or contractor will be allowed to make a tap onto the county sewerage system without prior approval and without the tap being made in the presence of a town water system representative. 
(b)  Plugged stubs. 
(1)  All service lines extending from collector sewers must utilize a plugged stub at the termination point. (See Standard Detail Drawings.) 
(2)  Service lines shall be plugged with an airtight, removable plastic plug. 
(3)  The precise location of each plugged stub shall be indicated on the as-built plans to the nearest foot. 
(c)  Service connections where plugged stub not provided. 
(1)  Connections to existing sewer lines where no plugged stub exists shall be made by removing a section of the sewer from the existing line and inserting, in the space, a wye branch of proper size) or by the construction of a manhole or other such method as approved by town. 
(2)  Connections to existing manholes where no plugged stubs exist shall be made by neatly cutting a hole in the wall of the existing structure with a coring machine at or near its invert, inserting a length of sewer pipe into the hole, filling around the pipe with concrete or mortar and trowelling the inside and outside surfaces of the joint to a neat finish. 
(3)  All sewer connections for multiple or nonresidential structures shall be made by the owner (applicant) at his expense. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-48; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-353. - Railroad crossings. 
    All railroad crossings shall conform to the requirements of the American Railway Engineering Association Manual for Railway Engineering, Part 5. The contractor shall secure permission from the railroads to schedule the work so as not to interfere with the operation of the railroads. The contractor shall be held responsible for any delays or damages occurring to the railroads. The contractor will furnish the railroad with such additional insurance as may be required, cost of same to be borne by the contractor, together with the costs for flagmen, watchmen, temporary work of any nature, safety devices and any other items that may be imposed by the railroad. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-49; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-354. - Highway crossings. 
(a)  The contractor shall be responsible for the coordinating and scheduling of all construction work in the state highway right-of-way with the town and/or the state department of transportation, as appropriate. 
(b)  Work along and across state highway right-of-way shall conform to the state DOT Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-50; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-355. - Jack and bore. 
(a)  Jacks for forcing the casing pipe through the roadbed shall have a jacking head constructed in such a manner as to apply uniform pressure around the ring of the pipe. The pipe to be jacked shall be set on guides, braced together, to properly support the section of the pipe and direct it to the proper line and grade. In general, roadbed material shall be excavated just ahead of the pipe, the excavated material removed through the pipe, and the pipe then forced through the roadbed into the excavated space. 
(b)  Where pipe is required to be installed under railroads, highways, streets or other facilities by jacking or boring methods, construction shall be done in a manner that will not interfere with the operation of the facility, and shall not weaken the roadbed or structure. 
(c)  Excavated material will be placed near the top of the working pit and disposed of as required. The use of water or other fluids in connection with the boring operation will be permitted only to the extent necessary to lubricate cuttings. Jetting will not be permitted. 
(d)  The diameter of the excavation shall conform to the outside diameter and circumference of the casing pipe as closely as practicable. Any voids which develop during the installation operation shall be pressure grouted. 
(e)  The pipe shall be jacked from the low or downstream end. At each end of the casing pipe the void between the carrier pipe and casing shall be sealed with brick and mortar. Any pipe damaged in jacking operations shall be removed, and replaced by the contractor at his expense. 
(f)  After the steel casing pipe has been installed, the DIP carrier pipe shall be installed in the casing pipe. Care shall be exercised at all times to protect the coating and lining of this pipe and to maintain tight, full-seated joints in the carrier pipe. (See Standard Detail Drawing.) 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-51; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-356. - Relationship to water lines. 
(a)  The following clearances from water pipes shall be maintained: 
(1)  Ten feet horizontal distance between sewer and water main for parallel installation; 
(2)  18 inches vertical distance for water main and sewer crossings. 
(b)  The county may allow parallel installation of water line closer than ten feet to a sewer, provided that the water main is in a separate trench or on an undisturbed earth shelf located on one side of the sewer and at an elevation so the bottom of the water main is at least 18 inches above the top of the sewer. 
(c)  For sewer and water main crossings, the crossing shall be arranged so that the sewer joints will be equidistant and as far as possible from the water main joints. Where a water main crosses under a sewer, adequate structural support shall be provided for the sewer. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-52; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-357. - Replacement of pavement. 
(a)  General. Contractor shall fully restore and replace all pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other surface structures removed or disturbed, to a condition that is as near original condition as possible. 
(b)  Pavement cuts. 
(1)  All pavement cuts shall be made by sawing prior to excavation to eliminate uneven and ragged edges. 
(2)  All road cuts shall have an eight-inch-thick concrete cap (3,000 psi in 28 days) which shall extend not less than 12 inches beyond the edges of the backfilled ditch. (See Standard Detail Drawing.) 
(3)  Final asphalt patches shall match the existing pavement type, quality and thickness as closely as possible. Special care shall be exercised to match existing slopes and grades for a smooth transition. 
(c)  Pavement replacement. Where sewer lines are installed in existing paved streets, the streets in which the sewer lines are installed shall receive a full width asphalt repaving in accordance with the town standards and specifications. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-53; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-358. - Location and protection of existing underground utilities. 
    It is the responsibility of the contractor to locate all underground utilities and to protect same. Utility lines or services damaged by the contractor shall be repaired by the contractor at the contractor's own expense. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-54; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-359. - Testing. 
(a)  Infiltration testing. Infiltration of groundwater into sewer lines shall not exceed 100 gallons per inch of diameter, per 24-hour day, per mile of sewer. 
(b)  Low pressure air testing. All lines shall be air tested in the following manner after backfilling and tamping has been completed: 
(1)  Test preparation. All wyes, tees or end-of-side sewer stubs shall be plugged with flexible joint caps, or acceptable alternate, securely fastened to withstand the internal test pressure. Prior to testing for acceptance, the pipe should be cleaned. 
(2)  Test procedure. The sewer segment being tested shall be pressurized to 3.5 psi. A short period of time (two to four minutes) may be required to allow the pressure to stabilize. The pressure shall not decrease more than 0.5 psi (from 3.5 to 3.0 psi) during the time periods shown below: 
Pine Size 
(inches) Time 4 2 minutes, 32 seconds 6 3 minutes, 50 seconds 8 5 minutes, 6 seconds 10 6 minutes, 22 seconds 12 7 minutes, 39 seconds  
(c)  Test failure. If the pipe installation fails to meet the infiltration or air test requirements shown above, the contractor shall determine at his own expense the source or sources of leakage, and he shall repair or replace all defective materials or workmanship. The completed pipe installation shall meet the requirements of these tests and the results of the air test shall be neatly tabulated by the contractor and submitted to the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-55; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-360. - Clean-up. 
(a)  Prior to requesting the completion of sewer construction inspection, the contractor shall remove and dispose in an acceptable manner all shipping timbers, shipping bands, spacers, excess materials, broken material, crates, boxes and any other material brought to the job site. 
(b)  Any work, trees, lawns, shrubs, fences, flower beds, drainage culverts, or other property damaged by the sewer construction shall be repaired or replaced. 
(c)  All shoulders, ditches, culverts, and other areas impacted by the sewer construction shall be at the proper grades and smooth in appearance. 
(d)  All manhole covers shall be brought to grade. 
(e)  A uniform stand of grass is required prior to the town acceptance of the sewer. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-56; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Secs. 109-361-109-378. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE 

Sec. 109-379. - Construction, inspection, generally. 
(a)  Authorized representatives of the town, the state or the United States shall have access to the site for inspection at any time. 
(b)  The town shall be notified when specific inspections are required so that the inspection time can be scheduled. 
(c)  The contractor shall notify the water system inspector by 8:30 a.m. of each workday when work is scheduled unless authorized to do otherwise. 
(d)  Upon request, the contractor shall furnish the inspector with copies of the manufacturer's certification or submittals confirming the materials utilized meet the requirements of these specifications. The inspector may reject any materials not meeting specifications or any faulty or damaged materials. Any materials so rejected must be removed from the project immediately and must be prominently marked so that such rejected material can be spotted on this or any other project. 
(e)  The inspector may at any time direct that he be allowed to see any foundation, bedding, pipe work, manhole or other appurtenances. No connections to manholes, wyes, bends, service laterals, nor service stoppers shall be backfilled without first having the approval of the inspector. 
(f)  The contractor shall complete the project and shall have cleaned up the job site prior to requesting a completion of sewer construction inspection. The inspector may terminate the completion of sewer construction inspection and direct further work at any time he feels that the project is not substantially complete and ready for the inspection. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-57; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-380. - Sequence of completion checkpoint construction inspections. 
(a)  Conditions for completion of sewer construction inspection. 
(1)  The contractor shall complete the sewer construction and shall have cleaned up the job site prior to requesting a completion of sewer construction inspection. 
(2)  The contractor shall request a completion of sewer construction inspection and present the following information to the town water system: 
a.  Length of sewer installed by line size. 
b.  Cost of sewer line installed by line size. 
(3)  Infiltration and air testing shall have been accomplished as provided in section 109-359(b) and the results presented to the inspector at the inspection. 
(4)  The check sheet issued by the town for corrective work, as needed, shall be presented along with a written response to such letter indicating what work has been done by the contractor in response to the check sheet items. 
(5)  Presentation of as-built drawings in accordance with section 109-381. 
(6)  During the completion of sewer construction inspection, the developer will be expected to provide the necessary manpower and tools to open manholes and provide access to any other structures as requested by the county. 
(b)  Completion of sewer construction inspection and letter. 
(1)  The town water system will issue a letter certifying the completion of the sewer system construction when the contractor has completed the work items shown on the plans in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter as indicated by the town inspector in his completion of construction inspection report. 
(2)  In no case will the completion letter be considered as final acceptance of the project, nor will the contractor or developer be relieved of responsibility to protect and maintain the system until final acceptance is given. 
(c)  Completion of development inspection and letter. 
(1)  Upon completion of all work items in a development including water and sewer lines, streets, storm drains and all other utilities, the subdivision inspection team will reinspect all phases of the development. During this inspection, the sewers will be checked for any cut lines, shifted manholes, excessive infiltration, adjustment of manholes, and any damage by other construction. The cleanouts will be checked and off street sewers will be checked for settling and erosion and for proper landscaping. 
(2)  Upon satisfactory completion of any discrepancies noted during this inspection, the developer will begin the 12-month maintenance period required for all phases of the development. 
(d)  Final acceptance inspection and letter. At the end of 12 months following the completion of development inspection, the subdivision will again be inspected. During the final acceptance inspection, the developer will again be expected to provide the necessary manpower and tools to open manholes and provide access to any other structures as requested by the county. When all discrepancies noted during this inspection have been corrected, the water system will issue an acceptance letter and will begin perpetual maintenance of the sewerage system. The county will not accept the sewer system until the as-built drawings have been provided in accordance with section 109-381 and submitted to the town water system. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-58; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Sec. 109-381. - As-built drawings. 
(a)  The developer or the developer's engineer or contractor is responsible for furnishing to the town water system as-built drawings as soon as the sewer work has been completed. It is the engineer's responsibility to ensure that the necessary information is received from the contractor to complete the as-built drawings. 
(b)  As-built or record drawings must be furnished to the town prior to approval of the final plat. 
(c)  As-built drawing preparation guidelines are as follows: 
(1)  Sewer as-builts should be on a separate plan sheet from other utilities. 
(2)  The as-builts shall contain the name of the development. 
(3)  The location of all sewer lines, manholes, stream crossings, road crossings, and all other appurtenances should be shown. 
(4)  Land lots and districts shall be shown. 
(5)  All lots are to be numbered. 
(6)  Road names shall be on plans. 
(7)  The term "as-built" or "record drawing" is to be stamped in large clear print on the plans. 
(8)  The as-built drawings are to be submitted on 24-inch by 36-inch paper. 
(9)  Maximum scale one inch equals 20 feet. Minimum scale one inch equals 100 feet. 
(10)  When a phase of a subdivision is completed, a location sketch of entire subdivision with said phase outlines shall appear on plans. 
(11)  Contour lines are acceptable as long as they are faint and do not interfere with or overpower details on the drawing. 
(12)  Out lots should be so noted. 
(13)  Contractor's name, address and phone number should be on the as-builts. 
(14)  As-built sewer plans shall show by appropriate dimensions the location of all plugged stubs to the nearest feet. 
(15)  The as-built drawings must be run from tracings which have been corrected to show all field changes made to the approved drawings. No hand-drawn or marked up construction plans will be accepted as as-built or record drawings. 
(16)  The as-built drawings shall include at a minimum a site plan and plan and profile sheets. 
(17)  The as-built drawings must be sharp, clear, and clean and legible, and must be suitable for filming as permanent records. 
(d)  The following recommendation was presented to the town council: 
(1)  All developments of one to 29 units must have individual systems which will be the responsibility of the individual home owner. 
(2)  All developments, over 30 units, served by a drip line irrigation system must become a part of the county sewer system. 
(3)  A drip line irrigation system must comply with the following to become part of the county system: 
a.  Water service must be provided by the town water system; 
b.  System must be built to county specifications (to be developed before ordinance adoption); 
c.  Provide an administration/connection/maintenance fee as then established by the town; 
d.  Pay an inspection fee as then established by the town; 
e.  Provide the county with a lien free title to the property where the system is installed and to a 100-percent replacement area, all with a 25-foot buffer; 
f.  Provide the county with all necessary easements; 
g.  Provide the county with all necessary soils analysis as required by the water system manager; 
h.  Provide an engineering plan prepared by a certified P.E. 
(4)  A customer of the county sewer system shall pay monthly charges for sewer service as then established by the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-9-59; Ord. No. 321, 5-15-1996) 
Chapter 111 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 111-1. - Definitions. 
    Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined in the zoning ordinance of the town shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinance. Principles for computing sign area and sign height are contained in article III of this chapter. 
    Animated sign means any sign, or part of a sign, that uses any movement or change of lighting or color to depict action or create a special effect or scene. (Prohibited) 
    Awning/canopy sign means any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. (Prohibited) 
    Banner means any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. Banners can be either a freestanding sign or a wall sign. 
    Beacon means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. (Prohibited) 
    Bench sign means any sign painted on or otherwise attached to a bench or other seat placed on or off a public right-of-way or meant to be seen by the public. (Prohibited) 
    Billboard means a freestanding sign larger than 60 square feet used for the display of posters or printed or painted advertising matter. (Prohibited) 
    Canopy/awning sign. See Awning/canopy sign. 
    Changeable copy sign means a sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day. (Prohibited) 
    Drive-through sign means a wall or freestanding sign at a drive-through facility. 
    Flag means any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols. 
    Flashing sign means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. (Prohibited) 
    Freestanding sign means any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. 
    Grade, for the purpose of measuring sign height, means the natural ground level at a sign's proposed location unless such ground level is lower than the centerline of the adjoining street in which case height shall be measured from the centerline elevation of the adjoining street. (See section 111-79.) 
    Illuminated sign, external, means a sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. Such source cannot be a device that changes color, flashes, or alternates. 
    Illuminated sign, internal, means a sign illuminated by an internal light source. (Prohibited) 
    Kiosk means a small, freestanding structure requiring a building permit which may have more than two surfaces. (Prohibited) 
    Lot means a parcel of land that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for lot area, coverage, and use, and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning regulations. 
    Marquee or marquee sign means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee. 
    Moving sign means a sign which revolves, rotates, swings, undulates, or otherwise attracts attention through the structural movement of parts. (Prohibited) 
    Mural means a graphic displayed on the exterior of a building, generally for the purposes of decoration or artistic expression, or depicting a scene or event of natural, social, cultural, or historic significance. (Prohibited) 
    Nonresidential zoning district. The following are considered nonresidential zoning districts within this chapter: O-I, E-I, M-1, M-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, PUD, and LUC. 
    Out-of-store marketing device means any device upon which a sign is placed which is intended to display messages outside of a primary building on a site zoned for commercial uses. Examples of out-of-store marketing devices include fuel pumps, menu boards, bank ATM units, newspaper racks, drink machines, ice boxes, and phone booths. 
    Pennant or streamer means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. (Prohibited) 
    Permanent sign means any sign which, when installed, is intended for permanent use. Each lot shall be allowed only one permanent freestanding sign of a type and construction as to not be easily or readily removed from the lot on which it has been erected. 
    Permit means a sign permit reviewed, approved, and issued by the Town of Tyrone. 
    Portable sign means any sign which is designed to be transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support constructed without wheels is converted to an A- or T-frame sign. Sandwich board signs, balloons used as signs, umbrellas used for advertising and signs attached to or painted on vehicles which prevent the vehicle being used in its intended purpose and that are legible from the public right-of-way are also considered portable signs. (Prohibited) 
    Principal building means the building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
    Public sign means: 
(1)  Any sign erected for the benefit of the public by a governmental entity for informational purposes including, but not limited to, identifying or providing direction to public telephones, restrooms, locating hazardous or dangerous areas, conditions, events, or identifying the location of underground utility facilities; 
(2)  A sign erected by a governmental agency to denote the name of any thoroughfare; to point out the route to any town, educational institution, public building, historic place, hospital, or other use, facility, or attraction; to direct and regulate traffic; and to denote any railroad crossing, bridge or other transportation facility for the convenience and safety of the general public. 
    Residential zoning district. The following are considered residential zoning districts within this chapter: AR, CR-1, CR-2, CR-3, R-52, R-50, R-48, R-46, R-44, R-42, DR-15, MPH, TR, and RMF. 
    Roof sign means any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure. (Prohibited) 
    Seasonal display means any item displayed for the purpose of celebrating a specified cultural, or religious event (e.g., Christmas, Easter, Thanksgiving, July 4th, New Year's, Hanukkah, Kwanzaa). 
    Sidewalk, sandwich, or A-frame sign means a sign which is normally in the shape of an "A" or some variation thereof and which is usually two-sided. 
    Sign means any device, fixture, placard, or structure affixed to, or suspended by, a stationary object, building, or the ground that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
    Suspended sign means any sign used in a multi-tenant building which is suspended from any part of the building. 
    Temporary sign means any sign that is used temporarily and is not permanently mounted. 
    Town manager means the person, officer or official whom the mayor and council has designated for the enforcement of this chapter, or his designee. 
    Wall sign means any sign attached parallel to a wall, painted on the wall surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface. No wall sign shall extend more than six inches from any wall, building, or structure. 
    Window sign means any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, that is placed within ten feet inside a window or upon the window panes or glass either inside or outside the building, and is visible and legible from the exterior of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-3), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-2. - Title. 
    This chapter shall hereafter be known and cited as the "Town of Tyrone Sign Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-1), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-3. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The mayor and town council understand that signs are an integral part of the ability of every person to exercise their right to freedom of speech. It is, however, important to understand that there is a fundamental need to protect the town as a whole from the unchecked proliferation of unregulated signage. It is with this understanding in mind that the mayor and town provide the following purposes for the regulation of signage: 
(1)  To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the town; 
(2)  To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the town's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; 
(3)  To improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
(4)  To minimize the possible adverse affects of signs on nearby public and private property; 
(5)  And to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions. 
(b)  This chapter is adopted under the zoning authority of the town in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-2), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-4. - Violations, penalties. 
(a)  Illegal signs. No person shall erect on any premises owned or controlled by him/her any sign which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Dangerous, defective condition. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by him any sign which is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises, or as otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(c)  Separate violations. Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions herein. 
(d)  Public nuisance. Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(e)  Misdemeanor. In case any sign or other device covered by this chapter is, or is proposed to be, erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the town manager shall cause a citation to issue. Additionally, the town may seek an injunction for a continuing violation or take other appropriate action to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, or use to correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-21), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-5. - Prohibited signs and devices. 
    The following signs shall be prohibited under this chapter. Such signs include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Animated or flashing signs; 
(2)  Rotating, animated signs, or any sign which requires either natural or artificial wind current or energy for motion or gives the appearance of movement; 
(3)  Portable or trailer display signs when not attached to a motor vehicle; 
(4)  Signs on courtesy benches, trash cans, and similar devices on which advertising is displayed; 
(5)  Search lights, beacons, or similar devices; 
(6)  Roof signs; 
(7)  Pennants, streamers; 
(8)  Attention-getting devices, including but not limited to balloons (including all inflatable air signs) and lights, shall not be used to attract attention to any sign or business. This includes neon tubing or bare bulb lights encircling a window or outlining the structure; 
(9)  Signs or other advertising structures that contain obscene or indecent material. 
a.  Material is obscene if either, or both, of the following apply: 
1.  To the average person, applying contemporary community standards, taken as a whole, it predominantly appeals to the prurient interest, that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion; or 
2.  The material depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined as follows: 
(i)  Acts of sexual intercourse, heterosexual or homosexual, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; 
(ii)  Acts of masturbation; 
(iii)  Acts involving excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the genitals; 
(iv)  Acts of bestiality or the fondling of sex organs of animals; or 
(v)  Sexual acts of flagellation, torture, or other violence indicating a sadomasochistic sexual relationship. 
b.  Material is indecent if the sign depicts the following portions of human anatomy: 
1.  Any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; 
2.  Any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals; 
(10)  No lettering, logos or other graphics are allowed on any awning, canopy (including a gasoline canopy), marquee, umbrella or other similar devices; 
(11)  Kiosks; 
(12)  Changeable copy signs; 
(13)  All signs attached to light poles, power poles or trees (when in the right-of-way); 
(14)  Any privately-owned sign located within or partially within a road right-of-way; 
(15)  Billboards; and 
(16)  Murals. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-15), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-6. - Prohibited placements of posters, signs and advertisements. 
(a)  This chapter is adopted with knowledge of the presence of O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58 which provides for the regulation of posters, signs and advertisements in the state. O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58 is set out in subsection (b) of this section. This chapter shall be enforced while giving full effect to O.C.G.A. § 16-7-58. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place posters, signs, or advertisements: 
(1)  On any public property or building, unless the owner thereof or the occupier as authorized by such owner has given permission to place such posters, signs, or advertisements on such property; provided, however, that signs within the rights-of- way of public roads shall be governed by O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; 
(2)  On any private property unless the owner thereof or the occupier as authorized by such owner has given permission to place such posters, signs, or advertisements on such property; and, provided, further that no municipal, county, or consolidated government may restrict by regulation or other means the length of time a political campaign sign may be displayed or the number of signs which may be displayed on private property for which permission has been granted; or 
(3)  On any property zoned for commercial or industrial uses if the placement of such posters, signs, or advertisements conflicts with any zoning laws or ordinances. 
(c)  Any poster, sign, or advertisement placed in violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section is declared to be a public nuisance, and the officials having jurisdiction of the public property or building, including without limitation law enforcement officers, may remove or direct the removal of the same. 
(d)  Each poster, sign, or advertisement placed in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  Any person who violates this section shall be punished the same as for littering under O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-24, exhibit A), 5-21-2009) 
Secs. 111-7-111-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 111-31. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming existing signs. A freestanding or wall sign for which a sign permit was issued which was in existence on May 21, 2009, or which was constructed in accordance with the ordinances and other applicable laws in effect on the date of its construction, but which by reason of its size, height, location, design or construction is not in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, shall be considered a nonconforming sign. Such a sign shall be allowed to remain in place and be maintained (provided that no action is taken which increases the degree or extent of the nonconformity) until there is a change of business name (single business), a change of complex name (multi-business), or the sign and/or supporting structure is totally destroyed as a result of vandalism or any act of the owner or any person acting on behalf of the owner. In the case of a change of ownership where the business name and existing signage (face and structure) remain the same, said sign shall be allowed to remain in place. 
(b)  Lapse of nonconforming sign permit. A nonconforming sign permit shall lapse and become void under the same circumstances as those under which any other sign permit may lapse and become void. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-22), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-32. - Inspection. 
    A representative of the town shall inspect each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this chapter from time to time for the purpose of ascertaining whether such structure is safe and lawful. If a sign is deemed to be in need of repair, the owner shall have ten days from the date of written notice from the town in which to repair or remove such sign. Missing letters from a raised letter or changeable copy sign, peeling paint from a painted sign, burned out/inoperative light emitting devices, etc., shall constitute a need for repair. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-13), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-33. - Removal of unlawful or dangerous signs. 
(a)  Removal. The town may order the removal of any sign in violation of this chapter by written notice to the permit holder; or, if there is no permit holder, then to the owner of the sign; or, if the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then to the sign erector and any party that procured the erection of the sign. If a permit has been issued, such notice shall operate to revoke the permit. 
(b)  Procedure following removal order. If the sign is not removed within 14 days after the order of removal (or 14 days after the date any appeal becomes final), the town shall remove or cause to be removed the sign and to collect the costs thereof as provided below. 
(c)  Removal without notice. The town shall remove any sign in violation of this chapter, without giving notice to any party, if: 
(1)  Said sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or 
(2)  Said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. 
(d)  Reclamation/fees. Following such removal or repair, the town may collect the costs as set by the mayor and council for any reclaimed signs. Signs not claimed will be destroyed after 14 days. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-23), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-34. - Variances. 
(a)  Standards. Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. A variance from compliance with the sign regulations of this chapter shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
(1)  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the public street and within 50 feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, existing buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
(2)  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; and such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and the variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to traffic. 
(b)  Variance applications shall be submitted to the town council and shall be heard under the same time frames and rules governing appeals under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-91), 5-21-2009) 
Secs. 111-35-111-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 111-57. - Permits required. 
(a)  Applications for signage. Applications for sign permits required by this chapter shall be filed with the town during normal business hours and shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, street address, and phone number of the owner of the property where the sign is to be installed, along with a site plan showing the proposed location of the sign on the property. 
(2)  If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a signed and notarized authorization by the property owner shall be included with the application. 
(3)  A description of the type of sign to be erected which shall include a schematic drawing of the sign indicating overall dimensions (height, width, square footage, shape, and number of faces). 
(4)  All applications for signage shall be on a form provided by the town. 
(b)  Review and notification. Review of an application deemed to be complete by the town and notification to the applicant of either approval or denial shall in no case extend for a period of time exceeding 30 days from the date of the town's receipt of the completed application. Notification to the applicant can be made either by certified mail, return receipt requested, by fax to the number provided on the application, or by hand delivery on or before the 30th day after the town's receipt of the application. Should the process exceed 30 days, it shall be deemed that the application is approved and the town shall issue a permit to the applicant. Issuance of a permit shall in no way prevent the town from later declaring the sign to be illegal if the structure fails to substantially comply with the specifications submitted in the application or some new information of illegality is discovered. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-11), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-58. - Signs which require no permit. 
(a)  Public signs. Signs erected by a public officer in the performance of his duties, including but not limited to public notices, safety signs, danger signs, traffic and street signs, memorial plaques, and historical markers, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Exempt signs. The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of section 111-57 and shall not count toward the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in sections 111-124, 111-157, and 111-159: 
(1)  Numerals displayed for the purpose of identifying property location not to exceed eight inches in height; 
(2)  Seasonal displays located outside the public right-of-way; 
(3)  Flags (see sections 111-128 and 111-163); 
(4)  Signs at the rear entrance of a business not to exceed one square foot; 
(5)  Window signs (see sections 111-126 and 111-159); 
(6)  Door signs not to exceed one square foot; 
(7)  Banners in residential zoning districts; 
(8)  Out-of-store marketing device (see section 111-162); 
(9)  Residential freestanding signs (see section 111-124); and 
(10)  Nonresidential temporary signs (see section 111-157(e)). 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-14), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-59. - Denial, revocation, suspension and appeal. 
(a)  Compliance. The town shall deny all applications for signs that do not comply with this chapter. Written notification to the applicant listing the reasons for denial shall be provided as set forth in section 111-57(b). 
(b)  Revocation of permits and certificates. The town may revoke a sign permit or certificate of compliance in those cases where an administrative determination has been duly made that false statements or misrepresentations existed as to material facts in the application or plans upon which the permit of approval was based. 
(c)  Suspension of permits and certificates. The town may suspend a sign permit or certificate of compliance where an administrative determination has been duly made that an error or omission on the part of either the permit applicant or a government agency existed in the issuance of the permit or certificate. A new permit or certificate shall be issued in place of the incorrect permit or certificate after correction of the error or omission. 
(d)  Appeals. Any individual whose application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the town manager to the mayor and council upon filing a written notice of an appeal with the town clerk within ten business days of notification of denial or revocation. Such appeal shall be considered by the mayor and council at the next council meeting held after the town's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that the notice of appeal is received a minimum of five full business days before the meeting. If the appeal is not heard at such meeting, it shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the mayor and council thereafter. In the event an individual whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the town council, he may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-12), 5-21-2009) 
Secs. 111-60-111-76. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 111-77. - Sign location. 
(a)  Obstructions to doors, windows, or fire escapes. No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. 
(b)  Signs not to constitute traffic hazard. No sign or part thereof, except authorized traffic signs, shall be located in any state, county or town right-of-way. No sign may be located any closer than 20 feet from an intersection as measured from the intersection of the two rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-31), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-78. - Measurement of sign area. 
    The area of a sign shall mean and shall be computed as the entire area within the continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of all writing, representation, emblem, or any figure or similar character. This shall also include any open spaces or colors forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-32), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-79. - Measurement of sign height. 
(a)  The height of a sign shall be computed as to the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: 
(1)  Existing grade prior to construction; or 
(2)  The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. 
(b)  In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Where the normal grade is below the normal grade of a public street, the sign base can be raised to the elevation of the normal grade of the street before the height limitations are applied (surveyor's certificate required). 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-33), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-80. - Construction standards. 
(a)  Town codes. All signs permitted under this Code shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the applicable town building codes. The town may remove, after due notice per section 111-33, any sign which shows neglect or becomes dilapidated. 
(b)  Face of sign shall be smooth. No sign or other advertising structure shall be constructed so as to have nails, tacks, or wires protruding therefrom. 
(c)  Illumination of signs. Signs, when illumination is permitted, may only be illuminated externally. 
(d)  Maintenance. Landscaping, weeds, and grass shall be kept cut in front of, behind, underneath, and around the base of ground signs. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-34), 5-21-2009) 
Secs. 111-81-111-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LOCATION RESTRICTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 111-104. - Zoning districts. 
(a)  Signs by zoning district. Sign standards by district apply to all zoning districts in the town. The districts are defined herein as being either residential or nonresidential. 
(b)  Residential zoning districts. Residential zoning districts allow for both residential and nonresidential uses and as such will be governed by the respective articles of this chapter based on the approved use. For all unimproved residential property, the residential sign regulations shall apply. For all nonresidential uses permitted in residential zoning districts, the sign regulations for those uses shall be determined to be under division 3, Nonresidential Districts, of this article. 
(c)  Nonresidential zoning districts. Nonresidential zoning districts allow for both nonresidential and residential uses and as such will be governed by the respective articles of this chapter based on the approved use. For all unimproved nonresidential property the single business sign regulations shall apply (see section 111-157). For all residential uses permitted in the nonresidential zoning district, the sign regulations for those uses shall be determined to be under division 2, Residential Districts, of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-41), 5-21-2009) 
Secs. 111-105-111-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 111-122. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this division apply in residential zoning districts. 
Sec. 111-123. - Signs allowed within residential zoning districts. 
    The following signs shall be allowed in all residential zoning districts: 
(1)  Freestanding signs (see section 111-124); 
(2)  Window signs (see section 111-126); 
(3)  Signage during construction (see section 111-127); 
(4)  Flags (see section 111-128); 
(5)  Numerals displayed for the purpose of identifying property location not to exceed eight inches in height; 
(6)  Seasonal displays located outside the public right-of-way; and 
(7)  Banners. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-61), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-124. - Residential freestanding signs. 
(a)  Number, size and height of signs. Lots located in a residential zoning district shall be allowed no more than four freestanding signs not to exceed six square feet each sign. Signs shall not exceed four feet in height. Sign structures shall not exceed five feet in height. For purposes of determining the maximum height of signs and sign structures, the measurements shall be taken from the grade level of any adjacent street or the grade level of the lot, whichever is higher. Banners shall not be exempt from this section. The freestanding signs allowed in this section shall be temporary signs as that term is defined in this chapter. However, one of the four signs allowed in this section may be a permanent sign. No permit shall be required. 
(b)  Subdivision signs. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the sign area of signs at the entrance of a subdivision shall be limited to 40 square feet and six feet in height. If used in conjunction with a wall, the wall shall not exceed five feet in height. The decorative facade, including post and/or columns, shall not exceed seven feet in height. No more than two signs shall be allowed to be placed at each entrance of a subdivision. Signs shall be placed on common property under the ownership of the home owners association (HOA) and shall not be allowed to be on private property. A permit shall be required. 
(c)  Banners. Banners shall not be more than 24 square feet in size to be displayed not more than 30 days in a calendar year. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet and shall not extend more than four feet above grade when mounted on the ground. There shall be only one banner displayed at a time. No permit shall be required. 
(d)  Multi-family parcels. For any multi-family residential property, the number of allowable freestanding signs shall not exceed eight signs not more than six square feet each. Such developments shall also be entitled to two permanent signs at the entrance to the development as regulated in subsection (b) of this section. The property owner shall be responsible for all signage posted on the property. Notwithstanding any provisions within this section to the contrary, signs within the DR-15 zoning district shall be regulated in the same manner as single-family residential zoning districts are regulated. For purposes of this chapter, a DR-15 zoning district shall not be considered to be a multifamily zoning district. A permit shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-62), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-125. - Wall signs. 
    Wall signs in residential districts shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-63), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-126. - Window signs. 
    Window signs shall be allowed in all residential districts and shall not cover more than 25 percent of the area of each window in which a sign is placed. Window signs may be placed in no more than four windows of the residential structure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-64), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-127. - Signage during construction. 
(a)  Number, size and height of sign. One temporary sign shall be allowed on construction sites. A permit shall be required. 
(1)  Duration. Said sign shall be allowed beginning with the issuance of a land disturbance permit and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/completion or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Size. Said sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area or five feet in height. 
(3)  Construction. Said sign may be a permanent sign as that term is defined in this chapter. Any permanent sign constructed consistent with this section shall not exceed the duration restrictions in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(b)  Additional sign. This sign is in addition to those signs listed in section 111-124. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-65), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-128. - Flags. 
    Flagpoles shall not exceed 35 feet in height. The flags' dimensions shall be proportional to the pole such that the hoist side of the flags is not more than 35 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-66), 5-21-2009) 
Secs. 111-129-111-154. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 111-155. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this division apply in nonresidential zoning districts. 
Sec. 111-156. - Signs allowed within nonresidential zoning districts. 
    The following signs shall be allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts: 
(1)  Freestanding signs (see section 111-157); 
(2)  Wall signs (see section 111-158); 
(3)  Window signs (see section 111-159); 
(4)  Banners (see section 111-160); 
(5)  Signage during construction (see section 111-161); 
(6)  Out-of-store marketing device (see section 111-162); 
(7)  Flags (see section 111-163); 
(8)  Suspended signs (see section 111-164); 
(9)  Sidewalk, sandwich, and A-frame signs (see section 111-157); and 
(10)  Awning/canopy signs (see section 111-165). 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-71), 5-21-2009; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 2-7-2013) 
Sec. 111-157. - Freestanding signs. 
(a)  Number, height and dimensions. Unless otherwise provided herein, each parcel is allowed one permanent freestanding sign, not to exceed six feet in height, ten feet in width and not more than 40 square feet in area. 
(b)  Multiple businesses parcel. Each parcel containing multiple businesses shall be entitled to display one permanent freestanding sign. Individual business names are included in the total square footage. The maximum area of the sign shall not exceed seven feet in height, ten feet in width, and not more than 60 square feet in area. 
(c)  Illumination; permit. Freestanding signs may be externally illuminated. A permit shall be required. 
(d)  Drive-through signs. Signs as part of a drive-through facility, not visible or legible by the traveling public shall not be regulated by this chapter; however, no individual drive-through sign may exceed 40 square feet. 
(e)  Temporary signage. Each parcel containing a single business shall be allowed not more than eight aggregate square feet of temporary signage. Each parcel containing multiple businesses shall be allowed not more than 12 aggregate square feet of temporary signage. No temporary sign shall be greater than four feet in height. A permit shall not be required. Sidewalk, sandwich, and A-frame signs may be used as the temporary signage as described in this section. The limitation on aggregate maximum square feet for temporary signage applies to sidewalk, sandwich, and A-frame signs. Sidewalk, sandwich, and A-frame signs may only be displayed during business hours. 
(f)  Subdivision entrance/exit signs. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the area of signs at the entrance/exit of a subdivision shall be limited to 40 square feet and six feet in height. If used in conjunction with a wall, the wall shall not exceed five feet in height. The decorative facade, including posts and/or columns, shall not exceed seven feet in height. No more than two signs shall be allowed to be placed at each entrance of a subdivision. Signs shall be placed on common property under the ownership of the property owners association (POA) and shall not be allowed to be on private property. A permit shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-72), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-158. - Wall signs. 
    Wall signs shall be located on the principal building only. A permit shall be required. 
(1)  Number. One wall sign shall be permitted for every street-facing wall of a structure, provided that said wall is on a side of the structure that is considered a front yard for setback purposes. In the case of structures which contain multiple businesses, each business is allowed a sign. 
(2)  Location. No wall sign shall be placed on any roof or on top of any structure. In addition, no part of a wall sign shall be at an elevation higher than 25 feet above the average ground level elevation along the side of the building on which the wall sign is installed. If a building has two or more stories, no signs shall be installed at a level above the bottom of the second floor windows, unless the building is a multi-tenant office or multi-tenant commercial structure wherein tenants have primary, direct access from their space to the outside. This access must include outside walkways and stairways properly designed for public use. 
(3)  Construction. All wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall, subject to the approval of the building official. 
(4)  Size/calculation. The allowable front wall sign area for each building shall not exceed one-and-one-half square feet per linear foot of the front length of the building or portion thereof occupied. If the linear frontage of a building or portion thereof occupied is 100 feet or less, the maximum size of a wall sign is 70 square feet. If the linear frontage of a building or portion thereof occupied is in excess of 100 feet, the maximum size of a wall sign is 150 square feet. If the sign is a panel or box, the total area including background is included. If a sign consists of individual letters, each attached directly to a building or structure, the area of the sign shall be measured by the area of the smallest rectangle or series of contiguous rectangles which enclose all the letters. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-73), 5-21-2009; Ord. No. 2013-03, §§ 2, 3, 2-7-2013) 
Sec. 111-159. - Window signs. 
    No more than 50 percent or 35 square feet, whichever is less, of the total available advertising space (glass area) shall be used to display window signs. No window signs are allowed above the first floor unless the building is a multi-tenant office or commercial structure wherein tenants have primary direct access from their space to the outside. This access must include outside walkways and stairways properly designed for public use. In no case shall any window signs be installed above the level of the second floor windows. No permit shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-74), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-160. - Banners. 
    Banners shall be allowed for a period not exceeding 21 days, with not more than four such 21-day periods being permitted per calendar year. 
(1)  Size. Banners shall not be more than 32 square feet. A permit shall be required. 
(2)  Height. No banner shall be mounted so as to extend above the horizontal plane of the roof where the building wall and roof meet or shall not extend more than five feet above grade when on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-75), 5-21-2009; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 4, 2-7-2013) 
Sec. 111-161. - Signage during construction. 
(a)  Number, size and height of sign. One temporary sign shall be allowed on construction sites. A permit shall be required. 
(1)  Duration. Said sign shall be allowed beginning with the issuance of a land disturbance permit and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy/completion or installation of a permanent sign, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Size. Said sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area or five feet in height. 
(3)  Construction. Said sign may be a permanent sign as that term is defined in this chapter. Any permanent sign constructed consistent with this subsection shall not exceed the duration restrictions in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(b)  Additional sign. This sign is in addition to the signs allowed in section 111-157. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-76), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-162. - Out-of-store marketing device. 
    One sign shall be allowed on an out-of-store marketing device. Said sign shall not exceed two square feet. The height of the sign shall not be more than two feet above the device. No permit shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-77), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-163. - Flags. 
    Flagpoles shall not exceed 70 feet in height. Flag dimensions shall be proportional to the pole such that the hoist side of the flag is not more than 35 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-78), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-164. - Suspended signs. 
    In a multi-tenant commercial or office building, in addition to all other permitted signs, one suspended sign per entrance used shall be allowed to identify the location of each tenant's premises. A permit shall be required. Suspended signs shall adhere to the following: 
(1)  Does not exceed three square feet in area; 
(2)  Is uniform in size, material, color and shape and is placed in an equivalent location to such other signs located on the same building; and 
(3)  Maintains a minimum of nine feet of clearance between the bottom of the sign and the walkway below. 
(Ord. No. 2009-006, § 1(6-6-79), 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-165. - Awning/canopy signs. 
    Signage on awnings or canopies shall be limited to 20 percent of allowable wall sign area for the wall upon which said awning signage is contemplated. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 5, 2-7-2013) 
Chapter 113 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-07, § Exh. A, adopted Oct. 1, 2015, enacted new provisions to the Code designated as chapter 113, "Zoning", superceding § 113-1, "Saved from repeal." 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 113-1. - Purpose of definitions. 
    For the purpose of interpreting this section, the following words or terms used herein shall be defined consistent with this section. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust, and company as well as an individual. The word "lot" includes the word "plot". The word "building" includes the word "structure". The word "shall" is always mandatory. The words "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied". The words "zoning map", or "Tyrone zoning map" mean the official Zoning Map of Tyrone, Georgia. 
Sec. 113-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Accessory use. A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
    Artist. A person who engages in the creation of products primarily by hand by persons trained in an artistic skill, e.g. ceramics, pottery, blown glass, sculpture, or hand-crafted furniture. 
    Adult business. A commercial establishment where an adult service is provided to patrons in the regular course of business and as one of the substantial business purposes of the establishment. 
    Adult day care services. The provision of an organized program of services, protective in nature, for adults which are offered for less than 24 hours per day including supervision, provision of meals, self-care, social and recreational indoor and outdoor activities, and assistance with medications. 
    Adult service. A dance, performance or other activity, including but not limited to, service of food or beverages, modeling, posing, wrestling, singing, reading, talking, or listening conducted for any consideration in an adult business by a person who exposes one or more specified anatomical areas or performs a specified sexual activity during all or part of the time that the person is providing the service. 
    Amusement park or arcade. An amusement enterprise offering entertainment to the general public in the form of rides and/or games of skill in the form of game machines, instruments, or an apparatus operated by coin, slug, token or similar medium. The activity may be indoors or outdoors. 
    Antenna. Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communication through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
    Auction house/yard. A structure or enclosure where goods or livestock are sold by auction. 
    Automobile. Every vehicle, excluding motorcycles, designed for carrying ten passengers or less and designed and used for the transportation of persons. 
    Automobile impoundment yard/tow service and wrecking facilities. A parcel of land or a building that is used for the storage of wrecked motor vehicles which are kept for a period of time not exceeding 45 days, and the dismantling or disassembly of damaged or wrecked vehicles. 
    Automobile repair. Buildings and land where repairs, including painting and body repair, are made on automobiles. 
    Automobile sales. Buildings and land used for the retail sale of automobiles. Repairs may occur at any establishment involved in retail sales, storage of inventory or replacement parts and services including mechanical and body repair or restoration. 
    Automobile service station. An establishment where gasoline and other petroleum products are sold as the principal use of the property. Light maintenance activities such as engine tune-ups, windshield wiper blade replacements, lubrication and minor repairs may also be provided if incidental to such principal use. 
    Automotive convenience and gas station. Structures designed for the sale of motor fuels and groceries. This establishment may include an automatic car wash but cannot engage in the business of automotive repair. 
    Basement. An area below the first floor level in a building and having not more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height above grade. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Bed and Breakfast inn (B&B). A private owner-occupied residence with one to three guestrooms. The B&B is subordinate and incidental to the main residential use of the building. 
    Buffer. A portion of a lot set aside to provide a visual separation from abutting tracts, uses, or streams through the use of natural vegetation or other means including replanting, or the provision of supplemental plantings or other visual screening elements or noise attenuation devices. Buffers are not included in setbacks. 
    Buildable area. That area of a tract or parcel of land excluding all floodplains, wetlands, bodies of water, required buffers, easements, street right-of-ways and/or other encumbrances. 
    Building. Any enclosed structure with a permanent foundation and having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal, process, equipment, good or property of any kind. 
    Building height. The vertical distance of a building measured from the median height of the basement level or crawl space to the midpoint of the highest roof. The midpoint shall be measured from the ceiling joist of the highest floor level to the top of the highest roof surface. For structures constructed without a basement or crawl space, the measurement will be taken beginning at the ground floor level. See also tower height. 
    Building materials establishments. A business engaged in selling primarily lumber or lumber and a general line of building materials to the public. While these establishments may also sell to contractors, they are known as retail in the trade. General building materials include: doors; windows; electrical supplies; flooring; paint; glass; wallpaper; wall covering; plumbing supplies (retail); and tile. 
    Building setback line. The minimum distance allowed between the street right-of-way line and the principal building or structure on a lot or any projection thereof, except the projections of unenclosed porches, steps, eaves, gutters and similar fixtures as permitted by this section. 
    Business vehicle. Any vehicle used for business purposes whether or not the owner is a private or governmental entity except that school buses shall be excluded. 
    Campground. An area to be used for transient occupancy by camping in tents, camp trailers, travel trailers, motor homes, or similar movable or temporary sleeping quarters of any kind. 
    Child caring institution. Any institution, society, agency, or facility which either primarily or incidentally provides full-time care for children under 17 years of age outside of their own homes, subject to such exceptions such as may be provided in rules and regulations of the state board of human resources. For purposes of these rules, a child caring institution means any institution, society, agency or facility that provides care to six or more children. 
    Club, lodge or social building. All associations of civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political, and recreational or like activities operated for the benefit of the members and not open to the general public. 
    Commercial motor vehicle. Any vehicle with a gross vehicular weight greater than 10,000 pounds or with a minimum width of 80 inches and a maximum length of 196 inches. Construction or other similar vehicles or equipment not designed and intended for passenger use or for on-the-road hauling shall be deemed commercial motor vehicles. 
    Commercial motor vehicle repair. Buildings and land where repairs, including painting and body repair, are made on commercial motor vehicles. 
    Commercial motor vehicles sales. Buildings and land used for the retail sale of commercial motor vehicle sales, including boats and recreational vehicles. Repairs may occur at any establishment involved in retail sales, storage of inventory or replacements parts and services including mechanical and body repair or restoration. 
    Community living arrangement. Any residence, whether operated for profit or not, that undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of daily personal services, supports, care, or treatment exclusively for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage and whose residential services are financially supported, in whole or in part, by funds designated through the department of human resources, division of mental health, developmental disabilities, and addictive diseases. A community living arrangement is also referred to as a "residence". 
    Construction vehicle. Any heavy-duty vehicle designed for executing construction tasks, including but not limited to backhoes, bulldozers, front loaders, excavators, graders, cranes, dump trucks, and similar vehicles. 
    County. Fayette County, Georgia. 
    Day care-Child care learning center. Any center operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution, or group that receives pay for group care, children remain less than 24 hours per day and provides care for 19 or more children, under 18 years of age, and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the Georgia Department of Early Care and Learning. 
    Day care-Family home. A private residence operated by any person who receives pay for supervision less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, of at least three but not more than six children under 18 years of age who are not related to such person and whose parents or guardians are not residents of the same private residence. 
    Day care-Group. A center operated by any person, partnership, association, or corporation that receives pay for group care, operates less than 24 hours per day and provides care for seven to 18 children, under 18 years of age, and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by the Georgia Department of Early Care and Learning. 
    Day spa. A nurturing, safe, clean commercial establishment, which employs professional, licensed therapists whose services include massage and body or facial treatments. Massage treatments may include body packs and wraps, exfoliation, cellulite and waxing, aromatherapy, cleansing facials, medical facials, and nonsurgical face lifts, electrical toning, and electrolysis. Hydrotherapy and steam and sauna facilities, nutrition and weight management, spa cuisine, and exercise facilities and instructions may be provided in addition to the massage and therapeutic treatment services. Full-service hair, make-up consultation and application and manicure and pedicure services may be provided as additional services. 
    Density. As used in residential categories of the comprehensive land use plan for the Town of Tyrone, means the number of dwelling units permitted per acre or other specified area of land. For the purpose of this definition street rights-of-way shall not be included in density calculations. 
    Drive-in. A retail or service enterprise where service is provided to the customer on the outside of the principal building. 
    Dwelling. A building or part of a building designed for occupancy by one family for residential purposes as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A detached dwelling designed for and containing one dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, two-family or duplex. A dwelling designed for and containing two dwelling units totally separated from each other. 
    Dwelling, multi-family. A dwelling designed for three or more dwelling units totally separated from each other. 
    Dwelling, townhouse. One of a series of three or more attached dwelling units which has ground floor access and is separated from the others by wall partitions extending at least from the lowest floor level to the roof. 
    Dwelling unit. A house or other structure or portion of any building or structure forming a separate, independent housekeeping establishment with provisions for cooking, eating, sleeping and sanitation. 
    Exterior storage. The storage of any material for a period greater than 24 hours, including items for sale, lease, processing, and repair not in an enclosed building. 
    FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration. 
    Family. One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit provided that unless all members are related by blood, adoption or marriage, no such family shall contain over five persons, but further provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
    Farm operations. Farming operations related to livestock-raising, provided all structures permitted under this category are related to the farming operations. 
    Farmers' market. Seasonal selling or offering for sale at retail of home-grown vegetables or produce, occurring in a pre-designated area, where the vendors are generally individuals who have raised the vegetables or produce or have taken the same on consignment for retail sale. 
    FCC. The Federal Communications Commission. 
    FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Floor area, accessory structure. The sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the structure under roof, excluding any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet. 
    Floor area, principal structure. The area of a dwelling exclusive of unheated attic, basement, garage, carport, patios, and open porches measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls of a dwelling. 
    Frontage lot. A lot for which one of the principal boundary lines as described on the deed is coincident with a street right-of-way line. 
    Group home. A facility or dwelling unit housing two or more individuals who are not related to the owner by blood or marriage and operating as a single family-like housekeeping unit, including but not limited to homes for orphans, foster children, the elderly, and battered children and women. 
    Hardware store. Retail stores where items such as plumbing, heating and electrical supplies, sporting goods and paints are sold. 
    Health club. A place or building where active exercise and related activities are performed utilizing weight control or muscle-building equipment or apparatus for the purpose of physical fitness. 
    Height. See building height; tower height. 
    Home occupation. An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit by the resident thereof; provided that the use is limited in extent and incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof. 
    Hospital. Any institution receiving in-patients, providing a staffed 24-hour emergency care facility, and authorized under Georgia law to render medical, surgical, and/or obstetrical care. The term "hospital" shall include a sanitarium, with an approved certificate of need (CON) from the state health planning agency, for the treatment and care of various forms of mental illness, but shall not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine, dentistry or psychiatry. 
    Hotel. A building in which overnight accommodations are provided to the public. The term "hotel" includes the terms "motel" and "tourist court". 
    Indoor pet boarding. Any facility where pet animals owned by another person are temporarily boarded indoors for pay, trade, barter, commission or remuneration of any sort; however, this definition shall not apply to animal hospitals and veterinary clinics operated by veterinarians duly licensed under law. 
    Indoor sports facility. An indoor facility accommodating a variety of individual, organized, or franchised sports, including wrestling, soccer, tennis, volleyball, racquetball, or handball. Such facility may also provide other regular organized or franchised events, swimming pool, snack bar, restaurant, retail sales of related sports, health or fitness items, arcade, and other support facilities. 
    Intermediate care home. A facility which admits residents on a medical referral; it maintains the services and facilities for institutional care and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will provide continuing supervision including emergencies, and it otherwise complies with these rules and regulations. 
    Junk or salvage yard. Property used for outdoor storage, keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house-wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, or for the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
    Kennel. Any location boarding, caring for and keeping more than a total of four dogs or cats or other small animals or combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) or any location boarding, caring for and keeping more than a total of ten chickens. The definition for kennel herein shall not include those facilities that satisfy the definition for indoor pet boarding and which are located on property zoned under the town's downtown commercial (C-1) or highway commercial (C-2) zoning classifications. 
    Landfill. Disposal sites where solid wastes, other than recyclable wastes or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
    Livestock. Animals including, but not limited to: horses, cattle, goats, sheep, pigs, potbellied pigs, roosters, ducks, geese, mules, emu/ostrich, buffalo, and llamas. This term shall be deemed to specifically exclude domestic dogs and domestic cats, as well as chickens (other than roosters) and normally domesticated small animals such as rabbits, hamsters, and guinea pigs. 
    Lot, corner. A lot located at the intersection of two streets. 
    Lot coverage. The percentage of a lot which may be covered with buildings or structures, excluding walks, drives, other similar uses, and recreation facilities which are accessory to a permitted use. 
    Lot of record. A lot which is part of an approved subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county; or a parcel of land, consistent with the town's ordinances and regulations at the time of conveyance, conveyed by deed recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. 
    Lot, parcel. A tract of land legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
    Lot, through. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or less parallel public streets and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot, both street lines shall be deemed front lot lines. 
    Lot width. The distance from one side lot line to the other side lot line measured at the minimum building setback line. 
    Manufactured housing. Manufactured housing means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on a site, it is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term "mobile home" shall be construed to mean "manufactured housing" or "manufactured home." 
    Manufactured home lot. A parcel of land in a mobile home park for the placement of a single mobile home and for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
    Manufactured home park. A parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransient use. 
    Motel. See hotel. 
    Neighborhood recreation center or swimming pool (residential zoning districts). A private recreational facility for use solely by the residents and guests of a particular residential development, planned unit development, or residential neighborhood, including indoor and outdoor facilities. These facilities are usually proposed or planned in association with the development and are usually located within or adjacent to such development. 
    Nonconformance. A legally existing lot, use, building or structure which fails to comply with the provisions herein, as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, or as the result of subsequent amendments. 
    Nursing home. A facility which admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision; it maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care and rehabilitative nursing care, and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will be available for any medical and/or dental emergency and who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the home; it otherwise complies with these rules and regulations. 
    Open space. That portion of a lot, including yards, established pursuant to the requirements of this section as open space, which is open and unobstructed from its lower level to the sky, with the exception of natural foliage, flower garden or accessory recreational facilities or walkways, which is accessible to all persons occupying a building on the lot and is not part of the roof of any portion of any building. 
    Parks. A natural or landscaped area, with or without buildings or structures, to meet the active or passive recreational needs of people. 
    Personal care home. Any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership and management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more individuals who are not related to the owner by blood or marriage. 
    Public use. Administrative and cultural buildings, uses and structures, including lots and facilities owned, used or operated by a governmental agency. 
    Recreation vehicle. A self-propelled or towed vehicle used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes. Recreation vehicles shall include camping trailers and travel trailers in addition to self-propelled vehicles and shall not exceed eight and one-half feet in width and 45 feet in length. 
    Religious institution. A building used for public worship including temples, synagogues and related Sunday school or church school facilities. 
    Setback. The area as designated by this section in which a structure may not be erected, as measured from the property boundaries of the lot or from the buffer line if a buffer is required. 
    Self-storage facility. A building or group of buildings in a controlled-access and secured compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access stalls or lockers for the storage of customers' goods or wares. 
    Sewer system, central sanitary. Collection of sanitary sewage via a pipe network and its transportation to a common collection point with treatment to required Georgia Department of Natural Resources criteria prior to release. 
    Sewer system, community sanitary. A sanitary sewer system provided for the collection of sanitary sewage for a platted subdivision of not less than 30 lots via a pipe network with transportation to a common collection point for on-site treatment. 
    Small engine sales and repair. The sale and repair of lawnmowers, motorized lawn equipment, motorized hand-carried tools, motorcycles, and motor scooters. 
    Special trade contractor. A person or establishment that specializes in a specific aspect of construction, such as carpentry, electrical, painting, plumbing, flooring, roofing or tile. 
    Specified anatomical areas. Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast before a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities . Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, masturbation, oral copulation, flagellation, bestiality, fondling, or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock, or female breasts; or 
(4)  Any combination of the foregoing. 
    State . The State of Georgia. 
    Story . That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above or, if there is no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above. Each floor or level in a multistory building used for parking, excluding a basement, shall be classified as a story. 
    Street, private . Any right-of-way or area set aside to provide vehicular access within a development which is not dedicated or intended to be dedicated to the town, and which is not maintained by the town. 
    Street, public . All streets other than private streets. 
    Structure . Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including but not limited to permanently mounted signs, tennis courts, swimming pools and buildings, but does not include walls or fences. 
    Subdivision . All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of sale, legacy or building development; it includes all divisions of land involving a new street to which the public has access (whether public or private) or a change in an existing street, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of this section; and 
(2)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved. 
    Tower, tower facilities . Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, and alternative tower structures. Facilities shall also include all accessory buildings excluding tower anchors. 
    Tower height . When referring to a tower or tower facilities, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. See also building height. 
    Town . The Town of Tyrone, Georgia. 
    Vehicle, abandoned . A vehicle which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, discarded, is in an unhealthy condition, does not bear a current license plate with an appropriate decal affixed thereto or is incapable of being moved under its own power, unless said vehicle is stored within a completely enclosed building. 
    Yard . A required open space on a lot that is left unoccupied with structures and facilities, except as permitted herein. 
    Yard, front . The area between a property line adjacent to a thoroughfare and the building line, extending the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, rear . The area between the rear property line and the rear building line, extending the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, side . The area between the side property line and the side building line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Revised June 6, 2013; October 3, 2013; April 2, 2015; Ord. No. 2018-07, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
Sec. 113-3. - Purpose. 
    The various use districts which are created by this section are adopted for the following purposes, among others: 
(1)  To achieve such density, distribution and design of land development and use as will protect and preserve the design capacity of the streets and roads within the Town and prevent traffic congestion and traffic hazards; 
(2)  To secure such accessibility, design and density of land development and use as will reduce fire hazards and fire losses; 
(3)  To promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the town; 
(4)  To preserve the town's natural beauty and encourage architecturally pleasing development; and 
(5)  To preserve the existing historical character of the town. 
Sec. 113-4. - Interpretation and application. 
    In interpreting and applying this section, the requirements contained herein are declared to be minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. Except as herein provided, this section shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of this section impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings or upon the height of buildings or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, the provisions of the section shall apply. 
Sec. 113-5. - Jurisdiction. 
    This section shall apply in all areas of the town. 
Sec. 113-6. - Compliance. 
    No land, building or structure shall be used, no building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or structure shall be moved, added to, enlarged or altered except in conformity with this section. 
Sec. 113-7. - Remedies. 
    In case any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of this section, the town may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the owner of the property, issue a citation for violation of this section requiring the presence of the violator in the Municipal Court of Tyrone. The town may also in such cases institute injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate this violation or to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land. 
Sec. 113-8. - Penalties. 
    Any person who does anything prohibited by this section as it exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who fails to do anything required by this section as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation shall be subject to punishment as provided by law. Each day that the violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Sec. 113-9. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances; validity of prior approvals and actions. 
    This chapter is the zoning ordinance of the town, and all other conflicting ordinances or resolutions are hereby repealed, provided, that nothing herein shall be construed as repealing or modifying the conditions of operation or conditions of site development accompanying those zoning approvals or use permits issued under the previous zoning ordinances or resolutions; however, modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished as provided by this chapter. 
Sec. 113-10. - Appeals. 
    The mayor and council will hear appeals of decisions made by the zoning administrator. The mayor and council will make a decision concerning the appeal and record the decision in the minutes for that meeting. Any person aggrieved by such a decision of the mayor and council may petition the Fayette County Superior Court for a writ of certiorari pursuant to those procedures set forth by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Sec. 113-11. - Words or phrases not listed. 
    In the event the definition of any word or phrase not listed which is in question when administering the zoning ordinance, the word or phrase shall be as defined from one of the following sources. Said sources shall be utilized by finding the desired definition from source "A", but if it is not available there, then source "B" may be used and so on. Sources are as follows: 
(1)  Any city resolution, ordinance, code or regulation; 
(2)  Any statute or regulation of the State of Georgia (i.e. the most applicable); 
(3)  Legal definitions from case law or a law dictionary; and 
(4)  The common dictionary (February 29, 2004). 
Sec. 113-12. - Zoning administrator. 
    The mayor and council shall designate an administrative official to administer and enforce the provisions herein. Any references herein referring to a "zoning administrator" shall refer to said administrative official. 
Secs. 113-13-113-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NONCONFORMANCES 

Sec. 113-35. - Nonconforming structures, lots, open uses of land. 
    A lawful use of, or vested right to use, any building, structure, or land existing at the time of the adoption of this section or the adoption of any amendment thereto, may be continued subject to the restrictions contained in this section, even though such use does not conform with the regulations of this section. 
(1)  Nonconforming use of structures . Nonconforming uses of structures include structures used, at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this section derives, for purposes not permitted in the zoning district in which they are located. They shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
a.  A nonconforming use of structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use through the variance process; 
b.  A nonconforming use of structure shall not be extended or enlarged beyond the area of use or the size of the structure as it existed on the date of the adoption of this Ordinance or the adoption of any amendments thereto. No alterations shall be made in any structure occupied by a nonconforming use, which would in any way increase the floor space, area, or volume of space occupied by the use; and 
c.  When any nonconforming use of a structure is discontinued for a period in excess of 12 months, any future use of the structure shall be limited to those uses permitted in that zoning district. Vacancy and/or non-use of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
(2)  Nonconforming lots . Any lot, being a lot of record at the time of passage of this section, that fails to comply with the requirements of this section may: 
a.  If vacant, be used for a dwelling, in the AR or a residential zoning district, provided that the minimum requirements for floor area, yards and any other applicable requirements are met; 
b.  If vacant and in any zoning district other than a residential or AR zoning district, be used for any use allowed in the applicable district provided that the minimum requirements for floor area, yards and any other applicable requirements are met; or 
c.  If occupied by a structure containing a conforming use, have the structure improved, enlarged or extended provided that improvements do not make the lot more nonconforming. 
(3)  Nonconforming open uses of land . Nonconforming uses consisting of storage yards, used car lots, auto wrecking, junk yards, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, and similar open uses shall be governed by the following restrictions in addition to other requirements herein: 
a.  When a nonconforming open use of land has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use; 
b.  Nonconforming open uses of land shall not be changed to any use but conforming uses; 
c.  A nonconforming open use of land shall not be enlarged to cover more land; and 
d.  When any nonconforming open use of land is discontinued for a period in excess of 12 months, any future use of the land shall be limited to those uses permitted in that zoning district under the provisions herein. Vacancy and/or non-use of the land, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. 
Sec. 113-36. - Restoration and re-use of nonconforming historic structures. 
    As used in this section, the term "historic structure" shall mean any structure identified in the Georgia Historic Resources Survey conducted for the Historic Preservation Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, a copy of which is available at town hall. Nonconforming historic structures previously used for purposes not permitted in the zoning district in which they are located shall be governed by the following restrictions: 
(1)  The structure itself must be the subject of restoration; and 
(2)  Any extension, enlargement or alteration of the structure is subject to variance approval. 
Sec. 113-37. - Reconstruction of nonconforming structures. 
    When a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use is razed or damaged by fire, flood, wind or act of God, such structure may be reconstructed only if the cost of reconstruction totals less than 75 percent of the current fair market value of the structure for tax purposes. The "value of the structure" shall not include the value of any accessory building, well, septic tank or utility in determining the extent of the damage. Structures which do not conform to the yard requirements herein shall also be governed by this provision. 
Sec. 113-38. - Changes in zoning. 
    Any nonconformance produced by a change in zoning district boundaries or regulations after the date of passage of this section shall also be governed by the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 113-39. - Illegal nonconforming uses. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions herein to the contrary, as to nonconforming uses which were illegal when they were commenced, or which became illegal thereafter prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, this section shall be deemed to impose additional regulations only. It shall not be held or construed to be permissive of such illegal use nor as recognizing any right to the continuance of an illegal use, except in those instances where the illegal use was rendered conforming by the inclusion of the land whereon such use was conducted within a zoning district wherein such use is permitted. 
Secs. 113-40-113-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 113-60. - Initiation of amendments. 
    Requests to amend this chapter may be in the form of proposals to amend the text, or proposals to amend the official zoning map. A proposal to amend the text of this chapter may be initiated by the planning commission or be submitted to the planning commission by the town council or by any person having an interest in the town. A proposal to amend the official zoning map may be initiated by the planning commission or to the planning commission by the town council. Unless initiated by the town council or the planning commission, all proposals to amend this chapter or the official zoning map must be in the form of an application satisfying the requirements of section 113-61 of this article and, in the case of proposals to amend the official zoning map, must be submitted by the owner of the affected property or the authorized agent of the owner. Such authorization shall be notarized and attached to the application. In the case of a proposal to amend the official zoning map which was defeated by the town council, the interval between the defeated proposal and a subsequent proposal affecting the same property shall be at least six months. The six -month interval shall not apply to proposals initiated by the town council or the planning commission. 
Sec. 113-61. - Application for amendments. 
    Each application to amend this chapter, the comprehensive land use plan, or the official zoning map shall be filed with the town clerk. An application shall not be required for proposals initiated by the town council or the planning commission. Applications shall be submitted in compliance with the following: 
(1)  Text amendment application . A text amendment application shall include the following: 
a.  Name and address of applicant; 
b.  Current provisions of the text to be affected by the amendment; 
c.  Proposed wording of text change; and 
d.  Reason for the amendment request. 
(2)  Map amendment application . A map amendment (rezoning) application shall include the following: 
a.  A legal description of the tract to be rezoned; 
b.  Ten copies of a plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district, the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid. The preparer's seal shall be affixed to the plat; 
c.  The present and proposed zoning district for the tract; 
d.  Existing and intermediate regional flood plain and structures; 
e.  The names and addresses of the owners of the land and their agents, if any, and abutting land owners; and 
f.  A written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed rezoning with respect to each of the following matters: 
(i)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties; 
(ii)  Whether the zoning proposal would adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(iii)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(iv)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
(v)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive land use plan; and 
(vi)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(3)  Schedule and fees . Applications shall be submitted in accordance with a fee schedule as established from time to time by the town council. The schedule shall be kept at town hall and shall be available to the public. These fees shall be in addition to any other fees and charges required under other ordinances as enacted by the town council. 
(4)  Disclosures . The applicant shall file all disclosures required by the Conflict of Interest in Zoning Actions Act, O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 67A. 
Sec. 113-62. - Public hearings. 
    The planning commission shall establish a schedule for planning commission public hearing, including filing deadlines for submission of applications. Public hearings shall conform to the requirements herein. 
(1)  Place . Public hearings shall be conducted in the council chambers at Tyrone Town Hall. 
(2)  Date and time. Any changes from the standard schedule for public hearings will be published in the newspaper which carries legal advertisements for the Town in compliance with the requirements for public notification (section 113-63). 
(3)  Conduct of public hearing . 
a.  Time allowed . Public hearings on amendments shall be conducted with at least ten minutes provided for the proponents and at least ten minutes provided for the opponents of a proposal. An applicant may reserve part or all of the allotted time for rebuttal. 
b.  Decisions . Decisions of the planning commission shall be made subsequent to the public hearing. 
c.  Minutes . The minutes of any public hearing shall be maintained with the zoning decision entered thereon. The minutes shall be kept as public records. 
(Ord. No. 2017-09, § 1, 11-2-2017) 
Sec. 113-63. - Public notification. 
    The mayor and council shall hold public hearings on matters affecting the zoning ordinance. 
(1)  Newspaper-Legal notice . Notice of scheduled public hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within Fayette County in which are carried the legal advertisements of the county. 
a.  Timeframe . The notice shall be published at least seven days prior to the public hearing before the planning commission, but not more than 45 days, nor less than 15 days prior to the required public hearing before the town council. In the event that the time frames above cannot be met with one advertisement, the notice shall be published twice. 
b.  Content . The notice shall contain the dates of the public hearings before the planning commission and the town council. Public notification shall include at a minimum the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing. Where a request for rezoning is initiated by any person other than the planning commission or town council, the notice shall also state the property location, area of the property, and the current and requested zoning districts. 
(2)  Posting of property . The zoning administrator shall cause appropriate signage to be posted in a conspicuous place on the area proposed to be rezoned by any person other than the planning commission or town council. 
a.  Location, duration . A sign shall be posted along every street frontage of property for which rezoning is sought. The sign shall be posted consistent with the requirements for newspaper notification. If the property proposed for rezoning does not have frontage on a public street, then an additional sign shall be posted on the right-of-way of the nearest public street which provides access to the site. 
b.  Size, content . Signs used for posting property shall be a minimum of three square feet and shall indicate the application number, the time, date, location and purpose of the public hearings, and the current and requested zoning districts. 
(3)  Applicant notification . 
a.  Public hearings . Upon certification by the zoning administrator that an application is complete, a notice giving the date, time and place of the public hearings shall be given by certified mail to the applicant. 
b.  Action . The town clerk shall notify the applicant by mail of any action (including tabling of action) taken by the town council. All actions of the town council shall be deemed to be effective as of the date of the action. 
Sec. 113-64. - Planning commission recommendation. 
(a)  Options . The planning commission shall make a recommendation of approval, denial, tabling or withdrawal without prejudice on each proposal. In addition, the planning commission may recommend amendments to the proponent's request which would reduce the land area for which the proposal is made, change the zoning district requested to one which is less intense, or recommend conditions which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this section will be served and the public health, safety and welfare secured. 
(b)  Failure to submit report . If the planning commission fails to submit a report within 45 days from the acceptance of the completed amendment application, the proposal shall be deemed to have been approved. 
(c)  Decision transmittal . A report of the planning commission's decision shall be submitted to the mayor and council. The report shall contain the decision of the planning commission, all grounds therefor, and shall be signed and approved by the chairman of the planning commission. 
Sec. 113-65. - Town council action. 
(a)  Options . The town council may approve, deny or table a proposal. An action to table shall include a justification of such action and a specific meeting date at which the proposal is to be reconsidered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the proposal, and no further notice is required. In addition, the town council may approve an amendment with a reduction in the land area requested, change the zoning district requested (as long as such change is to a less intense zoning district), or add or delete conditions of zoning which will enhance the health, safety and welfare of the town. 
(b)  Withdrawal . The town council may allow a proposal to be withdrawn without prejudice with regards to the waiting period required by a denial. 
(c)  Decision . The decision of the town council shall be contained in a written report prepared by the town clerk. The report shall contain the decision of the town council, all grounds therefor, and shall be signed and approved by the mayor. The town clerk shall provide a copy of the report to the zoning administrator which copy shall become a part of the proposal file. The town clerk shall send one copy to the applicant by certified mail. 
Sec. 113-66. - Standards for map amendment (rezoning) evaluation. 
    All proposed map amendments shall be evaluated with special emphasis being placed on the relationship of the proposal to the comprehensive land use plan and related development policies of the Town of Tyrone. The zoning administrator shall prepare a report for each proposed map amendment which shall recommend a course of action including recommended conditions, if any. The following factors shall be considered by the zoning administrator, the planning commission and the town council when reviewing a request for rezoning: 
(1)  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the comprehensive land use plan and policies contained therein; 
(2)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(3)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing or planned streets, utilities, or schools; and 
(4)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(Revised October 4, 2012) 
Sec. 113-67. - Zoning reversion. 
    Within three years of the date of rezoning, rezoned property shall be utilized for uses allowed in the new zoning district or substantial development shall be demonstrated toward such utilization. Failure to so utilize or demonstrate substantial development may subject the property to consideration for reversion to the previous zoning district. In such event, public hearings shall be held as for rezoning petitions and a final decision is rendered by the town council. 
Sec. 113-68. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the mayor and council made pursuant to this article may appeal said decision to the Fayette County Superior Court pursuant to those procedures set forth by law. 
Secs. 113-69-113-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 

Sec. 113-90. - Establishment and purpose of districts. 
    In order to implement the intent of this article, the incorporated area of the town is divided into the following districts: 
(1)  AR agricultural residential . A district for desirable agricultural or low density residential development with a minimum lot area of three acres; 
(2)  CR-2 conservation residential-2 . A district for low density residential development in an environmentally-sensitive area with a minimum lot area of two acres; 
(3)  CR-3 conservation residential-3 . A district for low density residential development in an environmentally-sensitive area with a minimum lot area of three acres; 
(4)  R-20 . A district for residential development with a minimum house size of 2,000 square feet (November 20, 1997); 
(5)  R-18 . A district for residential development with a minimum house size of 1,800 square feet; 
(6)  R-12 . A district for residential development with a minimum house size of 1,200 square feet; 
(7)  DR duplex residential . A two-family residential district which allows a maximum of two dwelling units per acre; 
(8)  TR traditional residential . A district for residential development designed to provide for an open, leafy, low-density area with a network of paths/trails and preserved open areas (April 16, 2009); 
(9)  RMF residential multi-family . A district for residential development at a density not to exceed four units per acre; 
(10)  MHP mobile home park . A district for mobile home parks; 
(11)  O-I office-institutional district . A district for offices, institutions and accessory supporting services; 
(12)  E-I educational-institutional district . A district for churches, educational and related institutional functions; 
(13)  C-1 downtown commercial . A district intended to protect and promote suitable areas for business and commercial uses which benefit from proximity to each other, and to encourage the development of a centralized business center for the town; 
(14)  C-2 highway commercial . A district for general business activities which will best accommodate the needs of the town and the traveling public; 
(15)  M-1 light industrial . A district for light industrial development which does not create noise, odor, smoke, dust or other objectionable characteristics which might be detrimental to the surrounding area; 
(16)  M-2 heavy industrial . A district for those industrial uses which cannot comply with the regulations for M-1; and 
(17)  OS open space . A district for land which will remain generally undeveloped except as to provide for outdoor recreation or other public uses (November 20, 1997). 
(18)  LUR residual limited use residential . A district established for the purpose of administering the completion of already approved LUR projects. 
(Revised March 1, 2012) 
Sec. 113-91. - Districts designated on maps. 
    The boundaries of the various zoning districts are shown upon the official zoning map of the town and are hereby made a part of this article and shall be maintained by the town clerk. 
Sec. 113-92. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zoning district shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline or right-of-way line of streets and alleys, land lot lines, militia district lines or lot lines, these lines shall be construed to be the boundaries; 
(2)  In unsubdivided property or tracts, where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of these boundaries, unless they are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the official zoning map; 
(3)  Where boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerline or right-of-way line of streets, alleys or highways, these boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the official zoning map. If no distance is given, this dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the official zoning map; and 
(4)  In case any further uncertainty exists, the town council shall determine the location of boundaries. 
Secs. 113-93-113-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 113-115. - Permitted uses and district standards. 
    Within the various zoning districts as described in this chapter and shown on the official zoning map, no land, building or structure shall be used except in accordance with the uses and standards permitted within each district. 
Sec. 113-116. - Agricultural residential district (AR). 
(a)  Permitted uses: 
(1)  Agricultural; 
(2)  Farm operations (February 6, 2014); 
(3)  Parks (February 6, 2014); 
(4)  Riding stables (February 6, 2014); and 
(5)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII): 
(1)  Bed and breakfasts; 
(2)  Child caring institutions (June 6, 2013); 
(3)  Community living arrangements (June 6, 2013); 
(4)  Day care services; 
(5)  Group homes (June 6, 2013); 
(6)  Kennels; 
(7)  Livestock; 
(8)  Outdoor rifle, pistol, skeet or archery ranges; 
(9)  Personal care homes (June 6, 2013); 
(10)  Pet cemeteries; 
(11)  Plant nurseries; 
(12)  Public utility facilities; 
(13)  Religious institutions; and 
(14)  Telecommunication antennas and towers. 
(c)  Development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot area-Three acres; 
(2)  Minimum lot width-250 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From all streets-100 feet 
b.  Side yard setbacks-50 feet; 
c.  Rear yard setbacks-50 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet; and 
(5)  Minimum square footage of the principal structure-1,200 square feet. 
(Revised February 6, 2014) 
Sec. 113-117. - Conservation residential district (CR-2). 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures; 
(2)  Customary home occupations; 
(3)  Community facilities (homeowners' association recreation centers or swimming pools; parks; public uses; and public utility facilities); and 
(4)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Beds and breakfasts; 
(2)  Community living arrangements (June 6, 2013); 
(3)  Group homes (June 6, 2013); 
(4)  Personal care homes (June 6, 2013); and 
(5)  Religious institutions (October 18, 2007). 
(c)  Development standards : 
(1)  Minimum lot area-Two acres; 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line-250 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From all streets-100 feet; 
b.  Side yard setbacks-20 feet; 
c.  Rear yard setbacks-50 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet; 
(5)  Minimum square footage of principal structure-1,800 square feet; and 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage-25 percent. 
(Revised June 6, 2013) 
Sec. 113-118. - Conservation residential district (CR-3). 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures; 
(2)  Customary home occupations; 
(3)  Community facilities (homeowners' association recreation centers or swimming pools; parks; public uses; and public utility facilities); and 
(4)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Beds and breakfasts; 
(2)  Community living arrangements (June 6, 2013); 
(3)  Group homes (June 6, 2013); 
(4)  Personal care homes (June 6, 2013); and 
(5)  Religious institutions (October 18, 2007). 
(c)  Development standards : 
(1)  Minimum lot area-Three acres; 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line-150 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From all streets-100 feet; 
b.  Side yard setbacks-20 feet; 
c.  Rear yard setbacks-50 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet; 
(5)  Minimum square footage of principal structure-2,000 square feet; and 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage-25 percent. 
(Revised June 6, 2013) 
Sec. 113-119. - R-20. 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures; 
(2)  Customary home occupations; 
(3)  Community facilities (parks; public uses; and public utility facilities); and 
(4)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Beds and breakfasts; 
(2)  Community living arrangements (June 6, 2013); 
(3)  Group homes (June 6, 2013); 
(4)  Homeowners' association recreation centers or swimming pools; and 
(5)  Personal care homes (June 6, 2013). 
(c)  Development standards : 
(1)  Minimum lot area-One acre; 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line-125 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From a major or minor thoroughfare-80 feet; 
b.  From a residential street-55 feet; 
c.  Side yard setbacks-15 feet; 
d.  Rear yard setbacks-30 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet; 
(5)  Minimum square footage of principal structure-2,000 square feet; and 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage-25 percent (November 20, 1997). 
(Revised June 6, 2013) 
Sec. 113-120. - R-18. 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures; 
(2)  Customary home occupations; 
(3)  Community facilities (homeowners' association recreation centers or swimming pools; parks; public uses; and public utility facilities); and 
(4)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Community living arrangements (June 6, 2013); 
(2)  Group homes (June 6, 2013); 
(3)  Personal care homes (June 6, 2013); and 
(4)  Religious institutions (October 18, 2007). 
(c)  Development standards . 
(1)  Minimum lot area-One acre; 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line-125 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From a major or minor thoroughfare-80 feet; 
b.  From a residential street-55 feet; 
c.  Side yard setbacks-15 feet; 
d.  Rear yard setbacks-30 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet; 
(5)  Minimum square footage of principal structure-1,800 square feet; and 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage-25 percent. 
(Revised June 6, 2013) 
Sec. 113-121. - R-12. 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures; 
(2)  Customary home occupations; 
(3)  Community facilities (parks; public uses; and public utility facilities); and 
(4)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Community living arrangements (June 6, 2013); 
(2)  Group homes (June 6, 2013); 
(3)  Homeowners' association recreation centers or swimming pools; 
(4)  Personal care homes (June 6, 2013); and 
(5)  Religious institutions (October 18, 2007). 
(c)  Development standards : 
(1)  Minimum lot area-One acre; 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line-125 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From a major or minor thoroughfare-80 feet; 
b.  From a residential street-55 feet; 
c.  Side yard setbacks-15 feet; 
d.  Rear yard setbacks-30 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet; 
(5)  Minimum square footage of principal structure-1,200 square feet; and 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage-25 percent. 
(Revised June 6, 2013) 
Sec. 113-122. - Duplex residential (DR). 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures; 
(2)  Customary home occupations; 
(3)  Community facilities (parks; public uses; and public utility facilities); and 
(4)  Two-family dwellings (duplexes). 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Community living arrangements (June 6, 2013); 
(2)  Group homes (June 6, 2013); 
(3)  Homeowners' association recreation centers or swimming pools; 
(4)  Personal care homes (June 6, 2013); and 
(5)  Religious institutions (October 18, 2007). 
(c)  Development standards : 
(1)  Minimum lot area-One acre; 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line-125 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From a major or minor thoroughfare-80 feet; 
b.  From a residential street-65 feet; 
c.  Side yard setbacks-15 feet; 
d.  Rear yard setbacks-30 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet; 
(5)  Minimum square footage of principal structure-2,000 square feet, with a minimum of 1,000 square feet per side; 
(6)  Maximum lot coverage-25 percent; and 
(7)  Where lot adjoins a single-family residential or the AR zoning district-25-foot buffer (June 21, 2001). 
(Revised June 6, 2013) 
Sec. 113-123. - Traditional residential district (TR). 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures; 
(2)  Community facilities (homeowners' association recreation centers or swimming pools; parks; public uses; and public utility facilities); 
(3)  Home occupations; and 
(4)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Community living arrangements (June 6, 2013); 
(2)  Group homes (June 6, 2013); and 
(3)  Personal care homes (June 6, 2013). 
(c)  Development standards : 
(1)  Minimum development acreage-Ten acres; 
(2)  Open space-Ten percent, dedicated to the homeowners' association; 
(3)  Minimum lot area-One acre; 
(4)  Minimum lot width at building line-100 feet; 
(5)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From all streets-50 feet; 
b.  Side yard setbacks-10 feet; 
c.  Rear yard setbacks-20 feet; 
(6)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet; 
(7)  Minimum square footage of principal structure-1,200 square feet; and 
(8)  Maximum lot coverage-35 percent. 
(d)  Architectural reference : 
(1)  Entrances . All dwellings shall have a front porch equal to three-fourths the length of the street-facing wall. A minimum front porch depth of five feet is required. 
(2)  Building materials . 
a.  For principal structures, allowable building materials (not including trim/accent) along the front and side facades are limited to the following: 
(i)  Brick; 
(ii)  Brick veneer; 
(iii)  Stone; 
(iv)  Architectural precast concrete; and 
(v)  Natural wood and/or cement-based wood siding. 
b.  There shall be no more than two building materials used (not including trim/accent materials). 
c.  Colors for the building materials shall be limited to earth tones, pastels and/or neutral tones (April 16, 2009). 
(Revised June 6, 2013) 
Sec. 113-124. - Residential multi-family district (RMF). 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures; 
(2)  Community facilities (parks; public uses; and public utility facilities); 
(3)  Home occupations; and 
(4)  Multi-family dwelling units. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Child caring institutions (June 6, 2013); 
(2)  Community living arrangements (June 6, 2013); 
(3)  Group homes (June 6, 2013); 
(4)  Homeowners' association recreation centers or swimming pools; 
(5)  Personal care homes (June 6, 2013); and 
(6)  Religious institutions (October 18, 2007). 
(c)  Development standards : 
(1)  Minimum lot area-Five acres; 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line-300 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From a major or minor thoroughfare-70 feet; 
b.  From a residential street-65 feet; 
c.  Side yard setbacks-40 feet; 
d.  Rear yard setbacks-40 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet; 
(5)  Minimum square footage-1,000 square feet per dwelling unit; 
(6)  Open space-50 percent; 
(7)  Maximum density-Four dwelling units per acre; and 
(8)  Where development adjoins a single-family residential or the AR zoning district-50-foot buffer (June 21, 2001). 
(Revised June 6, 2013) 
Sec. 113-125. - Manufactured home park district (MHP). 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures; 
(2)  Community facilities (public uses; and public utility facilities); 
(3)  Home occupations; 
(4)  Mobile homes and mobile home parks; and 
(5)  Mobile home as an accessory structure to be used for security purposes. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Community living arrangements (June 6, 2013); 
(2)  Group homes (June 6, 2013); 
(3)  Homeowners' association recreation centers or swimming pools; and 
(4)  Personal care homes (June 6, 2013). 
(c)  Development standards for manufactured home park : 
(1)  Minimum lot area-Ten acres; 
(2)  Minimum lot width at the building line-400 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From major thoroughfare-250 feet; 
b.  From minor thoroughfare-150 feet; 
c.  From collector-100 feet; 
d.  Side yard setbacks-40 feet; 
e.  Rear yard setbacks-40 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet; and 
(5)  Where manufactured home park adjoins a single-family residential or the AR zoning district-50-foot buffer (June 21, 2001). 
(d)  Developmental standards for individual manufactured homes : 
(1)  Minimum lot area-10,000 square feet; 
(2)  Minimum lot width-50 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  Side yard setbacks-Seven and one-half feet; 
b.  Rear yard setbacks-Seven and one-half feet; and 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet. 
(Revised June 6, 2013) 
Sec. 113-126. - Office-institutional district (O-I). 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services; 
(2)  Adult day care centers; 
(3)  Advertising agencies excluding sign contractors; 
(4)  Amphitheaters; 
(5)  Appraisers; 
(6)  Art galleries; 
(7)  Assembly halls; 
(8)  Attorneys; 
(9)  Auditoriums; 
(10)  Automobile claims adjusters; 
(11)  Blueprinting and photocopying services; 
(12)  Business agents and brokers; 
(13)  Business service support establishments; 
(14)  Churches and other places of worship and accessory facilities; 
(15)  Clerical services; 
(16)  Collection services; 
(17)  College and university industry associated research and training facilities; 
(18)  Commercial photography, art and graphics offices; 
(19)  Commercial vocational schools; 
(20)  Computer or data processing offices; 
(21)  Convention or exhibition halls; 
(22)  Counseling and guidance services; 
(23)  Credit reporting services; 
(24)  Cultural facilities; 
(25)  Dental care services; 
(26)  Detective agency and protective services (excluding armored cars and animal rental); 
(27)  Drafting services; 
(28)  Eating establishments as an accessory use; 
(29)  Employment agencies; 
(30)  Engineering, planning and architectural offices; 
(31)  Finance, insurance and real estate institutions; 
(32)  Health services clinics; 
(33)  Historical society/welcome, information centers; 
(34)  Home health care; 
(35)  Interior decorators; 
(36)  Libraries; 
(37)  Management, consulting and public relations services; 
(38)  Medical and dental laboratories; 
(39)  Medical photography and arts; 
(40)  Message answering services; 
(41)  Museums; 
(42)  Occupational physical therapy services; 
(43)  Optician and optometry stores as an accessory use; 
(44)  Parcel and express services; 
(45)  Pharmacies as an accessory use; 
(46)  Photographic studios; 
(47)  Political organizations; 
(48)  Radio and television broadcasting stations; 
(49)  Recording and developing studios; 
(50)  Specialized non-degree schools (beauty school); 
(51)  Talent and theatrical booking agents; 
(52)  Telecommuting centers; 
(53)  Ticket brokers; 
(54)  Travel agencies; and 
(55)  Utility business offices. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics; 
(2)  ATMs; 
(3)  Automobile brokers; 
(4)  Cemeteries; 
(5)  Child caring institutions (June 6, 2013); 
(6)  Day nurseries and kindergartens; 
(7)  Electric transformer stations, gas regulator stations and telephone exchanges; 
(8)  General building contractors; 
(9)  Nursing homes (June 6, 2013); 
(10)  Private or parochial elementary and high schools; and 
(11)  Public utility facilities. 
(c)  Development standards : 
(1)  Minimum lot width-125 feet (July 5, 2007); 
(2)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From a major or minor thoroughfare-80 feet; 
b.  From a collector street-70 feet; 
c.  From a residential street-55 feet; 
d.  Rear yard setbacks-30 feet; 
e.  Side yard setbacks-Eight feet; 
(3)  Maximum building height-35 feet; 
(4)  Any service area, loading area, refuse or outside storage area which is visible from the street shall be screened in accordance with the provisions of this section; and 
(5)  Where the lot adjoins a single-family residential or the AR zoning district-75-foot buffer (June 21, 2001). 
(Revised June 6, 2013) 
Sec. 113-127. - Educational-institutional district (E-I). 
    All permitted and conditional uses must be on a lot which fronts a collector street as defined in the comprehensive land use plan for the Town of Tyrone. 
(1)  Permitted uses : 
a.  Churches and other places of worship; and 
b.  Home occupations. 
(2)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
a.  Child caring institutions (June 6, 2013); 
b.  Daycare; 
c.  Nursing homes; 
d.  Private or parochial schools; and 
e.  Tennis courts. 
(3)  Development standards : 
a.  Minimum lot width-300 feet; 
b.  Minimum lot area-Three acres; 
c.  Front, rear and side yard setback from the right-of-way of each collector street-50 feet; 
(4)  Maximum building height-35 feet; 
(5)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to any of the permitted principal uses, including, but not limited to, a security building (10x10), administrative offices, agricultural, aquariums, planetariums, botanicals, art studios, books and stationary stores, dormitories, farm operations, radio and television broadcasting, recreational vehicle parking, student union buildings, infirmaries, cafeterias, gymnasiums, stadiums and maintenance and service buildings, provided such building or structure will not be permitted within 100 feet of any property line or street right-of-way; 
(6)  Nursery schools operated on a non-commercial basis, incidental to normal operations of a church, school or college-100 square feet of outdoor play area enclosed by a permanent solid wall or woven wire fence of the type commonly known as "cyclone fence" with a height of at least four feet; and 
(7)  Where the lot adjoins a single-family residential or the AR zoning district-100-foot buffer (June 21, 2001). 
(Revised July 17, 2014) 
Sec. 113-128. - Downtown commercial district (C-1). 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services; 
(2)  Advertising agencies; 
(3)  Adult day care; 
(4)  Amphitheaters; 
(5)  Antique stores; 
(6)  Apparel and accessory stores (including dressmaker and tailor); 
(7)  Appraisers; 
(8)  Art galleries; 
(9)  Art studios; 
(10)  Assembly halls; 
(11)  Attorneys; 
(12)  Automobile claims adjuster; 
(13)  Auditoriums; 
(14)  Bail bonding services; 
(15)  Bakeries, retail; 
(16)  Banquet halls; 
(17)  Barbershops and beauty shops; 
(18)  Bicycle repair shops; 
(19)  Blood donor stations; 
(20)  Blueprinting and photocopying services; 
(21)  Book and stationery stores; 
(22)  Bowling alley; 
(23)  Business agents and brokers; 
(24)  Business service support establishments; 
(25)  Camera and photographic supply stores; 
(26)  Carryout/delivery establishments; 
(27)  Catalog mail order stores; 
(28)  Caterers; 
(29)  Cigar stores and stands; 
(30)  Clerical; 
(31)  Collection services; 
(32)  Commercial photography, art and graphics offices; 
(33)  Computer or data processing offices; 
(34)  Convention or exhibition halls; 
(35)  Counseling and guidance services; 
(36)  Credit reporting services; 
(37)  Dance schools; 
(38)  Delicatessen and gourmet food stores (with incidental catering); 
(39)  Dental care services; 
(40)  Detective agency and protective services (excluding armored cars and animal rental); 
(41)  Dinner theatres; 
(42)  Doctors/physicians' offices; 
(43)  Drafting services; 
(44)  Drugstores; 
(45)  Eating establishments, when accessory to a permitted use; 
(46)  Electric transformer stations, gas regulator stations and telephone exchanges; 
(47)  Employment agencies; 
(48)  Engineering, planning and architectural offices; 
(49)  Fabric shops; 
(50)  Farm and garden supply stores; 
(51)  Finance, insurance and real estate institutions; 
(52)  Florists; 
(53)  Food specialty shops (ice cream, coffee, soda fountain); 
(54)  Furniture, home furnishing and appliance stores; 
(55)  General building contractors; 
(56)  Gift, novelty and souvenir stores (excluding adult novelty); 
(57)  Glass sales; 
(58)  Grocery stores limited to a floor area not exceeding 5,000 square feet; 
(59)  Gyms; 
(60)  Hardware sales; 
(61)  Historical society/welcome, information centers; 
(62)  Hobby, toy and game shops; 
(63)  Hotels; 
(64)  Household and apparel stores; 
(65)  Indoor sports facilities; and 
(66)  Interior decorator services; 
(67)  Jewelry sales and repair; 
(68)  Key duplicating shops; 
(69)  Kitchen-ware stores; 
(70)  Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up stations; 
(71)  Lawn and garden supply; 
(72)  Libraries; 
(73)  Locksmiths; 
(74)  Lodging houses; 
(75)  Management, consulting and public relations services; 
(76)  Manicure services (nail care); 
(77)  Meat, seafood and poultry markets (excluding live poultry); 
(78)  Medical photography; 
(79)  Message answering services; 
(80)  Museums; 
(81)  Musical instrument sales and repair; 
(82)  News dealers and newsstands; 
(83)  Notary public; 
(84)  Occupational physical therapy; 
(85)  Office uses as part of a planned office center; 
(86)  Optician and optometry stores; 
(87)  Parks; 
(88)  Pawn shops; 
(89)  Pet shops; 
(90)  Pharmacies; 
(91)  Photographic studios; 
(92)  Picture framing stores; 
(93)  Playhouses; 
(94)  Political organizations; 
(95)  Produce markets; 
(96)  Publishing only: newspaper, periodicals and books; 
(97)  Radio, television and stereo sales and service; 
(98)  Repair, as an accessory use; 
(99)  Retail automotive parts and tire stores; 
(100)  Restaurants, general and convenience; 
(101)  Seasonal outdoor retail (activity for the sale of flowers, garden supplies, produce); 
(102)  Shoe repair and sales; 
(103)  Skating rinks; 
(104)  Special trade contractors; 
(105)  Specialized non-degree schools; 
(106)  Specialized merchandise stores; 
(107)  Sporting goods; 
(108)  Swimming pools (prefabricated), hot tubs and spa sales; 
(109)  Talent and theatrical booking agents; 
(110)  Telephone business offices; 
(111)  Telecommuting centers; 
(112)  Travel agencies; 
(113)  Used goods stores; 
(114)  Video sales and rentals (excluding adult entertainment); and 
(115)  Visiting nurse associations. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics; 
(2)  Arcades; 
(3)  ATMs; 
(4)  Automobile brokers; 
(5)  Automobile repair; 
(6)  Bed and breakfasts; 
(7)  Cemeteries; 
(8)  Day nurseries and kindergartens; 
(9)  Dog grooming shops. 
(10)  Electrical supply stores; 
(11)  Electric transformer stations, gas regulator stations and telephone exchanges; 
(12)  Indoor pet boarding; 
(13)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments including pick-up stations, package plants and coin-operated facilities; 
(14)  Neighborhood recreation center or swimming pools; 
(15)  Paint, glass and wallpaper stores; 
(16)  Private or parochial schools; 
(17)  Public utility facilities; and 
(18)  Small engine sales and repair. 
(c)  Development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot area-One acre; 
(2)  Minimum lot width-100 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From a major thoroughfare-80 feet; 
b.  From a collector-70 feet; 
c.  From a residential street-55 feet; 
d.  Rear yard setbacks-30 feet; 
e.  Side yard setbacks-20 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-40 feet, with structures not to exceed three overall stories; 
(5)  Where a lot adjoins a single-family residential, MHP, or the AR zoning district-75-foot buffer (June 21, 2001); and 
(6)  Maximum building size-30,000 square feet (February 15, 2001). 
(Revised March 1, 2012; August 1, 2013; October 2, 2014; Ord. No. 2017-02, §§ 1-4, 5-4-2017; Ord. No. 2017-08, § 1, 11-2-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07, § 2, 5-17-2018) 
Sec. 113-129. - Highway commercial district (C-2). 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  All those permitted uses in the C-1 zoning district; 
(2)  Aquariums, planetariums, botanical gardens 
(3)  Assembly halls; 
(4)  Automobile air conditioning equipment, sales and installation; 
(5)  Automobile broker; 
(6)  Automobile claims adjuster; 
(7)  Automobile convenience and gas services; 
(8)  Automobile upholstery shops; 
(9)  Reserved; 
(10)  Bail bonding services; 
(11)  Billiard and pool halls; 
(12)  Blood banks; 
(13)  Body art studios (June 6, 2013); 
(14)  Building materials dealers (garage doors, fencing, roofing, storm windows, kitchen, cabinets, wallboard, insulation); 
(15)  Building materials establishments; 
(16)  Carpet and vinyl flooring stores; 
(17)  Catalog, mail order stores; 
(18)  Comedy clubs; 
(19)  Consumer electronic repair services; 
(20)  Drive-in restaurants; 
(21)  Dwelling as an accessory structure to be used for security purposes; 
(22)  Fast food restaurants; 
(23)  Flea markets; 
(24)  Flooring stores; 
(25)  Funeral homes and funeral chapels, mortuaries, crematoriums; 
(26)  Furniture upholstery shops; 
(27)  Landscaping services; 
(28)  Heating, air conditioning, ventilation supply stores; 
(29)  Home appliance repair and related services; 
(30)  Home health care services; 
(31)  Hookah lounges (June 6, 2013); 
(32)  Household and apparel sales and rental; 
(33)  HVAC/plumbing/electrical contractors; 
(34)  Indoor sports and recreation facilities; 
(35)  Medical supply businesses; 
(36)  Motels; 
(37)  Musical instrument sales and repair, musical supply sales including records, tapes and compact discs; 
(38)  Natural materials dealers (lime, plaster, sand, gravel, lumber); 
(39)  Nursing homes; 
(40)  Packaging services; 
(41)  Parcel and express services; 
(42)  Playhouses; 
(43)  Plumbing supply stores; 
(44)  Radio and television broadcasting stations (excluding transmission towers); 
(45)  Recording and developing studios; 
(46)  Service agencies; 
(47)  Sign stores-Painting and lettering; 
(48)  Swimming pool supplies, cleaning and maintenance services; 
(49)  Taverns, bars, lounges; 
(50)  Training/rehabilitation services; 
(51)  Upholstery, furniture services; and 
(52)  Water-softening services. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics; 
(2)  Armored car services; 
(3)  ATMs; 
(4)  Automobile repair; 
(5)  Automobile sales; 
(6)  Automobile service stations; 
(7)  Automotive parking establishments; 
(8)  Bed and breakfasts; 
(9)  Car wash services; 
(10)  Commercial motor vehicle repair; 
(11)  Commercial motor vehicle sales; 
(12)  Farmers' markets; 
(13)  General building contractors; 
(14)  Golf cart sales and service; 
(15)  Golf or baseball driving ranges; 
(16)  Gun shops; 
(17)  Health clubs and day spas; 
(18)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments including pick-up stations, package plants and coin-operated facilities; 
(19)  Marine sales and parts; 
(20)  Miniature golf courses; 
(21)  Nursing homes (June 6, 2013); 
(22)  Outdoor sports facilities and swimming pools; 
(23)  Paint, glass and wallpaper stores; 
(24)  Par 3 golf courses; 
(25)  Plant nurseries; 
(26)  Private or parochial schools; 
(27)  Public utility facilities; 
(28)  Retail automobile parts and tire stores; 
(29)  Small engine sales and repair; and 
(30)  Tennis courts, clubs and facilities. 
(c)  Development standards : 
(1)  Minimum lot area-One acre (May 20,1999); 
(2)  Minimum lot width-100 feet (May 20,1999); 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From a public street-50 feet (May 20,1999); 
b.  Rear yard setbacks-30 feet; 
c.  Side yard setbacks-20 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet (May 20, 1999); 
(5)  Where a lot adjoins a single-family residential district, a MHP district, or an AR district-75-foot buffer (June 21, 2001); 
(6)  Maximum building size-30,000 square feet (February 15, 2001). 
(Revised March 1, 2012; June 6, 2013; Ord. No. 2017-03, §§ 1-4, 5-4-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07, § 3, 5-17-2018) 
Sec. 113-130. - Light industrial district (M-1). 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Art studios (June 6, 2013); 
(2)  Automobile repossessing services; 
(3)  Automobile towing establishments; 
(4)  Building materials dealers (garage doors, fencing, roofing, storm windows, kitchen cabinets, wallboard, insulation); 
(5)  College and university industry, associated research and training facilities; 
(6)  Eating establishments, when accessory to a permitted use; 
(7)  Engineering, planning and architectural offices; 
(8)  Golf courses and clubhouses; 
(9)  HVAC/plumbing/electrical contractors; 
(10)  Incidental retail sales of goods produced and processed on the premises; 
(11)  Manufacturing offices of health service practitioners; 
(12)  Medical and dental laboratories; 
(13)  Medical supply businesses; 
(14)  Movie/media production studios (including ancillary businesses that supply support services, equipment and resources to the movie/media industry); 
(15)  Natural materials dealer (lime, plaster, sand, gravel, lumber); 
(16)  Offices used as part of a planned office center; 
(17)  Parcel and express services; 
(18)  Pest control/exterminator services; 
(19)  Plant nurseries; 
(20)  Precision instrument repair services; 
(21)  Printing, publishing and blueprinting services; 
(22)  Publishing only-Newspapers, periodicals and books; 
(23)  Recording and developing studios; 
(24)  Research testing and laboratories; 
(25)  Sign stores-Painting and lettering; 
(26)  Swimming pool (prefabricated), hot tubs and spa sales; 
(27)  Swimming pool cleaning and maintenance services; 
(28)  Technical and vocational schools; 
(29)  Telecommunications antennas and towers; 
(30)  Training/rehabilitation services; 
(31)  Upholstery stores; and 
(32)  Utility business offices. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics; 
(2)  ATMs; 
(3)  Auction yards or establishments; 
(4)  Automobile convenience and gas services; 
(5)  Automotive rentals; 
(6)  Automobile repair; 
(7)  Automobile sales; 
(8)  Automobile service stations; 
(9)  Building materials establishments; 
(10)  Commercial motor vehicle repair; 
(11)  Commercial motor vehicle sales; 
(12)  Electric transformer stations, gas regulator stations, and telephone exchanges; 
(13)  Landscaping services; 
(14)  Maintenance shops; 
(15)  Outdoor advertising services (no outside storage); 
(16)  Parks; 
(17)  Public utility facilities; 
(18)  Small engine sales and repair; 
(19)  Structural materials dealers (brick, tile, stone, clay, concrete, cinder block); 
(20)  Telecommunications antennas and towers; and 
(21)  Warehousing and storage. 
(c)  Development standards : 
(1)  Minimum lot area-One acre; 
(2)  Minimum lot width-125 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From a major thoroughfare-100 feet; 
b.  From a collector-70 feet; 
c.  From a residential street-55 feet; 
d.  Rear yard setbacks-30 feet; 
e.  Side yard setbacks-20 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet; 
(5)  Where a lot adjoins a single-family residential, MHP, or the AR zoning district-100-foot buffer (June 21, 2001); and 
(6)  Open space-Ten percent. 
(Revised January 24, 2013; June 6, 2013; Ord. No. 2017-05, § 1, 7-6-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07, § 4, 5-17-2018) 
Sec. 113-131. - Heavy industrial district (M-2). 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  All those permitted uses in the M-1 zoning district; 
(2)  Billiard and pool halls; 
(3)  Dwelling as an accessory structure to be used for security; 
(4)  General building contractors; 
(5)  Heavy construction contractors; 
(6)  Heavy manufacturing establishments-The following are heavy manufacturing establishments: 
a.  Asphalt plants; 
b.  Brick, clay, tile or concrete products manufacture; 
c.  Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture; 
d.  Manufacturing operations not housed within a building; 
e.  Transportation equipment manufacture; 
f.  Rubber and plastics manufacture; 
g.  Leather manufacture and processing; 
h.  Fabricated metal manufacture; and 
i.  Mining and quarry processing; 
(7)  Skate board or roller blade parks; and 
(8)  Special trade contractors. 
(b)  Conditional uses (see article VII) : 
(1)  Adult businesses; 
(2)  ATMs; 
(3)  Automobile impoundment yard/towing services; 
(4)  Golf or baseball driving ranges; 
(5)  Junkyards; 
(6)  Kennels; 
(7)  Public utility facilities; 
(8)  Quarries; and 
(9)  Telecommunications antennas and towers. 
(c)  Development standards: 
(1)  Minimum lot area-One acre; 
(2)  Minimum lot width-125 feet; 
(3)  Yard setbacks: 
a.  From a major thoroughfare-100 feet; 
b.  From a collector-70 feet; 
c.  From a residential street-55 feet (May 7, 1998); 
d.  Rear yard setbacks-30 feet; 
e.  Side yard setbacks-20 feet; 
(4)  Maximum height of structures-35 feet; 
(5)  Where a lot adjoins a single-family residential, MHP, or the AR zoning district-125-foot buffer (June 21, 2001); and 
(6)  Open space-Ten percent. 
Sec. 113-132. - Open space district (OS). 
(a)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted uses; and 
(2)  Community facilities (non-commercial parks; public uses; and public utility facilities). 
(b)  Development standards . It is intended that the OS zoning district be established to control development on certain land and water areas which provide for outdoor recreation activities; provide open space for the town's residents; possess great natural beauty; are of historical significance; are subject to periodic flooding; or serve as refuges for wildlife. The regulations which apply for uses in this zoning district are designed to protect the open nature of the landscape and discourage encroachment by residential, commercial, industrial or other uses capable of adversely affecting the relatively undeveloped character of the zoning district (November 20, 1997). 
Sec. 113-133. - Planned unit development. 
(a)  Purpose . The intent of this section is to: 
(1)  Encourage the development of large lots of land as: planned residential development (PRD); planned industrial development (PID); planned commercial development (PCD); and planned educational development (PED); 
(2)  Encourage flexible and creative concepts in site planning; 
(3)  Preserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging scenic and functional open spaces; 
(4)  Accomplish a more desirable environment than would be possible through the strict application of minimum requirements of this section; 
(5)  Provide for an efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets and thereby lowering development and housing costs; and 
(6)  Provide an environment of a stable character compatible with surrounding areas. 
(b)  Development standards . Each planned unit development shall meet the following standards in addition to any other as hereinafter set forth: 
(1)  The development shall utilize creative and flexible design including, but not limited to: varied lot sizes, amenities, mixed uses, etc; 
(2)  The development shall be compatible with surrounding uses and with the comprehensive land use plan of the Town of Tyrone; and 
(3)  Developers of approved planned unit developments shall be required to pave all new subdivision streets contained within said development to conform with the rules and regulations of the development regulations of the Town of Tyrone. Improvements to existing roads or planned roads which pass through a planned unit development will be handled conditionally at the time of rezoning or at the time of a revision to a development plan. 
(c)  Relation to zoning districts . An approved planned unit development shall be considered to be a separate zoning district in which the development plan, as approved, establishes the uses, restrictions and regulations according to which development shall occur. Upon approval, the official zoning map shall be changed to indicate the area as a planned unit development. The following procedures shall be followed in the establishment of each and every planned unit development: 
(1)  Pre-application conference . Prior to filing a rezoning petition for a planned unit development, the applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator to review the general character of the proposed development, including but not limited to, its scope, nature and location. At this time, the applicant shall be fully advised of the approval procedures contained herein as well as the various information and studies which the applicant may need in order to continue with said procedures; 
(2)  Pre-recommendation meeting(s) . Prior to filing a rezoning petition for a planned unit development and subsequent to the pre-application conference with the zoning administrator, the applicant shall meet with the planning commission in a plan review session(s). At this meeting, the applicant shall be required to review his/her plan with the planning commission and provide preliminary data concerning said plan as required by the planning commission. The planning commission may require additional pre-recommendation meetings to review said preliminary data prior to their pre-recommendation; 
(3)  Rezoning petition . A rezoning petition for a planned unit development shall only be submitted subsequent to the pre-application conference with the zoning administrator and the pre-recommendation meeting(s) with the planning commission. The petition shall contain a development plan and a written summary of intent, and shall show the relation between the proposed development and the surrounding area, both proposed and existing. A rezoning petition for a planned unit development shall follow the procedures in article III of this chapter; 
(4)  Development plan . The following information shall be submitted as the development plan: 
a.  General location map; 
b.  Current topographical map clearly showing existing conditions, including contour intervals of no more than five feet based on field survey or photogrammetric methods; 
c.  Map showing the existing flood plains and flood soil as indicated by FEMA; 
d.  Existing and proposed land uses in the development site and all adjacent properties, including the approximate location of all streets; 
e.  Legal description of the subject property; 
f.  Location and use of existing and proposed public, semi-public, or community facilities such as schools, parks and other open space. This will include areas proposed to be deducted or reserved for community or public use; 
g.  Conceptual drawings of representative building types for all non-residential structures which indicate the proposed general architectural style and appearance; and 
h.  If a proposed development creates special problems or involves unusual circumstances, additional information may be required in order to properly evaluate the proposal as follows: 
1.  Off-street parking and loading plan; 
2.  Economic feasibility report or market analysis; 
3.  Area traffic study and circulation plan within the development and to and from existing thoroughfares; 
4.  Hydraulic, hydrologic; and drainage engineering studies; 
5.  Environmentally sensitive areas, including, but not limited to: watershed protection, wetlands, or groundwater recharge impact study; 
6.  Based on the pre-application meeting with the zoning administrator and/or the pre-recommendation meeting(s) with the planning commission, other information as is deemed necessary may be requested, in addition, any of the aforementioned required information (items (a) thru (h)) may be excluded if deemed not applicable. 
(5)  Summary of intent . The written statement submitted with the development plan shall include the following information: 
a.  Statement of the present ownership of all land within the proposed development; 
b.  Explanation of the character of the proposed development, including, but not limited to: a summary of uses, number and type of dwelling units, a net residential density calculation, and minimum standards for floor area, lot size, yard and spacing requirements; 
c.  General statement of the proposed development schedule and progression of unit development or staging; and 
d.  Agreements, provisions, and covenants which govern the use, maintenance, and protection of the development and any common or open space, including the provisions which will organize, regulate and sustain the property owners' association, where applicable. 
(6)  Approval . After review and public hearing the planning commission shall provide a recommendation to the mayor and council. After a public hearing the mayor and council may approve, disapprove or approve with modifications. If the proposed development is approved as submitted, the zoning administrator shall cause the official zoning map to be changed to indicate the planned unit development. If the plan is approved with modifications, the applicant shall file written notice of consent to the modification and a properly revised development plan with the zoning administrator prior to changing the official zoning map. The development plan and all other accompanying information shall be properly identified and permanently filed with the zoning administrator. 
(7)  Subdivision approval . 
a.  At the option of the applicant, a preliminary subdivision plat may be filed along with the development plan in order that tentative approval of the subdivision by the planning commission may be granted, pending the approval by the mayor and council of the development plan. In no case shall final subdivision approval precede the approval of the development plan. 
b.  Site development regulations, specifications, and procedures governing the platting of a planned unit development and plat approval shall be in accordance with the Town of Tyrone Subdivision Regulations and Development Regulations. 
(8)  Ownership control . At the time a final plat is approved and recorded for a planned unit development, as applicable, the land comprising the area for the planned unit development shall be under one ownership, i.e., an individual, a corporation, or some other single legal entity. Individual lots may be sold only after the final plat has been approved and recorded and the deed contains sufficient covenants assuring the continuance of the planned unit development as originally approved and developed. 
(9)  Building and occupancy permits . The zoning administrator shall approve the issuance of building permits for buildings and structures in the planned unit development if they are in substantial conformity with the approved development plan, the development schedule, and with all other applicable regulations. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any completed building or structure if it conforms to the requirements of the approved development plan and all other applicable regulations. 
(10)  Revision of Development Plan . Any change in the approved development plan, which affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the approved uses, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes, shall be reviewed and approved by the mayor and council upon the recommendation of the zoning administrator and planning commission. A request for a revision of the development plan shall be supported by a written statement as to why the revisions are necessary or desirable. 
(d)  Planned residential development (PRD) . 
(1)  Purpose . The intent of a planned residential development (PRD) is to encourage creativity and resourcefulness in residential development and to provide open space, parks and recreational facilities for the residents of the development and/or the general public. 
(2)  Permitted residential uses . Planned residential developments may contain single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, townhouses, or a combination thereof. residential accessory buildings and uses shall also be allowed per article V. 
(3)  Permitted recreational uses . A list of proposed recreational uses shall be submitted with the summary of intent. Only those uses approved through the rezoning process shall be allowed in the PRD. 
(4)  Permitted incidental uses . The following incidental uses shall be allowed in a PRD: 
a.  Day care facility (including an outdoor play area only); 
b.  Hospice, assisted living, nursing care, retirement; 
c.  Church and/or other place of worship (including a parsonage and outdoor play area only); and 
d.  School, private (including an outdoor play area but excluding housing or a stadium). 
(5)  Buffers and setbacks . The uses along the exterior boundary of the PRD shall be consistent with the applicable conditional use requirements listed in article VII. 
(6)  Conditional uses . The following conditional uses shall be allowed in the PRD zoning district, provided that all conditions specified in article VII conditional uses, nonconformance, transportation corridor overlay zone, and commercial development standards are met: 
a.  Electric transformer stations, gas regulator stations and telephone exchanges; 
b.  Home occupation; 
c.  Horse quarters (see article V. Raising and Keeping Horses in Residential Districts); and 
d.  Telephone, electric or gas sub-station or other public utility facilities. 
(7)  Minimum dimensional and other requirements : 
a.  Development size-100 contiguous acres located within the AR and/or residential zoning districts; 
b.  Each single-family dwelling shall be placed on a separate lot; 
c.  Side yard setbacks-15 feet; 
d.  Rear yard setbacks-30 feet; 
e.  Maximum density-Four units per acre (single-family attached), and one unit per acre (single-family detached). For purposes of this section, density shall be interpreted as the number of dwelling units per net acre devoted to residential development. 
(8)  Common open space requirements : 
a.  Open space-2,500 square feet per lot. The open space shall not be located in the following areas: street right-of-ways (public or private); all land located within the 100-year flood plain; water impoundments; and all lands proposed to be dedicated to a governing authority; 
b.  The open space may be publicly owned, privately owned, or be deeded to and maintained by the property owners' association, comprised of the residents of the development. When the open space is to be deeded to the property owners' association the initial owner of the development shall be responsible for the organization of said association. The organization, responsibilities and financing of the property owners' association shall be established in appropriate deed covenants, which shall run with the land and which shall appear in each and every deed of property given by the initial owner; and 
c.  Approved recreational uses may be located in the open space. 
(9)  General deed covenants . Appropriate deed covenants, which shall run with the land, shall be made a part of each deed of property given by the initial owner of the development in order to ensure the continuance of the planned residential development in accordance with all approved plans and this section. A copy of the covenants shall be given to the zoning administrator as a part of the record of the planned residential development. 
(e)  Conservation residential overlay district (PCRD) . 
(1)  Purposes : 
a.  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure; 
b.  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land; 
c.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, flood plains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat; 
d.  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development; 
e.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development; 
f.  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community; 
g.  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions; 
h.  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood; 
i.  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries; 
j.  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles; 
k.  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space; and 
l.  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(2)  General regulations . 
a.  Applicability of regulations . This conservation subdivision option is available in CR-2 and CR-3 zoning districts. 
b.  Ownership of development site . The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
c.  Housing density determination . The maximum number of lots in the PCRD shall be determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning category. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
1.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
2.  The 100-year flood plain; 
3.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the army corps of engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
5.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
(3)  Application requirements . 
a.  Site analysis map required . Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, the applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
1.  Property boundaries; 
2.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
3.  Topographic contours of no less than one-foot intervals; 
4.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in (e)(4) Open Space of this article; 
5.  General vegetation characteristics; 
6.  General soil types; 
7.  The planned location of protected open space; 
8.  Existing roads and structures; and 
9.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
b.  Open space management plan required . An open space management plan, as described in (e)(4) Open Space, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
c.  Instrument of permanent protection required . An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in (e)(4) Open Space shall be placed in the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
d.  Other requirements . The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning district and the town's land development ordinances. 
(4)  Open space . 
a.  Definition . Open space is the portion of the PCRD that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
b.  Standards to determine open space . 
1.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
2.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
(i)  The regulatory 100-year flood plain; 
(ii)  Buffer zones of at least 75 feet in width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
(iii)  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
(iv)  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
(v)  Populations of endangered or threatened species or habitat for such species; and 
(vi)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
3.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
(i)  Important historic sites; 
(ii)  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one-acre contiguous area; 
(iii)  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
(iv)  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
(v)  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres of contiguous area; and 
(vi)  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
4.  Above-ground utility right-of-ways and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirements (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). 
5.  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
6.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the PCRD. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
c.  Permitted uses of open space : 
1.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
2.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
3.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
4.  Passive recreation areas; 
5.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and area not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
6.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts and such activities are not conducted with primary conservation areas; 
7.  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
8.  Easements for drainage, access and underground utility lines; or 
9.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this section. 
d.  Prohibited uses of open space : 
1.  Golf courses; 
2.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
3.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
4.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
e.  Ownership and management of open space . 
1.  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners' association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the PCRD and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
2.  Management plan. The applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
(i)  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
(ii)  Estimates the cost and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
(iii)  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the town council; and 
(iv)  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
3.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the Town of Tyrone may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, the homeowners' association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners' association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all PCRD properties. 
f.  Legal instrument for permanent protection . 
1.  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
(i)  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
A.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instrument shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
B.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing protection of the open space compatible with the purposes of this section. If the entity accepting the easement is not the Town of Tyrone, then a third right of enforcement favoring the Town of Tyrone shall be included in the easement; 
(ii)  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
(iii)  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the Town of Tyrone. 
2.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space (2008). 
(f)  Planned industrial park (PIP) . 
(1)  Purpose . The intent of a PIP is to encourage the development of a localized industrial park designed to meet light and heavy industrial purposes. 
(2)  Permitted uses . Only those uses in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts shall be proposed for the PIP. Only those uses approved through the rezoning process will be allowed in the PIP. 
(3)  Minimum dimensional and other requirements . The minimum requirements for a PIP shall be as follows: 
a.  Location-M-1 or M-2 zoning district; 
b.  The development shall have access and egress only to an arterial thoroughfare; 
c.  Development size-Ten acres; 
d.  All setbacks along the exterior boundaries of the development shall be consistent with either the M-1 or M-2 zoning district, whichever is applicable; and 
e.  Height limit-35 feet, except with respect to soundstages associated with movie/media production studios as provided in Section 113-155 of this ordinance. 
(g)  Planned educational district (PED) . 
(1)  Purpose . The intent of a PED is to encourage creativity and resourcefulness in educational/institutional design to meet more of a campus atmosphere. 
(2)  Permitted uses . Only those uses in the E-I zoning district shall be proposed for the PED. Only those uses approved through the rezoning process will be allowed in the PED. 
(3)  Minimum dimensional and other requirements : 
a.  Location-E-I zoning district; 
b.  No more than five recreational vehicles (motor homes); and 
c.  Development size-40 acres. 
(h)  Planned commercial district (PCD) . 
(1)  Purpose . The intent of the PCD is to provide a retail center through a planned development. A PCD will allow innovative and creative design and promote high standards in the development layout to alleviate incompatibility between the internal uses in the development to protect public safety to the greatest degree possible. 
(2)  Permitted uses . Only those uses allowed in the C-2 zoning district shall be proposed for the PCD. Only those uses approved through the rezoning process shall be allowed. 
(3)  Minimum dimensional and other requirements : 
a.  Minimum lot area-Ten acres; 
b.  The proposed site shall be permitted only on a lot which fronts on and accesses a major thoroughfare, as specified by the Town of Tyrone Thoroughfare Plan; 
c.  All setbacks and buffers along the exterior boundaries of the development shall be consistent with the C-2 zoning district, as applicable to the use; 
d.  The development plan shall indicate the different use areas for the proposed development. Appropriate separation, buffering, and vehicular circulation between uses internal to the development shall be established to alleviate incompatibility and protect public safety. Vehicular access facilities shall be designed in a manner to preclude large vehicles (semi-tractor trailers, delivery trucks) from utilizing areas where pedestrians are likely to be present; 
e.  Location-C-2 zoning district; and 
f.  Height limit-35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 1, 7-6-2017) 
Sec. 113-134. - Town center architectural design considerations. 
(a)  Purpose and intent . The following guidelines are established to maintain high quality and sustainable development; to promote a consistent and traditional architectural identity, and to provide guidance on the establishment of an active village atmosphere in the Town of Tyrone town center. The objectives include: 
(1)  To encourage a variety of attractive and innovative building designs which combine the best of contemporary and traditional design; 
(2)  To encourage harmonious and attractive streetscapes through attention to exterior architectural quality; 
(3)  To encourage safe, pedestrian-friendly streetscapes; and 
(4)  To assist builders and developers in the preparation of acceptable building designs. 
(b)  Application of guidelines . These guidelines shall apply to all new development occurring in the town center area of the Town of Tyrone which town center area is delineated on the map attached hereto as exhibit "A". 
(c)  Facade requirements . 
(1)  Building materials. For principal structures, allowable building materials (not including trim/accent) along the front and side facades are limited to the following: 
a.  Brick; 
b.  Brick veneer; 
c.  Stone; 
d.  Architectural precast concrete; and 
e.  Natural wood and/or cement based wood siding. 
(2)  There shall be no more than two building materials used (not including trim/accent materials). Split-face block is an allowable building material for accessory buildings. 
(3)  Colors. Colors for the building materials shall be limited to earth tones, nonreflective pastels, and/or neutral tones. The accent and trim must consist of a contrasting color. 
(4)  Entrances. 
a.  Covered main entry features help promote safe, socially-interactive and pedestrian-friendly streets by providing outdoor amenity areas which allow for views along the street and by providing a linkage between the public and private realm. In addition to providing shelter, covered main entry features located closer to the street can help to diminish the impact of the garage within the streetscape. 
b.  Covered main entry features are required and may include one of the following: 
1.  Front porches; 
2.  Porticos; 
3.  Verandas; or 
4.  Recessed entries. 
c.  The following design criteria for covered main entry features will apply: 
1.  Covered front porch and/or veranda sizes should be maximized wherever possible. A minimum depth of five feet is required; 
2.  Porch column styles and widths should be consistent with the character of the house; 
3.  An exposed beam/frieze is required at the top of the support columns on the underside of the soffit; and 
4.  Entrances shall be oriented to the street. A building entrance may be located to the side of the building when a direct pedestrian walkway is provided between the building entrance and the street right-of-way. 
(5)  Window requirements. 
a.  Windows shall be square or vertical rectangular. Arched tops are allowed. 
b.  The building shall have a consistent spacing of similar shaped windows with trim on all building stories. 
c.  Large ground floor windows are encouraged, where feasible. 
d.  All windows shall have window trim consisting of a head, jam and sill. 
(d)  Building requirements . 
(1)  Massing . 
a.  Horizontal massing shall not exceed a height/width ratio of 1:3 without substantial variation that includes a change in height and/or projecting/recessing element. These changes shall relate to entrances, integral structure or interior organization, not merely as a cosmetic effect. 
b.  No wall that faces a street shall have an uninterrupted length exceeding 20 feet without at least two of the following: change in plane; change in texture or masonry pattern; and windows, or an equivalent element that subdivides the wall. 
(2)  Roof material and pitch . 
a.  Roofs shall be limited to architectural dimensional grade asphalt singles, natural slate, natural terra cotta, natural wood shake, copper or factory finished sheet metal or material that has the same visual appearance. 
b.  All one-story buildings must have a pitched roof of 3:12. If not feasible, flat roofs shall be offset by a mansard, which should have a pitch of 12:12. 
c.  The pitch of a roof shall not exceed the average wall height of the building. 
d.  Rooftop-mounted equipment should be physically screened from the road and/or sidewalk. Screening shall meet the following specifications: 
1.  Shall be at a height that is as high or higher than the rooftop equipment being screened; 
2.  Have evenly distributed openings or perforations not exceeding 50 percent of the surface area; 
3.  Should be mounted behind major rooftop elements such as stair or elevator penthouses, parapets, or architectural projections; 
4.  Shall be provided in a manner that is architecturally integral to the overall appearance of the building. 
5.  The number of vents and flues shall be incorporated into the architectural features or painted to blend with the roofing material (August 7, 2003). 
(Revised January 24, 2013) 
Sec. 113-135. - Residual limited use residential (LUR). 
(a)  General purpose and description . The limited use residential (LUR) district is a residual district which shall no longer allow new designation through rezoning. The primary purpose of this section is to administer to the completion of already approved LUR projects. It is the specific purpose and intent of the residual LUR district that the residual LUR zoning district be established and reserved for completion of development of existing LUR zoning districts for residential purposes and the protection and preservation of unique or sensitive natural areas such as floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodland and scenic views. Recognizing that a residential district with unique land use patterns could cause a detrimental impact on neighboring lands, the regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, economically healthy and compatible environment for residential development, to promote the interest of the particular neighbors and the public welfare at large and to encourage the protection of natural resources within the town. The regulations, which apply to this district, are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, healthy residential environment and the preservation of natural areas by allowing for uniqueness in design. 
    Definitions-Green space : The portion of the rezoned tract that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the green space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(b)  General requirements . No new limited use residential districts shall be created. LUR is a residual district designation whereby lands already zoned LUR may carry out their approved development plan or modify their project based on the provisions of this section subject to the following additional limitations: 
(1)  Minimum size . In order to promote the preservation of natural space that provides a variety of benefits, minimum tract size for entire property to be rezoned is 25 acres. 
(2)  Permitted uses . Anyone or more of the following uses may be permitted in the LUR district: 
a.  Accessory uses and structures . 
1.  Accessory uses and structures incidental to any permitted use. 
2.  Customary home occupations. 
b.  Community facilities . 
1.  Homeowner association recreation centers of swimming pool. 
2.  Green space. 
3.  Parks. 
4.  Public uses. 
5.  Public utility facilities. 
c.  Dwellings . Single family detached. 
d.  Religious institution . 
(c)  Development standards . 
(1)  Criteria . 
a.  Maximum density for the entire site being rezoned shall not exceed one unit per acre. 
b.  Minimum floor area must equal 1,800 square feet. 
c.  Structures or buildings located at the perimeter of the LUR must be setback a distance of 100 feet from the boundaries of the LUR. 
d.  Buffer areas must be maintained in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
e.  Supplemental buffer areas are required along the first 25 feet of the property boundary to provide visual screening. 
f.  Maximum impervious surfaces shall not exceed 25 percent of the total project area. 
g.  Project must be served by public (municipally owned) sewer system. 
(2)  Ownership of development site . The tract of land to be rezoned may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(3)  Phased development . The entire LUR may be divided into logical geographical sections, subject to the approval of the mayor and council. In such cases, the Town of Tyrone shall specify reasonable periods within which the development of each section must be commenced and finished. 
(4)  Performance bonds . Performance bonds are required by the landowner to be reasonably required to assure performance with the approved site plan to protect the public interest in the event of abandonment of said plan before completion. 
(d)  Green space standards . 
(1)  General requirements . 
a.  Primary areas for protection . The following are considered primary areas for protection and must be included as green space area unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship or be counter to the purposes of this article. 
1.  The 100-year floodplain. 
2.  Riparian zones of at least 50 feet width along all perennial and intermittent streams. 
3.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area. 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the army corps of engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
5.  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads. 
6.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
b.  Secondary areas for protection . The following are considered secondary areas for protection and should be identified on the site plan submitted for rezoning. 
1.  Important historic sites. 
2.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acres contiguous area. 
3.  Individual existing healthy trees of greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line. 
4.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area. 
5.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
c.  Suitable land . At least 20 percent of the green space shall consist of land that is suitable for building. 
d.  Contiguous area . At least 75 percent of the green space shall be in contiguous tract. 
e.  Connectivity . Every attempt should be made to connect the designated green space with any neighboring areas of designated green space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of designated green space. 
f.  Accessibility . The green space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the green space. 
g.  Width . Acreage counted toward green space requirements may not be less than 50 feet in width. 
(2)  Permitted uses . 
a.  Conservation of natural, archaeological or historical resources. 
b.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas. 
c.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided that non-porous paving materials are limited to a ten feet width. 
d.  Passive recreation areas, such as open fields. 
e.  Active recreation areas which include impervious surfaces and golf courses, provided that they are not located in the primary areas for protection. Active recreation areas in excess of this limitation must be located outside of the protected green space. 
f.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary areas for protection. 
g.  Landscaped stormwater management facilities, provided such facilities shall be located outside of primary areas for protection. 
h.  Easements for drainage, access and underground utility lines. 
i.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
(3)  Prohibited uses . 
a.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections. 
b.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices. 
c.  Impoundments. 
d.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(4)  Ownership of open space . If requested by the town, the owner of the green space may deed to the town the land set aside as green space. If the town does not request that the land be deeded to it, the open space shall be deeded to the homeowner's 
association comprised of property owners within the LUR for the benefit of the residents. The homeowner's association and its adequate financing for the discharge of its responsibilities shall be assured through acceptable private deed covenants running with the land. 
(5)  Management plan . Applicant shall submit a plan for management of green space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the green space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of and insurance for, the green space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the mayor and town council; and 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
    In the event the homeowner's association fails to maintain the common green space property, the town may serve written notice upon the homeowner's association and/or upon the property owners of the LUR setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the common open space in reasonable condition. Said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within 30 days thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon, which shall be held within 15 days of the notice. 
    If the deficiencies are not corrected within the said 30 days, the town, in order to preserve the taxable value of the properties within the LUR and to prevent the common green spaces from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said common open spaces and maintain the same for one year and thereafter until the homeowner's association is prepared to provide property maintenance. 
    The cost of such maintenance by the town shall be assessed rateably against the properties within the LUR that have a right of enjoyment of the common green space and shall become a tax lien upon said properties. The town, at the time of entering upon said common open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the county tax assessor, upon the properties affected by such a lien. 
(6)  Legal instrument for permanent protection . 
a.  The green space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
1.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
(i)  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
(ii)  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. 
(iii)  If the entity accepting the easement is not the town, then a third right of enforcement favoring the town shall be included in the easement. 
2.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity. 
3.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the town. 
b.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the green space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the green space. 
(e)  Review and approval procedures . 
(1)  Pre-application conference . Prior to the submittal of a LUR application, the applicant shall meet with the town manager for a preliminary conference on the location, scope and nature of the proposed development. 
(2)  Site plan requirements . The applicant shall submit a site plan in accordance with those requirements as outlined in section 503 of the land development ordinance as part of the rezoning application. 
(3)  Procedures for revision . Due to specific topographic variations, changes in market preferences and other factors creating a need for change, it is expected that variation of the approved plan may occur. In the event that factors create a need for change to an existing LUR either the owner/developer or the town may petition of a modification of the LUR. Should the following conditions occur, the developer will be expected to apply to the mayor and council for a revision to the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 508, 10/18/07; Revised March 1, 2012) 
Sec. 113-136. - Community mixed-use district (CMU). 
(a)  Purpose. The intent of the CMU District is to provide a mixed-use center, primarily non-residential in character, through a planned development. Upon council approval, supplemental residential uses may be permitted when complementary to and compatible with the orderly development of the planned project. The CMU District will allow innovative and creative design and promote high standards in the development layout to alleviate incompatibility between the internal uses in the development, to limit the expenditure of public funds, and to protect public safety to the greatest degree possible. 
(b)  Requirements for a community mixed-use district. 
(1)  No property may be rezoned to the CMU district without the concurrent approval of a development plan by the town council following public review and recommendation by town staff and the planning commission. All property rezoned and developed pursuant to a single development plan shall be referred to herein as a "CMU Development". 
(2)  The boundaries of each CMU Development shall be as shown on the zoning map and shall correspond with the adopted development plan. 
(3)  The minimum size for a CMU development is 40 acres. 
(4)  For the purposes of this section, where two or more properties, lots or parcels are located within the same block or where two or more properties, lots or parcels have frontage on the same side of the street and are adjoining and such properties, lots or parcels are under common ownership or control and/or are being developed in a single development operation or a series of coordinated development operations, such properties, lots or parcels shall be considered as a single property. 
(5)  A CMU development must have a minimum of 200 feet of frontage abutting State Route 74. 
(c)  Application. Each application to rezone property to the CMU District and establish a development plan for the same shall follow the procedures set out below: 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Prior to filing a petition to rezone property to the CMU district, the applicant shall meet with the zoning administrator to review the general character of the proposed development, including but not limited to, its scope, nature and location. At this time, the applicant shall be fully advised of the approval procedures contained herein as well as the various information and studies which the applicant may need in order to continue with said procedures. 
(2)  Pre-recommendation meeting(s). Prior to filing a petition to rezone property to the CMU district and subsequent to the pre-application conference with the zoning administrator, the applicant shall meet with the planning commission in a plan review session(s). At this meeting, the applicant shall be required to review his/her plan with the planning commission and provide preliminary data concerning said plan as required by the planning commission. The planning commission may require additional pre-recommendation meetings to review said preliminary data prior to their pre-recommendation. 
(3)  Rezoning petition. A petition to rezone property to the CMU District shall only be submitted subsequent to the pre-application conference with the zoning administrator and the pre-recommendation meeting(s) with the planning commission. The petition shall contain a development plan and a written summary of intent, and shall show the relation between the proposed development and the surrounding area, both proposed and existing. A petition to rezone property to the CMU district shall follow the procedures set out in article III of this chapter. 
(4)  Development plan. The following information shall be submitted as the development plan: 
a.  General location map; 
b.  Current topographical map clearly showing existing conditions, including contour intervals of no more than five feet based on field survey or photogrammetric methods; 
c.  Map showing the existing floodplains and flood soil as indicated by FEMA; 
d.  Existing and proposed land uses in the development site and all adjacent properties, including the approximate location of all streets; 
e.  Legal description of the subject property; 
f.  Location and use of existing and proposed public, semi-public, or community facilities such as schools, parks and other open space, including areas proposed to be deducted or reserved for community or public use; 
g.  Conceptual drawings of representative building types for all non-residential structures which indicate the proposed general architectural style and appearance; and 
h.  If a proposed development creates special problems or involves unusual circumstances, additional information as required by the zoning administrator in order to properly evaluate the proposal as follows: 
i.  Off-street parking and loading plan; 
ii.  Economic feasibility report or market analysis; 
iii.  Area traffic study and circulation plan within the development and to and from existing thoroughfares; 
iv.  Hydraulic, hydrologic;, and drainage engineering studies; 
v.  Environmentally sensitive areas, including, but not limited to: watershed protection, wetlands, or groundwater recharge impact study; and 
vi.  Based on the pre-application meeting with the zoning administrator and/or the pre-recommendation meeting(s) with the planning commission, other information as is deemed necessary may be requested; in addition, any of the aforementioned required information (items (a) thru (h)) may be excluded if deemed not applicable. 
(5)  Summary of intent. The written statement submitted with the development plan shall include the following information: 
a.  Statement of the present ownership of all land within the proposed development; 
b.  Explanation of the character of the proposed development, including, but not limited to: a summary of uses, number and type of dwelling units, a net residential density calculation, and minimum standards for floor area, lot size, yard and spacing requirements; 
c.  General statement of the proposed development schedule and progression of unit development or staging; and 
d.  Agreements, provisions, and covenants which govern the use, maintenance, and protection of the development and any common or open space, including the provisions which will organize, regulate and sustain the property owners' association, where applicable. 
(6)  Approval. After review and public hearing the planning commission shall provide a recommendation to the mayor and council. After a public hearing the mayor and council may approve, disapprove or approve the rezoning and the development plan with modifications. If the proposed rezoning and development plan are approved as submitted, the zoning administrator shall cause the official zoning map to be changed to indicate the change in zoning and the boundaries of the property affected by the approved development plan. If the rezoning and development plan are approved with modifications, the applicant shall file written notice of consent to the modification and a properly revised development plan with the zoning administrator prior to changing the official zoning map. The development plan and all other accompanying information shall be properly identified and permanently filed with the zoning administrator. 
(7)  Subdivision approval. 
a.  At the option of the applicant, a preliminary subdivision plat may be filed along with the development plan in order that tentative approval of the subdivision by the planning commission may be granted, pending the approval by the mayor and council of the development plan. In no case shall final subdivision approval precede the approval of the development plan. 
b.  Site development regulations, specifications, and procedures governing the platting of a CMU development and plat approval shall be in accordance with the Town of Tyrone subdivision regulations and development regulations. 
(8)  Ownership control. At the time a final plat is approved and recorded for a CMU development, as applicable, the land comprising the area for the development shall be under one ownership, i.e., an individual, a corporation, or some other single legal entity. Individual lots may be sold only after the final plat has been approved and recorded and the deed contains sufficient covenants assuring the continuance of the CMU development as originally approved and developed. 
(9)  Building and occupancy permits. The zoning administrator shall approve the issuance of building permits for buildings and structures in the CMU development if they are in substantial conformity with the approved development plan, the development schedule, and with all other applicable regulations. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any completed building or structure if it conforms to the requirements of the approved development plan and all other applicable regulations. 
(10)  Revision of development plan. Any change in the approved development plan, which affects the intent and character of the development, the density or land use pattern, the approved uses, the location or dimensions of streets, or similar substantial changes, shall be reviewed and approved by the mayor and council upon the recommendation of the zoning administrator and planning commission. A request for a revision of the development plan shall be supported by a written statement as to why the revisions are necessary or desirable. 
(d)  Development standards. 
(1)  Permitted uses. 
a.  Residential uses. 
1.  Single-family attached and detached dwellings; 
2.  Townhouse dwellings; 
3.  Multi-family loft dwellings as part of a mixed-use commercial structure; and 
4.  Accessory uses and structures. 
b.  Commercial and institutional uses. 
1.  Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services; 
2.  Adult day care centers; 
3.  Advertising agencies excluding sign contractors; 
4.  Amphitheaters; 
5.  Antique stores; 
6.  Apparel and accessory stores (including dressmaker and tailor); 
7.  Appraisers; 
8.  Aquaponics/urban farming facilities; 
9.  Arcades 
10.  Art galleries; 
11.  Art studios; 
12.  Assembly halls; 
13.  Attorneys; 
14.  Auditoriums; 
15.  Automobile claims adjuster; 
16.  Bakeries, retail; 
17.  Banquet halls; 
18.  Barbershops and beauty shops; 
19.  Bicycle repair shops; 
20.  Blood donor stations; 
21.  Blueprinting and photocopying services; 
22.  Book and stationery stores; 
23.  Bowling alley; 
24.  Breweries; 
25.  Business agents and brokers; 
26.  Business incubators; 
27.  Business service support establishments; 
28.  Camera and photographic supply stores; 
29.  Carryout/delivery establishments; 
30.  Catalog mail order stores; 
31.  Caterers; 
32.  Churches and other places of worship and accessory facilities; 
33.  Cigar stores and stands; 
34.  Clerical; 
35.  Collection services; 
36.  College and university industry associated research and training facilities; 
37.  Commercial photography, art and graphics offices; 
38.  Commercial vocational schools; 
39.  Computer or data processing offices; 
40.  Convention or exhibition halls; 
41.  Counseling and guidance services; 
42.  Credit reporting services; 
43.  Cultural facilities; 
44.  Dance schools; 
45.  Day nurseries and day care centers; 
46.  Delicatessen and gourmet food stores (with incidental catering); 
47.  Dental care services; 
48.  Detective agency and protective services (excluding armored cars and animal rental); 
49.  Dinner theatres; 
50.  Doctors/physicians' offices; 
51.  Drafting services; 
52.  Drugstores; 
53.  Eating establishments, when accessory to a permitted use; 
54.  Electric transformer stations, gas regulator stations and telephone exchanges; 
55.  Employment agencies; 
56.  Engineering, planning and architectural offices; 
57.  Escape rooms; 
58.  Fabric shops; 
59.  Farm and garden supply stores; 
60.  Finance, insurance and real estate institutions; 
61.  Florists; 
62.  Food specialty shops (ice cream, coffee, soda fountain); 
63.  Furniture, home furnishing and appliance stores; 
64.  Gift, novelty and souvenir stores (excluding adult novelty); 
65.  Glass sales; 
66.  Grocery stores limited to a floor area not exceeding 5,000 square feet; 
67.  Gyms; 
68.  Hardware sales; 
69.  Health services clinics; 
70.  Historical society/welcome, information centers; 
71.  Hobby, toy and game shops; 
72.  Home health care; 
73.  Hotels; 
74.  Household and apparel stores; 
75.  Indoor sports facilities; 
76.  Interior decorator services; 
77.  Jewelry sales and repair; 
78.  Key duplicating shops; 
79.  Kitchen-ware stores; 
80.  Laundry and dry cleaning pick-up stations; 
81.  Lawn and garden supply; 
82.  Libraries; 
83.  Locksmiths; 
84.  Management, consulting and public relations services; 
85.  Manicure services (nail care); 
86.  Meat, seafood and poultry markets (excluding live poultry); 
87.  Medical and dental laboratories; 
88.  Medical photography; 
89.  Message answering services; 
90.  Museums; 
91.  Musical instrument sales and repair; 
92.  News dealers and newsstands; 
93.  Notary public; 
94.  Occupational physical therapy; 
95.  Office uses as part of a planned office center; 
96.  Optician and optometry stores; 
97.  Parcel and express services; 
98.  Parks; 
99.  Pet shops; 
100.  Pharmacies; 
101.  Photographic studios; 
102.  Picture framing stores; 
103.  Playhouses; 
104.  Political organizations; 
105.  Produce markets; 
106.  Radio and television broadcasting stations; 
107.  Radio, television and stereo sales and service; 
108.  Recording and developing studios; 
109.  Restaurants, general and convenience; 
110.  Seasonal outdoor retail (activity for the sale of flowers, garden supplies, produce); 
111.  Shoe repair and sales; 
112.  Skating rinks; 
113.  Solar generation facilities; 
114.  Specialized merchandise stores; 
115.  Specialized non-degree schools; 
116.  Sporting goods; 
117.  Swimming pools (prefabricated), hot tubs and spa sales; 
118.  Talent and theatrical booking agents; 
119.  Telecommuting centers; 
120.  Telephone business offices; 
121.  Ticket brokers; 
122.  Travel agencies; 
123.  Utility business offices; and 
124.  Veterinarians 
125.  Visiting nurse associations. 
(2)  Dimensional and other requirements. 
Residential based density (max) 4 units/acre Open space % of lot area 25% Building façade height (min) 18' Building façade height (max) 45' Loft unit floor area (min) 600 square feet Single family dwellings and townhome dwelling floor area (min) 1200 square feet  
a.  No more than 30% of the total aggregate square footage of a CMU development may be dedicated to residential use. 
b.  No single occupant of a structure may exceed a footprint of 30,000 square feet. 
c.  All setbacks along adjoining zoning districts shall be 75 feet. A 75-foot buffer shall be in effect along all bordering residential zoning districts coterminous with setbacks. 
d.  Setbacks from major and minor collectors, minor thoroughfares, and residential streets shall be 75 feet. 
e.  Setbacks from major thoroughfares and state routes shall be 100 feet. 
(3)  Open space. 
a.  Open spaces shall be provided in conformance with the approved development plan. 
b.  Open space may utilize any of the following elements towards the open space calculation: 
i.  Required yards, planted areas, fountains, community gardens, rooftop gardens, parks, plazas, hardscape elements related to sidewalks and plazas, amenity space, and similar features. 
ii.  Required buffer areas may be counted toward open space requirements even if such buffer area is dedicated to the town or other governmental entity for recreation use, conveyed to a conservation group, or is subject to permanent easements for public use. 
(4)  Fencing materials. No barbed wire, razor wire, chain-link fence, or similar elements shall be visible from any public plaza, ground level, or sidewalk level outdoor dining area or public right-of-way. 
(5)  Drive through uses. Drive-through service windows and drive-in facilities are not allowed. 
(6)  Storefront requirements. 
a.  The length of facade without intervening transparency shall not exceed 20 feet. 
b.  The ground story shall have a minimum 65 percent transparency. 
c.  Entrances may be counted where they are transparent. 
(7)  Dumpsters and loading areas. Dumpsters and loading areas shall be paved with impervious materials and shall be screened so as not to be visible from any public plaza, sidewalk-level outdoor dining area, public sidewalk or public right-of-way. In addition, dumpsters and loading areas serving residential uses shall be enclosed with opaque walls on three sides not less than eight feet in height, along with a gate or door. 
(8)  Loading dock entrances for nonresidential uses. Loading dock entrances for nonresidential uses shall be screened so that loading docks and related activity are not visible from any public right-of-way. 
(9)  Building mechanical and accessory features. 
a.  Shall be located to the side, rear, or roof of the principal structure and shall be in the location of least visibility from the public right-of-way. Screening with plant or fence materials shall be required if the equipment is otherwise visible from the public right-of-way. 
b.  When located on rooftops, shall be incorporated in the design of the building and screened with building materials similar to the building. 
c.  Shall not be permitted between the building and any public street. 
(e)  Parking and site design standards. 
(1)  Street requirements. New streets shall be provided in conformance with the development plan. 
(2)  Inter-parcel connectivity. Opportunities for inter-parcel pedestrian and vehicle access points between all contiguous commercial, office, or multifamily residential parcels shall be provided. 
(3)  Gates and security arms. Gates and security arms shall be prohibited from crossing any public street or sidewalk. 
(4)  Off-site parking. Required parking spaces shall be permitted to be provided on adjacent or nearby property within a CMU district, provided said relocated spaces lie within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal use for which such parking is provided. 
(5)  Driveways and curb cuts. 
a.  All sidewalk paving materials shall be continued across any intervening driveway at the same prevailing grade and cross slope as on the adjacent sidewalk clear zone. A corresponding interior sign or painted bar on the driveway shall be provided adjacent to the sidewalk paving as needed. 
b.  Except as required by Georgia Department of Transportation along state routes, no more than one curb cut shall be permitted for each development site, provided that properties with more than one street frontage may have one curb cut located on each street frontage. However, developments on properties with a single street frontage greater than 400 feet shall be permitted two curb cuts along one street frontage. 
(Ord. No. 2018-06, § 1, 5-17-2018) 
Secs. 113-137-113-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 113-155. - Exceptions to development standards. 
(a)  Double buffer . When a required buffer area would abut and be contiguous to an established buffer area which meets all requirements of this section, then this additional required buffer area need not be established. 
(b)  Height requirements. The height limitations as stated in this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Barns, silos, or other farm structures when located on farms; belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments; water towers; windmills; chimneys; smokestacks; flagpoles; radio or television towers; masts and aerials; 
(2)  Bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water tanks and scenery lofts and similar structures, provided that these structures shall not cover more than 25 percent of the total roof area of the building on which the structures are located; and 
(3)  Soundstages associated with movie/media production studios in a Planned Industrial Park (PIP), provided that: 
a.  The front setback shall be increased two feet for every one foot of building height over 35 feet, or a raised landscape berm shall be constructed one foot high for every one foot of building height over 35 feet, or any combination thereof. If the side and/or rear yards abut a residential or A-R zoning district, the setbacks shall be increased five feet for every one foot of building height over 35 feet; and 
b.  The required minimum acreage shall be increased based on building height per the table below: 
Height Limit Required Lot Acreage 36-50 feet 30 55 feet >30-45 60 feet >45-60 65 feet >100  
(c)  Multiple-frontage lots . Lots which adjoin a public street on more than one side shall provide the minimum required front yard on each street. 
(d)  Projections into yards . 
(1)  Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, chimneys, buttresses and other ornamental and architectural features of the principal building, provided that these features do not project more than three feet into any required yard or as provided elsewhere in this section. 
(2)  An open, unenclosed porch or hard-surfaced terrace, steps, stoops and similar fixtures of a building may project into a required front yard or rear yard for a distance not to exceed ten feet, and into a side yard to a point not closer than five feet from any side lot line. 
(3)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, fences, walls, hedges, driveways and buffer areas may be permitted in any required yard or along the edge of any yard, provided that no fence, wall or hedge along the street-side corner lots shall violate the corner visibility and that no fence in a required front yard in a residential district shall exceed four feet in height. 
(e)  Guest houses . Only one guest house is allowed per individual lot. Any living area included in an accessory structure is a guest house. A guest house shall not be used as tenant space. A guest house shall not exceed 700 square feet of heated and finished living space. 
(Ord. No. 2017-06, § 2, 7-6-2017) 
Sec. 113-156. - Principal structure or use. 
    In all residential and the AR zoning districts, no more than one principal structure or use shall be located on a lot or tract, except as otherwise provided herein. In all non-residential zoning districts, no more than one principal use shall be located on a lot or tract, except as otherwise provided herein. 
Sec. 113-157. - Office trailer. 
    The temporary use of an office trailer shall require a permit to be issued by the zoning administrator prior to locating the trailer on a site. Said permit shall require a fee as established by the town council and shall specify the precise location of the trailer. Said permit shall be issued for a six-month period. Three renewals of additional six-month periods are available so long as the applicant possesses a current building permit for property within the development. Additional renewals must be approved by the planning commission. The trailer shall be identified by a sign denoting the name of the business for which it is being used. 
Sec. 113-158. - Requirements for moving a building. 
    No dwelling unit or other permanent structure shall be moved within or into the town, unless when relocated, it meets all requirements herein and is inspected and approved before and after the move by the building official. 
Sec. 113-159. - Lots with well and/or private sewage system. 
    Any lot upon which both an individual well and septic tank or private sewage system are to be provided shall be governed by the Georgia Department of Human Resources Rules and Regulations for Individual Sewage Disposal Systems and by the rules and regulations of the Fayette County Health Department as amended and the Fayette County Water System, if applicable. Any lot upon which both an individual well and septic tank system are located shall not be less than one and one-half acres in size. 
Sec. 113-160. - Minimum area for lots. 
    Any lot platted after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall have a buildable area of not less than one continuous acre excluding all flood plains, wetlands, bodies of water in excess of 5,000 square feet, required buffers, easements, street right-of-ways and/or other encumbrances. The site location of any on-site septic system shall be approved by the Fayette County Board of Health in accordance with applicable board of health regulations 
(December 3, 1998; amended by July 1, 2004). 
Sec. 113-161. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  Walls, fences and entrance structures located in a front yard in the A-R and any residential zoning district, and entrance walls and fences for residential and non-residential subdivisions shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No wall or fence shall be constructed in a public right-of-way, and such wall or fence shall not be constructed any closer than three feet from any fire hydrant; 
(2)  Any driveway shall have a minimum clearance of 14 feet in width and 14 feet in height to allow for the passage of emergency vehicles; and 
(3)  A zoning compliance certificate will be required for all walls and fences to be located in a front yard prior to construction. A scaled drawing shall be submitted to the zoning administrator which shall include, but not be limited to: wall and/or fence elevations; location and height of wall/fence, posts/ columns and ornamental statues, figurines, and light fixtures; visibility; spacing over the entire linear footage of the wall/fence; changes in grade; building materials; and any other requirements of the section. 
(b)  Walls and fences not exceeding four feet in height shall comply with the following: 
(1)  A wall and/or fence shall be constructed of brick, brick veneer, stucco, synthetic stucco, rock, stone, cast-stone, wood, wrought iron, or other architecturally engineered facades which match these materials; and 
(2)  Posts or columns, light fixtures, ornamental statues, and figurines shall not be included in the measurement of the four-foot height. 
(c)  Walls and fences exceeding four feet in height shall comply with the following: 
(1)  A wall and/or fence shall be constructed of brick, brick veneer, stucco, synthetic stucco, rock, stone, cast-stone, wood, wrought iron, green or black vinyl-coated chain link, or other architecturally engineered facades which match these materials; and 
(2)  A solid wall and/or fence shall not exceed eight feet in height. Columns and posts shall not be included in this calculation. Chain link fences, other than green or black vinyl-coated chain link fences, are not permitted to be over four feet in height; and 
(3)  No solid wall and/or fence exceeding four feet in height shall be located in the front yard. Any solid wall and/or fence permitted to exceed four feet in height pursuant to this subsection shall be located in the side or rear yard; and 
(4)  A vehicular entry structure shall not be subject to the four-foot wall and/or fence requirement within 35 feet of either side of the driveway. 
(d)  Walls and fences that cannot meet height requirements due to changes in grade shall make adjustments to each section (as created by the columns or posts) of the wall or fence to meet the requirements to the greatest degree possible. In some cases, this will result in a stair-step pattern as the wall or fence moves along the grade. 
(e)  Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the above requirements: 
(1)  In any residential zoning district where horses are kept in accordance with this Ordinance, a wall or fence made of chain link or other wire material is exempt from the four-foot maximum height requirement and shall not exceed a maximum of five feet in height in a front yard; 
(2)  Where the use of the property is for farming in an AR zoning district, including the raising and selling of crops and/or livestock, a wall or fence is exempt from the four-foot maximum height requirements, and exempt from the construction requirements of brick, brick veneer, stucco, synthetic stucco, rock, stone, cast-stone, wood, wrought iron, green or black vinyl-coated chain link, or other architecturally engineered facades which match these materials; 
(3)  Walls and fences in any residential or AR zoning district: 
a.  On a corner lot, in order to reduce road noise, a solid wall and/or fence along a street which is classified as an arterial or collector per the town's thoroughfare plan shall be exempt from the four-foot maximum height requirement. However, this exemption shall not apply to the street which the front door of the residence is facing; 
b.  A temporary fence used in conjunction with a construction site; 
c.  A wall or fence used in conjunction with a stormwater facility; 
d.  A wall or fence used in conjunction with any non-residential permitted use or conditional use, including but not limited to an animal hospital, kennel, cemetery and mausoleum, church, temple or place of worship, colleges and universities, day care facilities, private schools, telephone, electric or gas sub-stations or other public utility facilities; and 
e.  With regard to the location of a wall or fence, a through lot shall be exempt from the four-foot maximum height requirement except for the area between the street from which the lot is accessed and the front door is facing. 
(f)  Residential and nonresidential subdivision entrance walls and fences. All walls and fences which were lawfully built and existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives and which do not conform with the provisions of this article, shall be allowed to remain in place and shall be considered to be a legally existing non-conforming wall or fence. All walls and fences built after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives shall comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02, § 1, 5-17-2016) 
Sec. 113-162. - Buffer area. 
    Buffer areas required by this section shall be established and maintained by the property owner under the following provisions: 
(1)  Be maintained as a planted area or when required, additional plantings as provided in this section; 
(2)  Be landscaped with trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, stone, rocks and other landscaping materials; 
(3)  Not be used for parking or a structure other than a fence or drainage improvements required by the town; and 
(4)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the natural topography of the land shall be preserved and appropriately landscaped. 
Sec. 113-163. - Recreational vehicle parking. 
    Camping trailers, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, camper pick-up coaches, motorized homes, boat trailers and boats shall not be parked on any residentially-zoned or AR lot that has not been improved with a dwelling nor any non-residential lot that has been not been improved with a principal building except in conjunction with the construction of a dwelling or principal building for which a building permit has been issued. Application for a permit for the parking of such recreational vehicles shall be made to the zoning administrator. Such permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed six months and shall not be renewable when associated with the construction of a dwelling. This provision shall not be interpreted as precluding the parking of such recreational vehicles for a period not to exceed 14 days. When parked in conjunction with a dwelling or principal building, the recreation vehicle must meet all applicable setbacks, shall not be parked in the front yard, nor on the street adjacent to the lot, and shall be parked on an improved surface. 
Sec. 113-164. - Non-residential service areas. 
    All service areas for non-residential uses shall be established so as not to infringe upon any yard requirement and shall be visually screened from adjacent residential properties. 
Sec. 113-165. - Fire safety in non-residential districts. 
    Accessibility for fire-fighting equipment shall be maintained throughout all stages of construction in all non-residential districts. 
Sec. 113-166. - Exterior storage. 
    Exterior storage (but not including the parking of vehicles for sale or lease) shall not be permitted in the front yard of any non-residential zoning district and shall be permitted in only the industrial (M-1, M-2) zoning districts and the educational-institutional (E-I) zoning district. Exterior storage located in the educational-institutional (E-I) zoning district shall be screened or fenced or located in a receptacle not to exceed 65 square feet. 
(Revised October 3, 2013) 
Sec. 113-167. - Open space not to be encroached upon. 
    No open space shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, setback, off-street parking spaces, and such other regulations required for the zoning district in which such building is located. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and planted buffer strips shall not be construed to be encroachments. Open space areas shall be permanently maintained as open space and appropriately landscaped. These areas may not be used for vehicular access, parking or similar uses except as otherwise provided herein. 
Sec. 113-168. - Determination of development standards from private streets. 
    When this section requires the establishment of minimum building setback lines, frontages and related development standards, these measurements for property not abutting a public street shall be made from or along a private street. 
Sec. 113-169. - Special requirements-Residential. 
(a)  Visual screening . A buffer area with a minimum width by zoning district, as provided below, and a six-foot fence or wall which provides visual screening shall be established and maintained by the owner of a lot in the MHP zoning district when said lot adjoins a residential zoning district. Such buffer shall be 50 feet wide. The requirement for a fence or wall may be waived by the town upon presentation of field survey data by the property owner or developer which shows that construction of the fence or wall would destroy existing vegetation which, in itself, provides visual screening between the development of the MHP lot and the residential zoning district, or when the development abuts undeveloped property. 
(b)  Lot coverage . The maximum lot coverage with buildings and pavement shall be 25 percent (January 5, 1998). 
Sec. 113-170. - Special requirements-Non-residential. 
(a)  The maximum height of structures shall be 35 feet. 
(b)  Twenty-five percent of the lot area shall be appropriately maintained as open space. However, not less than five percent of the area maintained as open space shall be located between the building and the public streets. No parking or other similar uses shall be permitted therein. On lots with multiple street frontages, five percent of the lot area shall be appropriately maintained as open space on each street frontage (January 5, 1998). 
Secs. 113-171-113-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 113-190. - Conditional use approval. 
    Conditional uses include certain uses which are allowed in a particular zoning district provided that all conditions specified under this section are met. The zoning administrator shall issue a conditional use permit for each use listed below upon compliance with all specified conditions and approvals by the appropriate town/county officials. 
(a)  Special regulations . Prior to the issuance of development and/or building permits, a site plan must be submitted to the zoning administrator and approved by the appropriate town/county officials. This requirement shall apply to all conditional uses allowed within the various zoning districts except for: farm outbuildings; home occupations; single-family residences; and temporary meeting and/or events which are conducted no longer than 14 days per year. 
(b)  Conditional uses allowed . The following list comprises the conditional uses allowed pursuant to this section and the zoning districts within which such uses may be found. 
(1)  Accessory antenna structures (see also accessory uses). Accessory antenna structures for amateur radio service shall be located a distance of at least one-third the height of the tower from all property lines. 
(2)  Accessory retail sales and service (O-I). Retail sales and service accessory to the operation of an office building or institutional use, conducted wholly within the building housing the use to which these activities are accessory, provided that the floor space used or to be used for these secondary uses shall be limited to a total of ten percent of the net floor area in an office building or institutional use, provided that: 
a.  Every public entrance to this use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary use structure; 
b.  No merchandise shall be stored or displayed outside of the primary use structure; and 
c.  Restaurants and cafeterias as an accessory use may be located in a structure other than the primary use structure. 
(3)  Accessory uses and structures incidental to permitted uses. The following provisions apply to accessory uses and structures that are incidental to permitted uses: 
a.  An accessory structure shall be located on the same lot as the principal building to which it is accessory; 
b.  No accessory structure shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced; 
c.  An accessory structure shall not be permitted in a front yard in a residential zoning district; 
d.  No accessory structure in a non-residential zoning district shall be used by other than employees of the owner, lessee or tenant of the premises, unless otherwise allowed by provisions of this section; 
e.  A residential accessory structure shall not be rented or occupied for gain; and 
f.  The maximum size of accessory buildings in residential zoning districts shall be according to the size of the lot as follows: 
Lot Size Building Size 0 to 0.999 acres 900 sq. ft. 1 to 1.999 acres 1,200 sq. ft. 2 to 4.999 acres 1,500 sq. ft. 5 to 7.999 acres 1,700 sq. ft. 8 to 9.999 acres 2,000 sq. ft. 10 or more acres No size limit  
(May 11, 2008) 
(4)  Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics (O-I, C-1, C-2, M-1). All structures used as an animal hospital or veterinary clinic shall be located and the activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. The use shall comply with the following: 
a.  Adequate soundproofing and odor-proofing shall be provided so the use does not create a nuisance; 
b.  No boarding shall be allowed unless required in connection with medical treatment; and 
c.  No outside runs or kennels shall be allowed. 
(5)  Arcade (C-1). Hours of operation shall be within 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(6)  Armored car service (C-2): 
a.  No outdoor storage; and 
b.  Additional parking space requirements. 
(7)  Auction yards or establishments (M-1): 
a.  Not allowed within a radius of 500 feet of any public park, public playground, school, church, hospital, and cemetery; within 100 feet of any highway, nor within 500 feet of any residential zoning district; 
b.  Must be screened from view of the road and adjoining property with an opaque fence at least seven feet in height; 
c.  Maximum lot size-Ten acres; 
d.  A minimum 100-foot buffer shall be provided along every property line including a public right-of-way so that junk is not visible from a public street or adjoining properties; 
e.  All structures and storage areas shall be set back at least 200 feet from a public street and adjoining properties in the residential zoning district or the A-R zoning district; and 
f.  Must follow all current state and federal regulations. 
(8)  Automatic teller machines (ATMs) (see also accessory uses) (all non-residential zoning districts). The ATM must be attached to an existing building. 
(9)  Automobile brokers (C-1, O-I). No stock in trade may be kept on premises unless confined to interior storage. 
(10)  Automobile repair. (C-1, C-2): 
a.  The use shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital. 
b.  No outdoor storage of equipment or inventory is permitted. 
c.  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
d.  The use shall not be established on a lot which is either adjacent to or directly across the street from any residential zoning district. 
e.  All overhead doors must face the side and/or rear yard or be screened from view from the street. 
f.  In C-1 Districts, no automobile repair business shall be established along the street frontage. All such businesses shall be located behind an existing non-automotive business. 
(11)  Automobile service stations (C-2): 
a.  Service areas, facilities, and pump islands shall not be located any closer than 75 feet from a residential zoning district or the A-R zoning district; 
b.  Gasoline pump islands, air and water hoses, and vacuum cleaners shall be set back the following distances from street rights-of-way: 
1.  Major thoroughfare: 
(i)  Arterial-35 feet; 
(ii)  Collector-30 feet; 
2.  Minor thoroughfare-25 feet; 
c.  Canopies shall extend no closer than 15 feet from any street right-of-way; 
d.  Underground storage tanks shall be set back no closer than 20 feet from all property lines; and 
e.  No automotive repairs. 
(12)  Automotive parking establishments (C-2). All stock-in-trade must be screened in accordance with screening provisions in the land development ordinance and stock-in-trade must be stored on an impervious surface. 
(13)  Automotive rentals (M-1). Rental units must be screened in accordance with the land development ordinance screening requirements. 
(14)  Baseball batting cages (C-2, M-1): 
a.  The facility shall be enclosed by a wall or fence and buffer area ten feet in depth to screen adjacent property; 
b.  Loudspeakers shall be prohibited; and 
c.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(15)  Bed and breakfast (AR, C-1, C-2). Individual guests are prohibited from staying at a particular bed and breakfast for more than 14 consecutive days or more than 45 days in a calendar year with breakfast served at no additional cost. 
(16)  Boatyard, truck repair, boat repair, motorcycle repair, automotive parking establishment, golf cart sales and service, automobile impoundment yard, automobile impoundment area (C-2, M-1). All stock-in-trade must be screened in accordance with screening provisions in the land development ordinance and stock-in-trade must be stored on an impervious surface. 
(17)  Campground facilities (AR): 
a.  Campsites shall be utilized by recreational vehicles and tents (normally associated with outdoor camping), but not by manufactured housing; 
b.  The campground shall be utilized for short-term occupancy of 15 days or less; provided, however, that the property owner or resident manager may permanently occupy one single-family dwelling; 
c.  Said uses shall be permitted only on a lot which possesses at least 60 feet of frontage on a major thoroughfare; 
d.  Minimum lot area-Ten acres; 
e.  Maximum density-Four campsites per gross acre; 
f.  A minimum 50-foot planted buffer plus all required setbacks shall be established around the perimeter of the entire development. Buffer areas shall be continuous except for approved access, utility easements, and signs (pursuant to the sign ordinance); 
g.  Minimum setbacks for structures and use areas (including campsites) as measured from required buffers: 
1.  Front yard-75 feet; 
2.  Side yard-25 feet; 
3.  Rear yard-25 feet; 
h.  At least ten percent of the gross acreage shall be reserved for recreational areas; 
i.  Accessory uses shall be allowed provided that the following requirements are met: 
1.  Such uses and structures shall be restricted to the use of occupants of the park and their guests; 
2.  All structures and use areas shall meet the minimum buffer and setback requirements; 
3.  Such uses and structures shall be limited to the following: rental offices; shower and restroom facilities; coin-operated laundry facilities; convenience stores; and snack bars; 
4.  Total floor area for all accessory structures listed above shall not exceed 3,000 square feet; 
j.  The sale of alcoholic beverages and/or automotive gasoline shall be prohibited; and 
k.  The site plan for the proposed campground (including all accessory structures) shall be approved by the Fayette County Health Department. 
(18)  Car wash service (C-2). Any impervious surface shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting service equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the wash machines. 
(19)  Cemeteries (C-1, O-I): 
a.  Minimum lot area-Ten acres for a human cemetery and five acres for a pet cemetery; 
b.  A crematorium shall be allowed only in conjunction with a cemetery or a mausoleum; not in conjunction with a cemetery as a conditional use with a church; 
c.  Grave sites shall be set back at least 50 feet from all property lines; 
d.  A 20-foot buffer shall be provided in addition to required setbacks along all property lines adjoining an AR zoning district or a residential zoning district; 
e.  A landscaped buffer ten feet in width and no less than six feet in height shall be installed along all side and rear lot lines; and 
f.  Road frontage shall have a fence of stone stucco, wrought iron or similar materials or combination thereof. 
(20)  Cemetery as an accessory structure to a church: 
a.  All such facilities shall front on a major collector for a distance for at least 100 feet; 
b.  Minimum lot size-One acre; 
c.  Maximum lot size-Three acres; 
d.  All buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from the front property line (35 feet if a corner lot), 40 feet from the rear property line, and 20 feet from side property lines; and 
e.  A densely-planted buffer, no less than six feet in height, having a minimum width of ten feet shall be installed along all side and rear property lines which abut a residential zoning district. 
(21)  Child caring institution (AR, RMF, O-I, E-I). 
a.  Such facility shall obtain all necessary local and state licenses; 
b.  All facilities must provide 80 square feet of personal living space per resident or that amount required by the State of Georgia for the licensing of child caring institutions, whichever is greater; and 
c.  Inspections may be performed by the town to determine whether or not said facility is in compliance with these conditions. 
(22)  Commercial motor vehicle repairs. (M-1): 
a.  The use shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital. 
b.  No outdoor storage of equipment or inventory is permitted unless screened entirely from adjacent properties and all rights-of-way by a solid opaque fence a minimum of six feet in height. 
c.  All repair activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
d.  The use shall not be established on a lot which is either adjacent to or directly across the street from any residential zoning district. 
e.  All overhead doors must face the side and/or rear yard or be screened from view from the street. 
(23)  Commercial motor vehicle sales. (C-2, M-1): 
a.  The use shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any property used for a school, park, or playground. 
b.  The use shall not be established on a lot which is either adjacent to or directly across the street from any residential zoning district. 
c.  Loudspeakers are prohibited. 
d.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
e.  Outside storage of other than stock-in-trade is prohibited. 
f.  Stock-in-trade must be stored on an impervious surface. 
g.  Outdoor activities are limited to operating hours from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
h.  All activities except for sales shall be conducted entirely indoors. 
i.  All overhead doors must face the side and/or rear yard or be screened from view from the street. 
(24)  Community living arrangement (AR, CR-2, CR-3, R-20, R-18, R-12, DR, TR, RMF, MHP). 
a.  The principal structure shall contain a residential facade architecturally similar to adjacent buildings; 
b.  Such facility shall obtain all necessary local and state licenses; 
c.  The use is limited to the principal structure only; 
d.  All facilities must provide 80 square feet of personal living space per resident or that amount required by the State of Georgia for the licensing of community living arrangements, whichever is greater; 
e.  The owner of the establishment must live on the premises; 
f.  Unless located in a district permitting two-family or multi-family dwellings, no more than four individuals not related to the owner by blood or marriage shall reside on the premises; and 
g.  Inspections may be performed by the town to determine whether or not said facility is in compliance with these conditions. 
(25)  Construction equipment, truck rentals (C-2). Outdoor display must be screened in accordance with the land development ordinance screening requirements. All outdoor storage of equipment and trucks must be on an impervious surface. 
(26)  Day care services; home occupation (all residential zoning districts). Home occupation day care services may be established and operated in the town in accordance with the guidelines and procedures set forth below: 
a.  Guidelines: 
1.  A home occupation day care service means a private residence operated by any person who receives pay for the supervision and care for fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, not more than six children simultaneously, who are under 18 years of age, who are not related to such person and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence; 
2.  Not more than 25 percent of a residence may be used for a home occupation day care service and an outdoor play area may be provided; 
3.  No home occupation day care service may be established and operated in the town until a permit to do so has been obtained in accordance with the procedures set forth below; 
4.  Must comply with all current state regulations for day care services; 
b.  Procedures: 
1.  Permit application . Persons seeking to operate a home occupation day care service in the town must file a permit application with the town clerk. Each application shall also be accompanied by the applicant's affidavit certifying the maximum number of children that will be served simultaneously and that the proposed home occupation day care service will meet and be operated in accordance with all applicable state laws and regulations with all ordinances and regulations of the town; 
2.  Decision on application . Within 30 days of the date the permit application is filed with the town clerk, the town council shall either approve or disapprove the application for a permit to be issued. An application shall be approved only upon a determination by the town council that the home occupation day care service proposed by the applicant will be operated in compliance with all state regulations, this section and the fire and safety codes of the county; will not constitute too great a concentration of such home occupations as to adversely impact a neighborhood; and that all other requirements of this section have been met; and 
3.  Issuance of permits . Each permit shall become effective on the date it is issued by the town. 
(27)  Day nurseries and kindergartens (O-I, E-I, C-1): 
a.  There shall be not less than 30 square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum licensed enrollment, and not less than 100 square feet per child of outdoor play area at maximum licensed enrollment; 
b.  The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than six feet in height in a location other than the front yard; 
c.  A circular drive shall be provided for off-street loading and unloading; and 
d.  Must comply with all current state regulations for day care services. 
(28)  Dog grooming shops (C-1). 
a.  All outdoor areas accessible to animals while off-leash shall be enclosed by a fence of at least six feet in height which is secured at the bottom to prevent an animal from digging out of the enclosed area. 
b.  Animals shall be supervised at all times while off-leash in outdoor areas. 
c.  No breeding of animals shall occur at the facility. 
d.  Adequate sound-proofing and odor-proofing shall be provided so that the use does not create a nuisance. 
e.  The facility shall be located at least 100 feet from any property residentially zoned or used for residential purposes. 
f.  The facility shall obtain all necessary state licenses and shall be in compliance with all applicable state regulations. 
(29)  Dry cleaning plants (M-2): 
a.  Dry cleaning plants using cleaning systems which make use of solvents rated at above 40 by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. Standard of Classification, known as Class I Systems, shall be prohibited; 
a.  Dry cleaning plants which use cleaning systems which make use of solvents rated at more than five but not less than 40 according to the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. Standard Classification, known as Class II and Class III Systems, shall not be established in a building with other occupancy; 
c.  The building for a dry cleaning plant shall not contain more than 4,000 square feet of floor area inclusive of dry cleaning pickup facility within the building; 
d.  Fuel for operation of the equipment shall be smokeless fuel; and 
e.  Central water and central sanitary sewage for systems are required. 
(30)  Electric transformer stations, gas regulator stations and telephone exchanges (all zoning districts). The following provisions apply to electric transformer stations, gas regulator stations and telephone exchanges: 
a.  These uses shall be essential for service to the area in which they are located; 
b.  Any building or structure, except a fence, shall be set back not less than 20 feet from any property line and shall meet all applicable yard requirements; 
c.  These uses shall be enclosed by a fence not less than eight feet in height; 
d.  The required front yard and other open space on the premises outside the fenced area shall be grassed, landscaped and maintained in an appropriate manner; and 
e.  The storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be prohibited. 
(31)  Electrical supply stores (C-1, M-1): 
a.  Except in the M-1 zoning district there shall be no outdoor storage of materials, supplies or equipment except within a completely fenced area, which is adequately buffered to provide visual screening from the adjoining properties; and 
b.  In the M-1 zoning district, outdoor storage shall be at least 50 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
(32)  Farmers' markets (C-2): 
a.  Weekend business license only; 
b.  Written permission of the property owner shall be obtained prior to licensing and permitting of the operation; and 
c.  Hours of operation limited from 8:00 a.m. to sundown. 
(33)  Farming structures (AR). All farming-related structures shall be located at least 100 feet from property lines, and must comply with the conditions set out for accessory structures. 
(34)  General building contractors (O-I, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2). There shall be no exterior storage of equipment, materials or construction vehicles in any district other than the M-2 zoning district. Any outdoor storage must be placed on an impervious surface. 
(35)  Golf cart sales and service (C-2). All stock-in-trade must be screened in accordance with screening provisions in the land development ordinance and stock-in-trade must be stored on an impervious surface. 
(36)  Golf driving ranges (C-2, M-1): 
a.  All structures, greens, fairways, and parking areas shall be set back at least 100 feet from any AR or residential zoning district; 
b.  All structures, greens, fairways, and parking areas shall be set back at least 50 feet from any non-residential zoning district; 
c.  Said facilities shall be for daytime use only except that lighting may be provided for facilities which are located more than 350 feet from a single-family or multi-family residence provided that lighting is oriented away from adjacent property; and 
d.  No outside loudspeaker system shall be utilized. 
(37)  Golf courses and clubhouses (A-R, M-1, C-2): 
a.  The golf course shall be a minimum of nine holes; 
b.  Any building or structure established in connection with this use shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line, except where the property line is a street line. The front yard setback established for the zoning district shall apply. When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line setback shall be in accordance with the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act and this section, whichever is greater; and 
c.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and or roadways. 
(38)  Group home (AR, CR-2, CR-3, R-20, R-18, R-12, DR, TR, RMF, MHP). 
a.  The principal structure shall contain a residential facade architecturally similar to adjacent buildings; 
b.  Such facility shall obtain all necessary local and state licenses; 
c.  The use is limited to the principal structure only; 
d.  All facilities must provide 80 square feet of personal living space per resident or that amount required by the State of Georgia for the licensing of group homes, whichever is greater; 
e.  The owner of the establishment must live on the premises; 
f.  Unless located in a district permitting two-family or multi-family dwellings, no more than four individuals not related to the owner by blood or marriage shall reside on the premises; and 
g.  Inspections may be performed by the town to determine whether or not said facility is in compliance with these conditions. 
(39)  Gun shops (C-2): 
a.  Must have 12 inch bollards 42 inches high four feet apart which are designed to prevent vehicles from entering the front doors and which meet ADA standards; 
b.  Must have a steel roll down gate in front of the entrance to prevent unauthorized entry; 
c.  Operating hours must be limited to the time period between 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; 
d.  Must have an alarm system on the building to notify of unauthorized entry; 
e.  Must have a camera security system to monitor building at all times for unauthorized activity; 
f.  Must have concrete poured walls in any area involving discharge of fire arms; 
g.  Must have a certified range safety officer on duty at all times; 
h.  Must meet all applicable standards established for lead management and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) compliance for indoor shooting ranges, as published by the National Association of Shooting Ranges and OSHA; 
i.  Must install an intercom system within the facility; and 
j.  Must install a seven-inch wide, four-foot tall concrete block wall along the property line shared with any other business for a distance of at least 65 feet. 
k.  Gun shops may also have a firing range as an accessory use. 
(40)  Health clubs or day spas (O-I, C-1, C-2). Private treatment rooms are required for each client receiving a personal service, and the use must comply with all state requirements. 
(41)  Home occupations (All residential zoning districts): 
a.  No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare or electrical interference that would be detectable beyond the dwelling unit or accessory building; 
b.  The use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit or accessory building and only persons living in the dwelling unit shall be employed at the location of the home occupation; 
c.  No more than 30 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for the conduct of the home occupation; 
d.  No materials, equipment shall be stored or parked on the premises of the home occupation unless they are confined entirely within the residence. In addition, there shall be no storage of mechanical earthmoving equipment at the location of the home occupation unless the property area exceeds five acres; and 
e.  No home occupation shall be operated so as to create or cause a nuisance. 
(42)  Hospital (C-2, M-1, M-2, O-I): 
a.  Minimum lot size-Ten acres; 
b.  Such use shall be permitted only on a lot which fronts on an arterial thoroughfare; 
c.  A minimum 50-foot buffer plus the required setbacks shall separate all buildings from any residential or AR zoning district; 
d.  Minimum setbacks: 
1.  Front yard-100 feet; 
2.  Side yard-50 feet; 
3.  Rear yard-50 feet; and 
e.  Support services, such as pharmacies, public cafeterias and gift shops, are allowed provided such services are in conjunction with, and accessory to, the hospital structure. Such businesses shall be conducted within the primary use structure. 
(43)  Indoor pet boarding (C-1): 
a.  All outdoor areas accessible to animals while off-leash shall be enclosed by a fence of at least six feet in height which is secured at the bottom to prevent an animal from digging out of the enclosed area. 
b.  Animals shall be supervised at all times while off-leash in outdoor areas. 
c.  No breeding of animals shall occur at the facility. 
d.  Adequate sound-proofing and odor-proofing shall be provided so that the use does not create a nuisance. 
e.  The facility shall be located at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
f.  The facility shall obtain all necessary state licenses and shall be in compliance with all applicable state regulations. 
(44)  Junkyard (M-2): 
a.  Not allowed within a radius of 500 feet of any public park, public playground, school, church, hospital, and cemetery; within 100 feet of any highway, nor within 500 feet of any residential zoning district; 
b.  Must be screened from view of road and adjoining property with an opaque fence at least seven feet in height; 
c.  Maximum lot size-Ten acres; 
d.  A minimum 100-foot buffer shall be provided along every property line including public right-of-way so that junk is not visible from a public street or adjoining properties; 
e.  All structures and storage areas shall be set back at least 200 feet from a public street and/or adjoining residential or AR zoning district; and 
f.  Must follow all current state and federal regulations. 
(45)  Kennels (M-2, AR). All structures used as boarding or breeding kennels shall be located and activities conducted at least 400 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(46)  Laundromat, self-service or otherwise (C-2). Central water and central sanitary sewage systems are required. 
(47)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments, including pick-up stations, package plants and coin-operated facilities (C-1, C-2). The establishment is limited to a floor area not exceeding 4,000 square feet. 
(48)  Livestock (AR): 
a.  Livestock shall only be permitted on a fenced lot containing two or more acres for one animal, or one and one-half acres for each animal if more than one; and 
b.  All buildings used for animals shall be set back not less than 200 feet from any property line. 
(49)  Lumber, hardware and other building material establishments (C-2, M-1). Outdoor storage shall be at least 50 feet from the street right-of-way line. 
(50)  Miniature golf courses (C-2): 
a.  The facility shall be enclosed by a wall or fence and buffer area ten feet in depth to screen the adjacent properties, the fence or wall must be at least six feet in height and any portion over six feet must be transparent; 
b.  Loudspeakers shall be prohibited; 
c.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways; and 
d.  No outdoor activities after 11:00 p.m. 
(51)  Automobile sales. (C-2, M-1): 
a.  The use shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any property used for a school, park, or playground. 
b.  The use shall not be established on a lot which is either adjacent to or directly across the street from any residential zoning district. 
c.  Loudspeakers are prohibited. 
d.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
e.  Outside storage of other than stock-in-trade is prohibited. 
f.  Stock-in-trade must be stored on an impervious surface. 
g.  Outdoor activities are limited to operating hours from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
h.  All activities except for sales shall be conducted entirely indoors. 
i.  All overhead doors must face the side and/or rear yard or be screened from view from the street. 
(52)  Nursing home (RMF, O-I, E-I, C-2). 
a.  Such facility shall obtain all necessary local and state licenses; and 
b.  There shall be a maximum of 20 beds per gross acre of development. 
(53)  Outdoors sports facilities and swimming pools (C-2): 
a.  The facility shall be enclosed by a wall or fence and buffer area ten feet in depth to screen the adjacent properties, the fence or wall must be at least six feet in height and any portion over six feet must be transparent; 
b.  Loudspeakers shall be prohibited; 
c.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways; and 
d.  No outdoor activities after 11:00 p.m. 
(54)  Paint, glass and wallpaper stores (C-1, C-2). There shall be no outdoor storage of materials, supplies or equipment. 
(55)  Personal care home (AR, CR-2, CR-3, R-20, R-18, R-12, DR, TR, RMF, MHP). 
a.  The principal structure shall contain a residential facade architecturally similar to adjacent buildings; 
b.  Such facility shall obtain all necessary local and state licenses; 
c.  The use is limited to the principal structure only; 
d.  All facilities must provide 80 square feet of personal living space per resident or that amount required by the State of Georgia for the licensing of personal care homes, whichever is greater; 
e.  The owner of the establishment must live on the premises; 
f.  Unless located in a district permitting two-family or multi-family dwellings, no more than four individuals not related to the owner by blood or marriage shall reside on the premises; and 
g.  Inspections may be performed by the town to determine whether or not said facility is in compliance with these conditions. 
(56)  Plant nurseries (C-2, M-1). Any structure used as a commercial plant nursery shall be set back at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(57)  Public utility facilities (O-I, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2): 
a.  Minimum lot size-Five acres; 
b.  All structural parts of the facility shall be contained within the boundaries of the parcel; 
c.  An eight-foot high fence capped with barbed wire with a locked gate shall surround the facility; 
d.  If electrical current is present in the facility, signs stating "high voltage" shall be attached to the fence every 20 linear feet; and 
e.  A 100-foot undisturbed buffer is required adjacent to all property lines. 
(58)  Recycling facility (M-1): 
a.  All separation and processing (baling, compacting, grinding or shredding) must occur entirely within an enclosed building; 
b.  A convenient paved drop-off area must be provided, permitting vehicles to re-enter the public street in a forward manner. Traffic circulation patterns must be indicated on the site plan; 
c.  All outside storage of recyclable materials must be on a paved surface within fully enclosed bins with hinged lids or other access points which can be closed; and 
d.  All outside storage areas shall be screened according to the development regulations. Storage bins cannot be greater in height than the screening. 
(59)  Religious institutions (all residential zoning districts): 
a.  Religious institutions must be located on a lot of at least five acres and have 100 feet of street frontage; 
b.  A 50-foot buffer adjacent to residential zoning district is required; 
c.  Driveways and parking areas are exempt from setbacks; 
d.  The scale, intensity, and operation of the use shall not generate unreasonable noise, traffic, congestion or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous residential properties; 
e.  Additional accessory uses and facilities that are customarily associated with religious institutions and intended primarily for the use of worshipers are permitted such as: 
1.  Outdoor recreation facilities 10,000 square feet or smaller; 
2.  Indoor recreation facilities such as gymnasiums, health, and fitness facilities; 
3.  Recreation center and club; 
4.  Cemetery or mausoleum; 
5.  Museum; 
6.  Adult day care center; 
7.  Child day care center; 
8.  Kindergarten; 
9.  Private school; 
10.  One dwelling for an employee of the place of worship; 
11.  No outdoor activities are permitted to take place after 10:00 p.m.; 
12.  The scale, intensity and operation of the accessory use or facility shall not generate unreasonable noise, traffic congestion, or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous residential properties; 
13.  Must comply with the AR zoning district setbacks; 
14.  Landscape area shall be required in accordance with the land development regulations; 
15.  The construction of one open air pavilion utilized for picnics /social gatherings only is allowed under the following conditions: 
(i)  Minimum lot size-15 acres; 
(ii)  The pavilion must be at least 150 feet from any property line; 
(iii)  The pavilion must be constructed following the construction of the main sanctuary building; 
(iv)  The floor area cannot exceed 20 percent of the square footage of the main sanctuary building; 
(v)  The pavilion may not be lighted or used after 10:00 p.m.; and 
16.  Church or religious tent meetings must comply with and obtain a special events permit. 
(60)  School (private, parochial and/or special) and incidental sports arena, stadium or recreational field (E-I, C-1, C-2): 
a.  Minimum lot size-One acres; 
b.  A minimum 100-foot wide buffer plus required setbacks shall be provided adjacent to any residential or AR zoning district; 
c.  Outdoor recreation areas shall not be located within 150 feet of an adjoining residential or AR zoning district. Outdoor lighting for recreation purposes shall not be permitted after 10:00 p.m.; 
d.  Student drop-off and vehicular turn-around facilities shall be provided on the site; 
e.  The construction of one open air pavilion over 900 square feet utilized for picnics/social gatherings only is allowed under the following conditions 
1.  Minimum lot size-40 acres; 
2.  The pavilion must be at least 150 feet from any property line; 
3.  The pavilion must be constructed following the construction of the main school building; 
4.  The floor area cannot exceed 20 percent of the square footage of the main school building; and 
5.  If the pavilion is built in conjunction with an attached storage building, the overall square footage shall not exceed 20 percent of the main school building square footage. 
(61)  Self-storage warehouses (M-1): 
a.  The development will be screened from view from any right-of-way; 
b.  The development shall be limited to a single story; 
c.  Hours of operation will be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. (does not prohibit access to storage units); 
d.  All lighting will be directed downward and inward. After hours lighting will be reduced as to minimize lighting impacts on adjacent and nearby developments; 
e.  Impervious surface area is limited to 70 percent of the parcel (May 5, 2007); 
f.  Storage of vehicles, boats, and trailers, shall be located so that they are not visible from view from adjacent residential areas and public roads with any combination of privacy fence and /or berm, and vegetation. Covered vehicle storage up to 850 square feet per parking space, shall be allowed provided it does not exceed 25 percent of the overall gross square footage of all buildings. All covered storage must have a peaked roof, be closed on any side that is visible from a residential or A-R zoning district or from any street and must be built of materials consistent with the main structure. Aisles adjacent to boat and RV parking shall be a minimum of 50 feet wide unless it is angle parking; and 
g.  No exterior loudspeakers or paging equipment shall be permitted on the site. 
(62)  Sexually oriented business (M-2): 
a.  It is not located within 1,000 feet of: 
1.  A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; 
2.  A public or private educational facility including but not limited to child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges and universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school; 
3.  A boundary of a residential zoning district; 
4.  A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities included but not limited to a park, playground, nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis court, pedestrian/bicycle path, wilderness area, or other similar public land which is under the control, operation or management of the town parks and recreation authorities; 
5.  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use; 
6.  An entertainment business which is oriented primarily toward children or family; 
7.  The premises of a business licensed pursuant to the alcoholic beverage regulations of the state; 
b.  It is not located within 1,500 feet of another sexually oriented business; and 
c.  It is not located within the same building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(63)  Small engine sales and repair. (C-1, C-2, M-1): 
a.  The use shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any property used for a school, park, playground or hospital. 
b.  No outdoor storage of equipment or inventory is permitted. 
c.  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
d.  The use shall not be established on a lot which is either adjacent to or directly across the street from any residential zoning district. 
e.  All overhead doors must face the side and/or rear yard or be screened from view from the street. 
(64)  Special trade contractors (O-I, C-1, M-1, M-2). There shall be no exterior storage of equipment, materials or construction vehicles in any district other than the M-2 zoning district. Any outdoor storage must be placed on an impervious surface. 
(65)  Temporary carnival or rodeo (AR): 
a.  Said carnival or rodeo shall not be operated longer than seven days; 
b.  Tents shall require the approval of the Fayette County Fire Marshal; 
c.  Off-street parking shall be required; and 
d.  Outdoor lighting for activities shall not be permitted after 11:00 p.m. 
(66)  Tennis court, club and facilities (C-2); 
a.  The facility shall be enclosed by a wall or fence and buffer area ten feet in depth to screen the adjacent properties, the fence or wall must be at least six feet in height and any portion over six feet must be transparent; 
b.  Loudspeakers shall be prohibited; 
c.  Lighting shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways; and 
d.  No outdoor activities after 11:00 p.m. 
(67)  Waste facility (M-2): 
a.  No outside storage of waste or waste containers shall be permitted; 
b.  No waste shall be stored on-site over 24 hours; 
c.  No waste facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of any AR or residential zoning district, park, playground, or other public land; 
d.  No waste facility shall be located within 5,000 feet of another waste facility; and 
e.  No waste facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of any state or federal highway right-of-way (November 20, 1997). 
(Revised March 1, 2012; June 6, 2013; February 6, 2014; June 5, 2014; October 2, 2014; April 2, 2015; August 6, 2015; Ord. No. 2017-01, §§ 1, 2, 5-4-2017; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 1, 7-6-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07, §§ 5-9, 5-17-2018) 
Sec. 113-191. - Quality growth development district special requirements. 
    The purpose of this section is to maintain a physically and aesthetically pleasing gateway into the Town of Tyrone, while keeping it in line with the surrounding environment to ensure visual continuity. Any structure or portion of property that fronts on to State Route 74 shall, in addition to the other requirements of this Ordinance, comply with the following: 
(1)  Every application for the construction of a new building or structure and alterations and/or additions to existing structures shall be accompanied by drawings signed by the architect, engineer, or other appropriate professional which clearly show the following: 
a.  Exterior elevations drawn to scale with color rendering; 
b.  Proposed colors, materials and textures for structures; 
c.  Location of all exterior utility facilities including any roof top units; 
d.  Proposed signs and location including size, color and material; 
e.  Line of sight study from State Route 74; 
(2)  The design shall protect adjacent properties from negative visual and functional impacts; 
(3)  The design shall protect scenic views and utilize natural features of the site; 
(4)  The design shall be planned in such a fashion that it is physically and aesthetically related and coordinated with other elements of the project and surrounding environment to insure visual continuity; 
(5)  All side and rear yards shall be used for planted buffers and/or landscaping utilizing berms as feasible; 
(6)  All loading docks, trash receptacles and equipment areas shall be screened from all streets; 
(7)  Loading and unloading shall be done only into or from the rear or side of buildings; 
(8)  Exterior storage is prohibited, unless as permitted in article VI Supplemental Regulations; 
(9)  All outside finish construction shall be 80 percent brick, veneer or glass. 
(10)  Exterior walls must be designed to provide visual relief at a minimum of every 20 feet (no long flat walls); 
(11)  A maintained planted buffer shall be in place for the first 20 feet of the building setback which is adjacent to State Route Highway 74. 
    In reviewing any application within this area, the mayor and council shall consider among other things, the general design, the character and appropriateness of design, scale of buildings, arrangement, texture, materials, and colors of the structures in question and the relationship of such elements to similar features of structures in the surrounding area. 
(Revised March 6, 2014) 
Sec. 113-192. - Telecommunications antennas and towers. 
(a)  Purpose and intent . The purpose of this section is to establish minimum development standards for the regulation of commercial telecommunications transmission towers, including but not limited to, cellular and personal communications systems (PCS) towers, broadcasting towers, two-way radio towers, fixed-point microwave dishes, commercial satellites and receiving dishes, and related accessory equipment and buildings. The intent of this section is to: (1) to implement the provisions of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 on a local level; (2) to control placement of towers and antennas in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact to nearby properties by locating towers and antennas in non-residential areas or in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; and (3) to advocate the shared use of new and existing tower sites through co-location thereby discouraging the proliferation of towers throughout the Town of Tyrone. 
(b)  Applicability : 
(1)  District height limitations . The requirements set forth shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of the height limitations specified for each zoning district. The height limitations applicable to buildings and structures shall not apply to towers and antennas. 
(2)  Public property . Antennas and towers located on public property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be exempt from the requirements of this section, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the governing authority. 
(3)  Amateur radio receive-only antennas . This section shall not govern any amateur radio tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas; 
(4)  Pre-existing towers and antennas : 
a.  Any tower or antenna previously permitted or currently in use on the effective date of this section shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section, other than the requirements of subsections (c)(5) and (c)(6) herein. Any such tower or antenna shall be referred to in this section as "pre-existing tower" or "pre-existing antenna"; 
b.  Pre-existing towers or antennas that are not in use for a continuous period of 12 months shall be removed per subsection (g) herein. An annual "tower in use certification" shall be required per subsection (g) as well; 
c.  Where a pre-existing tower does not comply with the setback requirements of this section, co-location of antennas on such a tower may occur, provided that any proposed accessory equipment buildings placed within the existing fenced area meet the minimum setbacks of this section and that the height of the pre-existing tower is not increased by the proposed antenna. All other requirements of this section shall apply; 
(5)  Existing tower replacement . Replacement of an existing tower structure is permitted provided that all of the following apply: 
a.  The replacement tower is constructed on a site within close proximity to the existing tower at the same or greater setbacks than previously established; 
b.  The replacement tower complies with the height requirements for the area in which it is located; 
c.  The tower being replaced is removed from site within 15 calendar days from the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the new tower; 
d.  Additional co-location opportunities on the new tower are made available with the minimum users required based on tower height; 
e.  Proposed accessory equipment buildings comply with established setbacks for existing tower facilities without increasing nonconformity; and 
f.  A site plan for the new tower facilities is administratively approved. 
(c)  General guidelines : 
(1)  Principal or accessory use . Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. The entire tower facility shall count as one principal or accessory use. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot; 
(2)  Inventory of existing or planned tower sites . Each applicant for a new tower shall provide an inventory of all existing or planned tower sites in the town and within one-quarter mile of the border thereof. The zoning administrator may share such information with other applicants applying for approval under this section or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the town; provided, however, that the zoning administrator is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available and/or suitable; 
(3)  Availability of suitable existing towers or structures for co-location . No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the town that no existing tower, nor any towers in the approval process, can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. All evidence shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts. An existing or planned tower would not be suitable for co-location for the following reasons: 
a.  No existing towers or structures located within the geographic area meet the applicant's engineering requirements, including, but not limited to, sufficient height, structural support strength, or electromagnetic interference with antenna(s) on the existing towers or structures; 
b.  The fees or costs required to co-locate on an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for co-location are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed unreasonable. The applicant shall submit in writing a detailed estimate of total development costs; 
c.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable; or 
d.  Letters of rejection have been received for requests to co-locate on all existing and planned towers within the service area of the proposed tower. 
(4)  Site plan . Applicants shall submit a scaled site plan. Additional information must include maximum effective radiated power, tower height requirements, tower structure standards, access, landscaping, buffers, and other information necessary to assess compliance with this section. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. Site plan submittal shall include completion of a tower application, signed and notarized by both the property owner and the tower company representative/agent; 
(5)  Aesthetics-Lighting . The following guidelines shall govern the aesthetics, installation and lighting of all towers and antennas: 
a.  Towers shall, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. Where possible, towers shall be designed to appear to be trees, or other natural features; 
b.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment; 
c.  If any antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color and texture of the supporting structure, and if roof-mounted shall be screened by a parapet wall, so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive; 
d.  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(6)  Federal requirements . All towers must meet current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas, including modulation studies on frequency usage to avoid interference with existing systems in operation. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall result in appropriate action by the Town of Tyrone. Prior to submittal for an administrative site plan approval, applicants shall be required to submit written approval from the FAA which states that the proposed communications tower does not encroach onto or through any established public or private airport approach path or federal airspace as established by the FAA; 
(7)  Building codes-Safety standards . To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the electronic industries association, as amended from time to time. If upon inspection the governing authority concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 60 days to bring such tower into compliance. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance with such standards appropriate action will be taken by the Town of Tyrone. 
(8)  Application . Any application submitted for approval shall meet all of the guidelines listed above. Failure to meet all required guidelines shall result in denial of said application. All applicants for new tower construction shall include the following information at time of application submittal: site and landscape plans drawn to scale; a report including all tower specifications and a description of the tower with technical reasons for its design; documentation establishing the structural integrity for the tower's proposed uses; the general capacity of the tower and information necessary to assure that ANSI standards are met; a statement of intent on whether excess space will be leased; proof of ownership of the proposed site or authorization to utilize it; and copies of any easements necessary; 
(9)  Streamlined process for modification or co-location of wireless facilities: 
a.  Applications for co-location or modification of a wireless facility entitled to streamlined processing as described below shall be reviewed for conformance with applicable site plan and building permit requirements, including zoning and land use conformity, but shall not otherwise be subject to the issuance of additional zoning, land use, or special use permit approvals beyond the initial zoning, land use, or special permit approvals issued for such wireless support structure or wireless facility; 
b.  The streamlined process set forth above shall apply to applications for all modifications and to applications for all proposed co-locations that meet the following requirements: 
(i)  The proposed co-location shall not increase the overall height or width of the wireless support structure to which the wireless facilities are to be attached; 
(ii)  The proposed co-location shall not increase the dimensions of the equipment compound approved by the governing authority; 
(iii)  The proposed co-location shall comply with applicable conditions of approval, if any, applied to the initial wireless facilities and wireless support structure, as well as any subsequently adopted amendments to such conditions of approval; 
(iv)  The proposed co-location shall not exceed the applicable weight limits for the wireless support structure, as demonstrated by a letter from a structural engineer licensed to practice in the State of Georgia; 
c.  An applicant shall not be required to submit radio frequency analyses; however, the zoning administrator may require the applicant to provide a letter from a radio frequency engineer certifying the applicant's proposed wireless facilities will not interfere with emergency communications; 
d.  Within 90 calendar days of the date an application for modification or co-location of wireless facilities is filed with the zoning administrator, unless another date is specified in a written agreement between the governing authority and the applicant, the zoning administrator shall: 
(i)  Make his or her final decision to approve or disapprove the application; and 
(ii)  Advise the applicant in writing of his or her final decision; 
e.  Within 30 calendar days of the date an application for modification or co-location is filed with the zoning administrator, the zoning administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of any information required to complete the application. To the extent additional information is required to complete the application, the time required by the applicant to provide such information shall not be counted toward the 90 calendar day review period set forth above. 
(d)  Development requirements : 
(1)  Zoning districts allowed-M-1, M-2; 
(2)  Lot area. Tower facilities shall be on a lot which meets the minimum lot size for the district in which it is located. A tower may occupy a leased parcel being a portion of the lot (parent parcel). For the purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including, but not limited to, set back requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are constructed and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
(3)  Setbacks: 
a.  All tower facilities shall be set back from adjoining properties in the A-R or residential zoning districts a distance equal to the height of the tower or 200 feet, whichever is greater; 
b.  All tower facilities shall be set back from adjoining properties in the non-residential zoning districts a distance equal to the height of the tower or 100 feet, whichever is greater; 
(4)  All anchors for guyed towers shall comply with the minimum setbacks of the zoning district; 
(5)  Towers over 70 feet in height shall not be located within one mile from any existing or planned tower that is over 70 feet in height; 
(6)  Security fencing. The tower facilities shall be enclosed by a black or green vinyl-coated chain link fence not less than eight feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. Access to the communication tower shall be through a locked gate; 
(7)  Landscaping. As specified below, the regulations of the Tyrone Zoning Ordinance and/or Tyrone Land Development Standards shall apply: 
a.  A ten-foot buffer area shall surround all tower facilities. The buffer shall consist entirely of evergreens, and once installed shall be a minimum of six feet in height at time of planting; 
b.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible, as determined by the zoning administrator. In some cases, such as towers sited on large wooded lots, the zoning administrator may determine that natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer, in lieu of the required landscaping. If existing vegetation to remain is requested to count toward the landscaping requirements, all such information, including location, size, and type of vegetation shall be indicated on the site/landscape plan; 
c.  Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of the required fence; 
(8)  Maximum height for all towers and antennas is 199 feet. Tower height shall be measured from the natural grade of the ground at the location of the tower to the highest point of the tower, including any antenna. If minimal grading (elevation of one to two feet above natural grade) is required to level the ground for the tower base, tower height shall be measured from the finished grade approved by the zoning administrator; and 
(9)  Towers shall not be located on the same lot as a school or day-care center. 
(e)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  General . Permitted uses shall not require public hearings. Nevertheless, all such uses shall comply with subsections (c) and (d) of this section and all other applicable ordinances. Prior to the installation of any tower or antenna, the applicant shall provide written notice to the zoning administrator, which notice shall include the location, size, and configuration of such antenna. Written notice shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer; 
(2)  Specific permitted uses : 
a.  Installing an antenna on an existing structure, so long as said addition adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing structure (including buildings, light poles, water towers, or other free standing non-residential structures excluding signs). Total height of existing structure and new antenna shall be 199 feet or less; 
b.  Installing an antenna on any existing tower, so long as said addition adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower and said existing tower is not a pre-existing tower. Total height of existing tower and new antenna shall be 199 feet or less; and 
c.  Adding onto an existing mechanical or accessory building, or placement of additional equipment cabinets or buildings at a tower site as part of co-location. 
(f)  Public hearing required . 
(1)  General . The following provisions shall govern those towers which require a public hearing and approval by the mayor and council. All such uses shall comply with subsections (c) and (d) of this section and all other applicable ordinances. Applicants shall apply for a public hearing through the zoning administrator: 
a.  If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use, then a public hearing shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts; and 
b.  In granting an approval, the mayor and council may impose conditions to the extent they conclude such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
(2)  Factors considered in public hearing applications . The mayor and council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to approve an application, although the mayor and council may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria, if in the sole discretion of the mayor and council, the goals of this section are better served thereby: 
a.  Height of the proposed tower; 
b.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential zoning district boundaries; 
c.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Surrounding topography; 
e.  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
f.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; and 
g.  Proposed ingress and egress. 
(g)  Tower in use certification and removal of abandoned antennas and towers . An annual tower in use certification will be required for any tower or antenna previously permitted or currently in use on the effective date of this section. Said certification shall be submitted to the zoning administrator signed and notarized by the tower company representative/agent by the 31 st of January each year. Any antenna or tower, including pre-existing towers and antennas, that are not in use for a period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(h)  Performance bond required . Prior to the issuance of a zoning compliance certificate to erect a new tower structure, every applicant shall be required to deposit a performance bond with the Town of Tyrone. The amount of the bond shall be not less than $5,000.00 nor more than ten percent of construction costs, as determined by the zoning administrator. Such bond shall be required upon compliance with all aspects of this section and shall be applicable to any assignee and owner of any permit granted hereunder, or any employee, contractor, subcontractor, or other party performing services in connection with any certificate of zoning compliance issued by the zoning administrator. The required performance bond shall be released only upon demolition of the tower and restoration of the site to the pre-development conditions. The format of the bond shall be approved by the town attorney. 
Secs. 113-193-113-204. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRAFFIC AND PARKING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 113-205. - Scope of provisions. 
    Except as provided herein, no application for a building permit shall be approved without a plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and service facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. 
Sec. 113-206. - Parking spaces shall not be reduced. 
    Off-street parking spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum required number for the use or facility to which they are assigned. 
Sec. 113-207. - Street access. 
    Except as provided herein, each building shall be located on a lot or parcel which abuts a public street or has access to a public street by means of a recorded access easement. 
Sec. 113-208. - Street access-Curb cuts in other than residential zoning districts. 
    Curb cuts for service drives, entrances, exits and other similar facilities on public streets in other than residential zoning districts shall not be located within 40 feet of any intersection or within 40 feet of another curb cut. A curb cut shall be no greater than 30 feet in width and no closer than 20 feet to any property line. 
Sec. 113-209. - Corner visibility clearance. 
    In any zoning district, no fence, structure, sign, planting or other obstruction above a height of three feet shall be maintained within 15 feet of any right-of-way or railroad right-of-way, except as provided herein. 
Sec. 113-210. - Private streets. 
    Private streets within any zoning district shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this section. Private streets within any zoning district shall be assigned names and locations and the names of these streets shall be shown on plans required for the issuance of building and development permits as provided in this section. All private street names shall be approved by the town and the Fayette County Emergency Services to avoid conflicting names. 
Sec. 113-211. - Off-street automobile parking. 
(a)  Plans required . A parking plan for all non-residential and multi-family uses shall be submitted to the town with the site plans. 
(b)  Design standards . All parking facilities, including entrances, exits and maneuvering areas, shall: 
(1)  Have access to a public street; 
(2)  Be graded and paved, including access drive(s), and be curbed when needed for effective drainage control; 
(3)  Have all spaces marked with paint lines, curb stones or other similar designations; 
(4)  Be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets; 
(5)  If a parking area is established within a residential zoning district for a non-residential use, provide a 20-foot wide continuous visual buffer at least four feet in height between the parking area and the abutting residential property; 
(6)  Provide adequate lighting if the facilities are to be used at night. The lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect or cause glare on abutting properties or streets; 
(7)  Not be established within the front yard of any property in the O-I zoning district. This paragraph only applies to parking or loading areas; 
(8)  Not be established in the front yard of any residential zoning district except for a single-family residential use; no more than 35 percent of the front yard may be paved or used for parking; and 
(9)  The provisions of paragraphs (2), (3), (5), (6) and (7) of this subsection shall not apply to single-family residential uses where three or less spaces are required. 
(c)  Parking area : 
(1)  Parking stalls shall have a minimum width of nine feet and a minimum length of 18 feet; 
(2)  There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way; 
(3)  Interior driveways shall be: 
a.  At least 24 feet wide where used with 90 degree angle parking; 
b.  At least 18 feet wide where used with 60 degree angle parking; 
c.  At least 12 feet wide where used with 45 degree angle parking; 
d.  At least 12 feet wide where used with parallel parking, or where there is no parking; 
e.  At least 12 feet wide for one-way traffic movement; and 
f.  At least 24 feet wide for two-way traffic movement. 
(4)  Curb return radii shall not exceed 15 feet nor be less than ten feet. 
(d)  Location . All parking facilities shall be located on the same plot with the use it serves. 
(e)  Joint use of parking facilities . The required parking space for a number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking spaces required for churches, theatres or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night and on Sundays. 
(f)  Use of area . No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing or long-term storage of any vehicles or equipment unless such activity is allowed in the zoning district in which the parking area is located. 
(g)  Location and surface of parking areas . The parking of any vehicle on any lot in any zoning district on other than a surface treated and hardened to accommodate the vehicle is prohibited. In addition, parking of vehicles in the front yard or in front of the principal building line in a residential zoning district shall be prohibited except on a hard-surfaced driveway or in a carport or garage. 
(h)  Parking of business vehicles . In any residential or multi-family zoning district, no prohibited business vehicle or school bus used for transporting students to either public or private schools shall be allowed to park on parcels so zoned or on streets abutting such parcels except during daylight hours and only for the purpose of making deliveries, pickups and providing services. A prohibited business vehicle is defined as a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in excess of 26,000 pounds, or a vehicle with more than two axles, or a vehicle designed to transport at least 15 passengers (including the driver). Business vehicles with a GVWR of less than 26,000 pounds, or less than three axles, or those designed to carry less than 15 passengers (including the driver) shall not be parked on streets abutting such parcels. This provision shall not be construed as restricting in any way the normal business vehicle activity associated with development and construction. 
(i)  Required spaces . The number of parking spaces or area required for a particular use shall be as follows: 
(1)  Automobile sales and repair garage . One space per employee plus one space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area; 
(2)  Automobile service station . Three spaces for each service bay, with a minimum of ten spaces required; 
(3)  Business, professional offices and clinics . One space per 250 square feet of gross floor area; 
(4)  Bowling alleys, religious institutions and other places of assembly . One space per four seats in the main auditorium or 100 square feet in the largest assembly room (10/18/07); 
(5)  Commercial, manufacturing and industrial establishments . One space per 2,000 square feet of gross office, plant and storage area; 
(6)  Delivery, ambulance and other similar services . One space for each vehicle, plus one additional space for each two employees; 
(7)  One-, two- and three-family dwellings . Two spaces per dwelling unit plus one space for each 200 square feet of clubhouse, or other common structure; 
(8)  Food stores . One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area; 
(9)  General business, commercial or personal service establishments . Five and one-half spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; 
(10)  Hospitals, care homes and similar institutions . One space per two beds plus one space for each staff member or visiting doctor, plus one space for each employee; 
(11)  Hotels and motels . One space for each guest room plus one space for each 200 square feet of accessory uses such as convention halls, banquet rooms, lounges, restaurants or similar accessory uses; 
(12)  Lodges, fraternal or social organizations . One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area; 
(13)  Manufactured homes . Two spaces for each manufactured home lot; 
(14)  Restaurants, night clubs, taverns and similar establishments serving food or beverages and providing patron use area . One space per 75 square feet of gross floor area; 
(15)  Restaurants, drive-in (without area provided for patron use) . One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area; 
(16)  Shopping centers . Five and one-half spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; 
(17)  Schools, public or private elementary . Two spaces per classroom; 
(18)  Schools, public or private middle, high, trade, exam preparation and tutoring, colleges and universities . Five spaces per classroom; 
(19)  Skating rinks, dance halls, poolrooms, and other places of amusement or assembly without fixed seating . One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area; 
(20)  Swimming pool, golf course, neighborhood recreation center or similar use . One space per five members but not less than 20 spaces except that golf courses shall require a minimum of 20 spaces per nine holes; 
(21)  Theaters, auditoriums funeral homes, gymnasiums, stadiums and other places of assembly with fixed seating . One space per three seats; 
(22)  Theaters, auditoriums, funeral homes, gymnasiums, stadiums and other places of assembly without fixed seating for the accommodation of movable seats in the largest assembly room . One space per 25 square feet of gross floor area available; and 
(23)  Wholesale establishments or other similar uses . One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to sales or display plus two spaces per 2,000 square feet of gross storage area. 
Sec. 113-212. - Off-street loading requirements. 
(a)  Design standards . Where required, one or more off-street loading spaces shall be provided on the same or adjoining premises with the facility it serves, either inside or outside a building. A loading berth shall have minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 35 feet by 14 feet overhead clearance. Such facilities must be designed so that no truck or vehicle maneuvering occurs on the public right-of-way nor in areas designated for the parking of vehicles. 
(b)  Required spaces . The number of spaces or area required for a particular use shall be as follows: 
(1)  Retail operations, including accessory uses within hotels and office buildings . One loading berth for every 40,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof; one loading space for every 20,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof; 
(2)  Office buildings and hotels . One loading berth for every 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof; 
(3)  Industrial, manufacturing, distribution and wholesale operations . One loading berth per 50,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof; and 
(4)  Hospitals, nursing homes and similar institutions . One loading berth at least then ten feet wide and 30 feet long for each 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. 
Secs. 113-213-113-234. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 113-235. - Procedures for variances. 
(a)  Recommendations . Applications for variances are heard initially by the planning commission in a public hearing. All applications shall be submitted by the owner of the affected property or the authorized agent of the owner. The planning commission shall decide whether or not to recommend granting relief for the applicant to the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall take final action on the application subsequent to receiving a recommendation from the planning commission. 
(b)  Request for a variance . The planning commission may recommend, and the mayor and council may grant, a variance from the terms of these regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to the special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of these regulations will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of these regulations shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; provided, however, that a variance shall not be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this section in the zoning district in question. The planning commission may recommend, and the mayor and council may grant, a variance in an individual case upon a finding that the following exists: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; and 
(2)  The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; and 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of these regulations; provided, however no variance may be granted for a use of land, building, or structure that is prohibited herein; and 
(5)  A literal interpretation of the zoning ordinance would deprive the applicant of any rights that others in the same zoning district are allowed; and 
(6)  Provided that the planning commission may recommend, and the mayor and council may impose or require, such additional restrictions and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers in the general neighborhoods; and provided that wherever the mayor and council shall find, in the case of any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations, that any of the terms, conditions, or restrictions upon which such permit was granted are not being complied with, the mayor and council shall rescind and revoke such permit after giving due notice to all parties concerned and granting full opportunity for a hearing. In exercising the above power, the mayor and council shall not consider any nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning district, and no permitted use of lands, structures or buildings in other zoning districts as grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(c)  Compliance with standards . Where an application to the planning commission and the mayor and council is initiated due to an existing violation of the zoning ordinance and the application is denied, the violation shall be required to be corrected within ten days of such denial or as specified by the mayor and council if a greater period of time is necessary. The maximum extension of time shall not exceed 30 days. 
Sec. 113-236. - Application. 
    Forms shall be filed with the zoning administrator, and the applicant shall pay the zoning administrator for expenses incidental to the application. No form shall be accepted by the zoning administrator unless it contains all pertinent information and is accompanied by the required fee. Requests for variances must contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant; 
(2)  Name and address of property owner; 
(3)  Location and legal description of property; 
(4)  Present zoning of property; 
(5)  Specific variance (state exactly what is proposed to be done on the property which does not conform with existing requirements); 
(6)  Copies of plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district, the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract(s), prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid. His/her seal shall be affixed to the plat; 
(7)  A sketch or preliminary plan indicating the intended use of the property, including but not limited to, proposed streets and lot layouts, access and egress routes, and buffer areas and parking. In general, the plat should contain sufficient data so as to clearly indicate proposed land uses. A sketch plan, with a scale of not less than one inch per 200 feet shall be acceptable; however, should the applicant prefer, a preliminary plat meeting all the requirements of the Town of Tyrone Subdivision Regulations shall be submitted; 
(8)  A letter of intent indicating specifically how the property is to be used. Said letter shall be detailed as necessary to clearly describe the proposed site development, existing uses and zoning of nearby property; 
(9)  List the extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular use or development proposed, or to the piece of property in question because of its size, shape, topography or other condition, which justifies the variance; 
(10)  Explain how the strict application of the zoning ordinance requirements to the use or development proposed, or to this particular piece of property, results in great practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship; 
(11)  Explain how the extraordinary and exceptional conditions identified above are peculiar to the use or development proposed or to the particular piece of property involved; 
(12)  Provide the conditions, factors and/or circumstances which give assurance that if the requested variance were granted that such variance would not cause substantial detriment to other property owners or tenants, or to the public good, and would not impair the purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance; 
(13)  Show how a literal interpretation of the zoning ordinance deprives the applicant of any rights that others in the same zoning district are allowed; 
(14)  The application shall be signed and notarized. If the property owner and the applicant are not the same person, a "property owner's authorization" form must be completed; and 
(15)  Appropriate filing fee. 
Sec. 113-237. - Public notice. 
    The zoning administrator shall establish a public hearing date for the planning commission and the town council. The zoning administrator shall cause a notice of public hearing to be published in the legal organ of the town not less than ten days but not more than 45 days prior to the scheduled public hearing before the Planning Commission and not less than 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the scheduled public hearing before the mayor and council. Said notice shall set forth the applicant's name, the location of the property to be affected, the present zoning district, the proposed variance for which application has been made and the date, time and place of the public hearing. 
Sec. 113-238. - Posting of property. 
    The zoning administrator shall cause to be erected upon the property for which the variance is being sought, a sign advertising the date, time and place of the public hearing, the present zoning district and the fact that a request for a variance has been filed. The sign shall be clearly visible from a public street. The sign shall be erected not less than ten days prior to the date of the public hearing before the planning commission and not less than 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing before the mayor and council. 
Sec. 113-239. - Public review. 
    Copies of the proposed variance, the zoning ordinance and official zoning map, plus the evaluation of any changes, will be made available for public review during normal working hours between the date of the appearance of the public hearing notice and the time of the public hearing. 
Sec. 113-240. - Who may appear. 
    Any party may appear at the public hearing in person or by agent or attorney. 
Sec. 113-241. - Administrative variance. 
    The zoning administrator is empowered to review and approve a request for an administrative variance. Applications may be considered only if the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The request only pertains to a zoning setback requirement; and 
(2)  The request is for an encroachment that would not exceed 25 percent of the required setback, up to a maximum of ten feet. 
    In reviewing the application, the zoning administrator shall analyze the application to determine whether granting the request would cause substantial detriment to other property owners in the surrounding area or would impair the purposes of the zoning ordinance. If the request is in conformance with these requirements and does not adversely affect the area, the zoning administrator shall issue an official determination in writing approving the request. The property owner, the town clerk, and the building official shall be provided with a copy of this determination. If the request is not in conformance with these requirements or may possibly have an adverse effect on the surrounding area, the zoning administrator shall deny the appeal in writing, stating the reasons for the denial. The zoning administrator shall act on all requests within 15 working days after the application is filed. If the request is denied by the zoning administrator, the property owner many go through a variance process. 
Sec. 113-242. - Limitations on authority. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary provided herein, certain issues are not eligible for variances: 
(1)  There shall be no variance to the minimum lot area or size; and 
(2)  There shall be no variance to the minimum lot frontage on a street. 
Sec. 113-243. - Appeals of town council decision. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision on any request for variance may appeal such decision to the Superior court of Fayette County by writ of certiorari. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1984 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1984 Code, as supplemented through February 7, 2002, which are included herein. Sections of the 1984 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1984 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-1-1, 1-1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-1-3 2-48 2-51 1-1-3(a)- 
1-1-3(g) 2-76-2-82 1-1-3(h)(1)- 
1-1-3(h)(5) 2-108-2-112 1-1-3(h)(6) 2-50 1-1-3(h)(7) 2-49 1-1-4 1-3 1-1-5 1-8 1-1-6 1-7 1-1-7 1-5, 1-6 2-1-2, 2-1-3 2-139, 2-140 2-1-4 2-21 2-1-5, 2-1-6 2-46, 2-47 2-2-3, 2-2-4 8-1, 8-2 2-2-6 8-3 2-2-13 8-4 2-2-15 8-5 2-2-18 8-6 2-3-1 24-1 2-3-6-2-3-11 24-2-24-7 2-4-1 2-166 2-4-3, 2-4-4 2-167 2-4-6 2-168 2-4-8 2-192 2-4-9 2-1 2-4-26-2-4-31 2-274-2-279 2-5-1-2-5-6 2-224-2-229 2-5-7 2-223 2-5-9 2-230 2-5-17-2-5-19 22-56-22-58 2-5-21 22-118 2-5-22 22-113 2-5-26, 2-5-27 22-115, 22-116 2-5-28 22-119 2-5-29 22-117 2-5-30 22-114 2-5-31, 2-5-32 22-120, 22-121 2-5-34-2-5-41 22-122-22-129 2-5-42 22-124 2-5-44, 2-5-45 22-130, 22-131 2-5-47, 2-5-48 22-132, 22-133 2-5-60-2-5-62 22-90-22-92 2-5-80-2-5-83 22-165-22-168 2-5-84, 2-5-85 22-190, 22-191 2-5-91, 2-5-92 4-40, 4-41 2-6-1-2-6-6 30-1-30-6 2-7-1-2-7-9 101-23-101-31 2-7-26-2-7-29 20-1-20-4 2-7-30-2-7-34 20-5 2-8-1 4-2 2-8-2 4-1 4-94 2-8-3, 2-8-4 4-4, 4-5 2-8-4, 2-8-5 4-6, 4-7 2-8-7-2-8-10 4-8-4-11 2-8-12-2-8-18 4-12-4-18 2-8-21, 2-8-22 4-71, 4-72 2-8-23-2-8-29 4-74-4-80 2-8-30 4-73 2-8-31, 2-8-32 4-87, 4-88 2-8-33 4-91 2-8-34, 2-8-35 4-89, 4-90 2-8-36-2-8-38 4-81-4-83 2-8-39 4-92 2-8-40, 2-8-41 4-84, 4-85 2-8-51-2-8-56 4-117-4-122 2-8-70-2-8-88 4-143-4-161 2-8-89 4-163 2-8-100 4-93 2-8-110 4-3 3-1-2, 3-1-3 18-19, 18-20 3-1-4, 3-1-5 18-21 3-1-6-3-1-12 18-22-18-28 3-2-1 14-1 3-2-21 14-23 3-2-23 14-60 3-2-24 14-26 3-2-31, 3-2-32 14-81, 14-82 3-2-33-3-2-40 14-84-14-91 3-2-41 14-83 3-3-1-3-3-5 10-19-10-23 3-4-1, 3-4-2 26-58, 26-59 3-4-3-3-4-13 26-61-26-71 3-4-14 26-60 4-1-1-4-1-5 34-21-34-25 4-1-7 34-1 4-2-1 32-5 4-2-2 32-1 4-2-3, 4-2-4 32-8, 32-9 4-2-5, 4-2-6 32-10 4-2-7-4-2-11 32-11-32-15 4-2-12, 4-2-13 32-7 4-2-14, 4-2-15 32-16, 32-17 4-2-16-4-2-19 32-4 4-2-20 32-3 4-2-21 32-2 4-2-22 32-6 5-1-1 38-1 5-2-1 16-26 5-2-2 16-25 5-2-3-5-2-17 16-28-16-42 5-2-18 16-27 5-3-1-5-3-3 16-1-16-3 6-1-11 101-26 6-1-21 2-254 6-1-31 2-255 105-1 6-1-33 105-2 6-4-26 12-59 6-4-28, 6-4-29 12-60, 12-61 6-4-32 12-62 6-4-201 105-25 6-4-202 105-23 6-4-202- 
6-4-205 105-26-105-29 6-4-206 105-24 6-7-1 109-1 6-7-2 109-3 6-7-3 109-2 6-7-4-6-7-7 109-49-109-52 6-7-8-6-7-14 109-78-109-84 6-7-15-6-7-20 109-112- 
109-117 6-7-21-6-7-24 109-148- 
109-151 6-7-25-6-7-32 109-171- 
109-178 6-7-33, 6-7-34 109-217, 
109-218 6-7-35, 6-7-36 109-179, 
109-180 6-7-37 109-219 6-7-38 109-181 6-7-39 109-219 6-7-40-6-7-46 109-182- 
109-188 6-7-47 109-221 6-7-48 109-189 6-7-49 109-222 6-7-50-6-7-52 109-274- 
109-276 6-7-53-6-7-55 109-253- 
109-255 6-7-71, 6-7-72 109-29, 109-30 6-7-73-6-7-76 109-25-109-28 6-7-78 101-51 6-7-79-6-7-81 101-54-101-56 6-7-82 101-52 6-7-83-6-7-87 101-65-101-69 6-7-89-6-7-91 101-62-101-64 6-7-92 101-57 6-7-93 101-61 6-7-94 101-53 6-7-95-6-7-97 101-58-101-60 6-8-1 103-66 6-8-2-6-8-5 103-68-103-71 6-8-6 103-46 6-9-1 38-56 6-9-2 38-61 6-9-3-6-9-11 38-167-38-175 6-9-12-6-9-18 38-53-38-59 6-9-19-6-9-23 38-81-38-85 6-9-24-6-9-32 38-114-38-122 6-9-33-6-9-39 38-143-38-149 6-9-40-6-9-43 109-319- 
109-322 6-9-44-6-9-56 109-348- 
109-360 6-9-57-6-9-59 109-379- 
109-381 8-1-1, 8-1-2 36-1, 36-2 8-1-4-8-1-6 36-3-36-5 8-2-1 36-6 8-2-6, 8-2-7 36-7, 36-8 8-2-8 36-10 8-3-1, 8-3-2 36-43, 36-44 8-3-4-8-3-6 36-45-36-47 8-4-3 28-123 8-5-1 36-70 8-5-1-8-5-6 36-73-36-78 8-5-7 36-72 8-5-8 36-71 9-1-1, 9-1-2 28-74, 28-75 9-1-4 28-76 9-1-5 28-21 9-1-6, 9-1-7 26-1, 26-2 9-1-8 28-22 9-1-9 28-50 9-1-10 28-1 9-1-11 28-96 9-1-12 28-23 9-1-13 28-97 9-1-14 36-12 9-2-1 26-23 9-2-3-9-2-6 26-24-26-27 9-3-1-9-3-7 6-1-6-7 9-3-7.1, 9-3-7.2 6-9, 6-10 9-3-8-9-3-10 6-41-6-43 9-3-12 6-11 9-3-13 6-8  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section Section 
this Code 38 12- 8-1977 36-43  6-21-1979(Res.) 2-254 48  7-17-1980 28-74 51 11-20-1980 6-1 6-5 6-7 6-41, 6-42 61  1-21-1982 26-1 62  2-18-1982 6-4 69 11-18-1982 36-5 70  3-17-1983 28-123 73  7-21-1983 28-76 75  8-18-1983 28-74 80 10-20-1983 28-75  4-19-1984(Res.) 2-255 90  6-21-1984 26-2 99  6-27-1985 28-75 100  6-27-1985 28-1 103  7-18-1985 36-7 107 10-17-1985 36-45 116  2-20-1986 36-7 119  5-12-1986 38-1 123  8-27-1986 28-50  9-24-1987(Ord.) 5-4 14-61 154 11-17-1988 6-1 90-15  9-27-1990 9-84 14-61 180 11- 2-1990 28-23 28-96, 28-97 207  1-17-1991 36-1 233  8- 5-1992 1, 2 6-9, 6-10 3 6-42 245  2-17-1993 16-25-16-31 16-33-16-43 261  3-16-1994 26-2 262  3-16-1994 26-1 295  4-19-1995 14-1 299 10- 4-1995 36-12 308  2-21-1996 101-26 321  5-15-1996 38-53-38-59 38-61 38-81-38-85 38-114-38-122 38-143-38-149 38-167-38-175 109-319-109-322 109-348-109-360 109-379-109-381 322  6-19-1996 16-1, 16-2 324  9-18-1996 36-1 331  2- 6-1997 36-8 332  2- 7-1997 36-46 337  3-20-1997 36-8 338  4- 3-1997 6-8 6-11 340  6- 3-1997 109-1-109-3 109-49-109-52 109-78-109-84 109-112-109-117 109-148-109-151 109-171-109-189 109-217-109-219 109-221, 109-222 109-253-109-255 109-274-109-276 356  6- 4-1998 16-38 357  6- 4-1998 36-10 385  5- 4-2000 36-70-36-78 394 11-16-2000 1 16-1-16-3 395 11-16-2000 105-1, 105-2 398  4- 5-2001 36-47 399  5- 1-2001 101-51-101-69 379  6- 4-2001 12-59-12-62 105-23-105-29 406  9- 6-2001 109-25-109-30 422  5- 1-2002 1 103-21 423  5- 1-2002 1(exh. A, app. A)- 105-265-105-267 1(exh. A, app. C) 1(exh. A) 105-119 1(exh. A, § 1-004), 105-217, 105-218 1(exh. A, § 1-005) 1(exh. A, § 1-006) 105-196 1(exh. A, § 1-007), 105-219, 105-220 1(exh. A, § 1-008) 1(exh. A, § 1-009), 105-169, 105-170 1(exh. A, § 1-010) 1(exh. A, § 1-011)- 105-251-105-260 1(exh. A, § 1-020) 1(exh. A, § 1-021) 105-123 1(exh. A, § 1-022) 105-221 1(exh. A, § 1-023) 105-261 1(exh. A, § 1-024), 105-194, 105-195 1(exh. A, § 1-025) 1(exh. A, § 1-026)- 105-262-105-264 1(exh. A, § 1-028) 1(exh. A, § 1-029) 105-150 1(exh. A, § 1-030) 105-124 1(exh. A, § 1-031) 105-149 1(exh. A, § 1-032)- 105-120-105-122 1(exh. A, § 1-034) 105-125 1(exh. A, § 1101), 105-121, 105-122 1(exh. A, § 1102) 1(exh. A, § 1103) 105-216 430 10-17-2002 I 36-47 440  6-19-2003 I 2-168 445  8-21-2003 1 2-46 467 11-18-2004 1(7-2-1) 22-397 1(7-2-3) 22-400 1(7-2-4) 22-399 1(7-2-5) 22-398 1(7-2-6) 22-433 1(7-2-7) 22-440 1(7-2-11)- 
1(7-2-14) 22-429-22-432 1(7-2-15)- 
1(7-2-20) 22-434-22-439 1(7-2-31)- 
1(7-2-33) 22-460-22-462 1(7-2-41) 22-493 1(7-2-43)- 
1(7-2-59) 22-494-22-510 1(7-2-61)- 
1(7-2-66) 22-511-22-516 1(7-5-1)-1(7-5-7) 22-221-22-227 1(7-6-1)-1(7-6-6) 22-541-22-546 1(7-8-1)-1(7-8-4) 22-1-22-4 1(7-9-1) 22-310 1(7-9-2)-(7-9-5) 22-311 1(7-9-6) 22-312 1(7-12-1) 22-345 1(7-12-2), 
1(7-12-3) 22-366, 22-367 1(7-12-5) 22-368 1(7-12-6) 22-346 1(7-12-8) 22-369 473  7-21-2005 1 30-6 475  8-18-2005 1(8-2-8) 36-11 480 12- 1-2005 1 12-20, 12-21 1(1) 12-22 1(2) 12-19 1(3)-1(7) 12-23-12-27 484  1-19-2006 8-2-7 36-9 485  2-14-2006 1(6-10-1), 
1(6-10-2) 105-300, 105-301 1(6-10-3) 105-298 1(6-10-5)- 
1(6-10-7) 105-303-105-305 1(6-10-8) 105-299 1(10-164) 105-302 487  5- 4-2006 I 36-47 488  5-18-2006 I 36-48 491 12- 7-2006 I 36-47 499  4-19-2007 8-5-1 36-70 8-5-1-8-5-6 36-73-36-78 8-5-7 36-72 8-5-8 36-71 500  5-17-2007 I(10-181), 
I(10-182) 107-2, 107-3 I(10-183) 107-1 I(10-184) 107-27 I(10-185), 
I(10-186) 107-60, 107-61 I(10-187) 107-28 I(10-188) 107-4 501  5-17-2007 1 18-20 504  6- 7-2007 1(6-10-1) 105-84 1(6-10-2) 105-87 1(6-10-3) 105-85 1(6-10-4) 105-88 105-92 1(6-10-5) 105-89 1(6-10-6) 105-94 1(6-10-7), 
1(6-10-8) 105-90, 105-91 1(6-10-9) 105-86 1(6-10-10) 105-93 1(6-10-11) 105-95 505  6- 7-2007 I(5-2-19(1)) 38-205 I(5-2-19(2)) 38-204 I(5-2-19(3))- 
I(5-2-19(5)) 38-208-38-210 I(5-2-19(6)) 38-207 I(5-2-19(7)) 38-206 2008-510  2-21-2008 1-4 4-163 2008-513  3-20-2008 1 101-26 2008-514  4- 3-2008 1 107-3 2-5 107-1 6 107-60 2008-517  5- 1-2008 1, 2 109-79, 109-80 3 109-149 4 105-196 522 10-16-2008 1 22-122 2 22-127 2008-520 10-16-2008 1(5-5-1) 38-22 1(5-5-2) 38-21 1(5-5-3)- 
1(5-5-12) 38-23-38-32 2008-523 11-20-2008 1 16-25 2009-002  2- 5-2009 1 20-5 2009-003  3-19-2009 1(5-2-20) 38-60 exhibits A, B 38-60 2009-005  4-16-2009 1 6-41 2009-006  5-21-2009 1(6-6-1), 1(6-6-2) 111-2, 111-3 1(6-6-3) 111-1 1(6-6-11) 111-57 1(6-6-12) 111-59 1(6-6-13) 111-32 1(6-6-14) 111-58 1(6-6-15) 111-5 1(6-6-21) 111-4 1(6-6-22) 111-31 1(6-6-23) 111-33 1(6-6-24, exhibit A) 111-6 1(6-6-31)- 
1(6-6-34) 111-77-111-80 1(6-6-41) 111-104 1(6-6-61)- 
1(6-6-66) 111-123-111-128 1(6-6-71)- 
1(6-6-79) 111-156-111-164 1(6-6-91) 111-34 2009-008  6-18-2009 1(8-2-1), 1(8-2-2) 34-56, 34-57 1(8-2-3) 34-54 1(8-2-4)-1(8-2-8) 34-79-34-83 1(8-2-9)- 
1(8-2-16) 34-110-34-117 1(8-2-17)- 
1(8-2-21) 34-150-34-154 1(8-2-22), 
1(8-2-23) 34-177, 34-178 1(8-2-24)- 
1(8-2-26) 34-210-34-212 1(8-2-27) 34-60 1(8-2-28) 34-55 1(8-2-30) 34-118 1(8-2-31) 34-59 1(8-2-32) 34-58 2009-09 12- 3-2009 20-6 2009-12 12- 3-2009 2-138 2010-01  1-21-2010 2-5 30-6 2010-03  7- 1-2010 IV 105-53 10-01 105-47 10-02 105-50 10-03 105-48 10-04, 10-05 105-56, 105-57 10-06 105-54 10-07 105-51 10-08 105-49 10-09 105-52 10-10 105-55 2010-09 11-18-2010 1 38-1 2011-02  1-20-2011 1 4-11 2 4-71 3 4-87 4 4-84 5(2-8-89) 4-162 6 4-3 7 4-163 2011-03  2-17-2011 1 28-51 2011-04  2-17-2011 7-4-1 22-581 7-4-2 22-583 7-4-3-7-4-6 22-606-22-609 7-4-7-7-4-9 22-611-22-613 7-4-10 22-610 7-4-11-7-4-20 22-636-22-645 7-4-21 22-640 7-4-22 22-582 2011-07  4- 7-2011 1 32-7 2011-08  5- 5-2011 1(7-7-1) 22-248 1(7-7-2)-1(7-7-4) 22-285-22-287 1(7-7-5) 22-249 1(7-7-6) 22-288 1(7-7-7) 22-252 1(7-7-8), 1(7-7-9) 22-250, 22-251 1(7-7-10), 
1(7-7-11) 22-253, 22-254 2011-09  5-19-2011 1 38-2 2011-11  5-19-2011 1       Added 38-3 2011-12  9- 1-2011 1       Added 10-1 2011-12-B 10- 6-2011       Added Adopt. ord., pg. xi 2011-14 12- 1-2011 1       Added 4-123 2012-08-A  7-19-2012 2       Added 24-11-24-18 2012-11  9-20-2012 1 38-60(b) 2 38-60(g)(1) 2013-03  2- 7-2013 1       Added 111-156(10) 2       Rpld 111-158(1)       Added 111-158(1) 3       Rpld 111-158(4)       Added 111-158(4) 4 111-160 5       Added 111-165 2013-04  3- 7-2013 1       Rpld 6-4       Added 6-4 2013-06  3- 7-2013 1 4-1 2       Rpld 4-74(5), (6)       Added 4-74(5), (6) 3       Rpld 4-76       Added 4-76 4       Rpld 4-94(4)       Added 4-94(4) 2013-07  3-21-2013 1       Rpld 36-70-36-78       Added 36-70-36-77 2013-14  6-20-2013 1 22-286 2013-15  6- 6-2013 1(Exh. A)       Added 16-60-16-97 2013-21 11- 7-2013 1 4-80(d) 2013-22 11-21-2013 1       Added 22-135, 22-136 2014-01  1- 2-2014       Added 109-223 2014-03  2- 6-2014 1-4       Added 38-225-38-227 2014-04  2-20-2014 1, 2 22-113 3 22-126 4 22-128 5       Dltd 22-132       Rnbd 22-133       as 22-132 2014-08 10- 2-2014 1       Dltd 22-135, 22-136 2       Added 22-135-22-139 2014-11 11- 6-2014 1 32-2(1) 2       Dltd 32-4(e) 2015-04  6-18-2015 1       Dltd 28-51 2015-05  8- 6-2015 1 38-226(c) 2 38-226(d)(1) 3 38-227(a) 4 38-227(a)(3) 5-8       Added 38-228-38-231 2015-07 10- 1-2015 Exh. A Ch. 113 2016-02  5-17-2016 1 113-161 2016-03 10- 6-2016 1 105-48 2016-04 12- 1-2016 1       Rpld 34-46       Added 34-46 2 34-47 2017-01  5- 4-2017 1 113-190(b)(46), (61) 2       Added 113-198(b)(12), (33), (52) 2017-02  5- 4-2017 1       Rpld 113-128(b)(10), (11), (13), (19) 2       Rpld 113-128(a)(42), (47) 3       Added 113-128(a)(54), (64), (103) 4       Added 113-128(b)(8) 2017-03  5- 4-2017 1       Rpld 113-129(b)(15) 2       Rpld 113-129(a)(27), (36) 3       Added 113-129(a)(27) 4       Added 113-129(b)(15), (18), (21), (29) 2017-05  7- 6-2017 1 113-130(a)       Added (14)       Rnbd (14)-(31)       as (15)-(32) 2017-06  7- 6-2017 1 113-133(f)(3)e. 2 113-155(b) 2017-07  7- 6-2017 1 113-190(b)(26) 2017-08 11- 2-2017 1 113-128(c)(4) 2017-09 11- 2-2017 1 113-62(2) 2018-02  2-15-2018 1       Rpld 6-2       Added 6-2 2018-03  4-19-2018 1 16-1 2018-06  5-17-2018 1       Added 113-136 2018-07  5-17-2018 1 113-2 2       Added 113-128(b)(5)       Rnbd 113-128(b)(5)-(16)       as 113-128(b)(6)-(18) 3       Rpld 113-129(a)(9) 113-129(b)(4),(9), (19), (27)       Rnbd 113-129(b)(1)-(29)       as 113-129(b)(1)-(25)       Added 113-129(b)(4), (5)       Rnbd 113-129(b)(4)-(25)       as 113-129(b)(6)-(27)       Added 113-129(b)(10), (11)       Rnbd 113-129(b)(10)-(27)       as 113-129(b)(12)-(29)       Added 113-129(b)(29)       Rnbd 113-129(b)(29)       as 113-129(b)(30) 4       Rpld 113-130(b)(4), (11), (12), (16)       Rnbd 113-130(b)(5)-(19)       as 113-130(b)(4)-(15)       Added 113-130(b)(6)-(8)       Rnbd 113-130(b)(6)-(18)       as 113-130(b)(9)-(16)       Added 113-130(b)(10), (11)       Rnbd 113-130(b)(10)-(19)       as 113-130(b)(12)-(20)       Added 113-130(b)(18)       Rnbd 113-130(b)(18)-(20)       as 113-130(b)(19)-(21) 5 113-190(10) 6 113-190(49) 7       Added 113-190(b)(22)       Rnbd 113-130(b)(22)-(64)       as 113-130(b)(23)-(65) 8       Added 113-190(b)(23)       Rnbd 113-130(b)(22)-(65)       as 113-130(b)(24)-(66) 9       Added 113-190(b)(63)       Rnbd 113-130(b)(63)-(66)       as 113-130(b)(64)-(67)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
O.C.G.A. 
Section Section 

this Code 1-3-3 38-1 105-56 2-10-105 22-125 tit. 3 4-2 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 4 3-1-2 4-1 3-3-2 et seq. Ch. 4 3-3-7 4-162 3-3-20 4-11 3-3-21 4-80 3-3-22 4-15 3-3-23 4-5 28-97 3-3-24 4-6 3-3-29 4-4 3-4-1 et seq. Ch. 4, Art. V 3-4-50 4-71 3-4-110 4-2 4-143 3-4-130 4-41 3-5-40 4-2 3-5-42 4-2 3-5-43 4-71 3-5-80 et seq. 4-40 3-6-40 4-2 3-6-60 et seq. 4-40 3-7-60 4-41 3-9-10 et seq. 4-148 4-1-1 et seq. Ch. 6 4-6-71(a)(3) 36-2 4-8-21 et seq. 6-8 4-11-9.6 6-41, 6-42 4-11-15.1 6-6 4-12-1-4-12-3 22-251 4-12-8 22-251 tit. 5, ch. 4 4-163 107-28 5-4-1 et seq. 4-163 107-28 7-1-730 et seq. 22-91 8-2-1 Ch. 103 8-2-1 et seq. Ch. 103, Art. II, 
Div. 2 8-2-3 103-103, 
103-104 8-2-3(b) 103-101 8-2-3(c) 103-104 8-2-3(e) 103-105 8-2-20 et seq. Ch. 103, Art. II 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)- 
(VIII) 103-19 8-2-25(a) 103-19 tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2 105-56 12-2-8 105-57 12-4-72 105-56 12-5-7(a) 38-1 12-5-20 105-48 12-5-23(a)(5) 105-54 12-5-27.1 12-60 12-5-30(f) 105-48 105-57 12-5-440 et seq. 105-48 ch. 12-7 105-48 12-7-1 et seq. Ch. 105, Art. III 105-57 12-7-2 105-50 12-7-3 105-48 12-7-4 Ch. 105, 
Art. III 12-7-6 105-56, 105-57 12-7-6(b) 105-56 12-7-6(b), 
12-7-6(c) 105-57 12-7-7 et seq. 105-55 12-7-7(e) 105-51 12-7-7(f)(1) 105-54 12-7-7.1 105-56 12-7-8(a) 105-48 105-51 105-54 12-7-12 et seq. 105-49 12-7-15(b)(1) 105-52 12-7-17 105-56 12-7-17(9), (10) 105-54 12-7-19(b)(4) 105-52 12-7-20 105-52 12-7-20 105-54 12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 32 12-8-24 16-38 tit. 15, ch. 6, art. 2 109-114 tit. 15, ch. 18, art. 5 24-11 15-2-20 et seq. 16-26 15-5-20 et seq. 105-56 15-6-50 et seq. 109-114 15-18-22 24-17 15-18-96 24-16 15-21-90 et seq. 1-7 16-5-71 16-60 16-5-71.1 16-60 16-7-20 et seq. 28-21 16-7-40 et seq. 32-10 16-7-43 111-6 16-7-50 et seq. 32-10 16-7-51(6) 32-1 16-7-58 28-22 111-6 16-7-100 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. III 16-8-1 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. II 16-8-14 28-23 16-11-1 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. IV 16-11-125.1 et seq. 28-50 16-11-173 28-50 16-12-1 et seq. Ch. 28, Art. V 16-12-4 6-5 16-12-5 16-60 16-12-35(b)-(f) 22-310 16-13-2 28-96 17-6-11 4-5 20-5-20 et seq. Ch. 20 tit. 21 Char. § 5.101 Char. § 5.103 21-2-1 et seq. Ch. 8 21-2-212(c) Char. § 5.101 21-2-260 8-1 tit. 22 Char. § 1.104 Char. § 7.105 22-1-8 Char. § 1.104 22-2-21 Char. § 1.104 25-1-1 et seq. Ch. 14 25-9-3(18) 38-226 25-9-6 34-154 tit. 31 16-97 tit. 31, ch. 3 16-25 tit. 31, ch. 5 16-27 16-60 16-97 31-1-1 et seq. Ch. 16 31-3-1 et seq. 16-25 31-3-5 16-28 31-3-5.2 38-1 31-5-1 et seq. 16-27 31-5-1 16-70 16-88 16-97 tit. 31, ch. 9 16-91 tit. 31, ch. 40 16-60 16-86 16-90 31-40-4 16-70 16-88 31-40-1(1) 16-63 tit. 32 Char. § 1.104 Char. § 7.105 32-4-90 et seq. Ch. 34 32-4-92(10) 34-56 32-6-51 111-6 32-80-60 et seq. Char. § 6.204 33-3-5 22-135 22-138 33-8-4 22-137 22-138 33-8-8-33-8-8.6 22-125 33-8-8.1 22-137 33-8-8.2 22-138 35-8-1 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. II 18-22 tit. 36 Char. § 6.215 tit. 36, ch. 62 2-255 tit. 36, ch. 67A 113-61 tit. 36, ch. 71 101-64 36-18-1 105-56 36-32-1 et seq. Ch. 24 36-32-6 28-96 36-32-9 28-23 36-32-10 28-97 36-32-10.2 24-2 36-34-2 Ch. 2, Art. III 36-34-2(7) Ch. 22, Art. III, 
Ch. 22, Art. IV 36-35-3 34-56 36-35-4 2-21 36-35-23(a) 107-2 36-38-1 Ch. 2, Art. V 36-60-4 26-1 36-60-17 38-174 36-62-1 et seq. 2-255 36-66-1 et seq. Ch. 113 36-71-1 et seq. Ch. 101, Art. III 101-51 101-64 36-71-2 101-52 36-71-2(8) 22-113 36-71-3, 36-71-4 101-65, 101-66 36-71-4(g) 101-52 36-71-4(l) 101-57 36-71-7 101-68 36-71-10, 
36-71-11 101-62, 101-63 36-71-13 101-64 36-80-19 1-1 36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 36-81-3 2-223 36-82-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 36-85-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. II tit. 40, ch. 6 36-1 40-1-1 36-1 40-1-1 et seq. Ch. 36 40-5-100- 
40-5-104 4-5 28-51 40-6-1 et seq. 36-1 40-6-200 et seq. Ch. 36, Art. II 40-6-320 et seq. Ch. 36, Art. III 40-6-330 et seq. Ch. 36, Art. III 40-6-360 et seq. Ch. 36, Art. III 40-6-370, 40-6-371 Ch. 36 40-6-371(a)(1) Ch. 36, Art. II 40-6-372- 
40-6-376 36-1 40-11-1 et seq. 26-2 41-1-1 et seq. Ch. 26 41-1-6 26-27 41-2-1 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. II 41-2-8 et seq. Ch. 26, Art. III 41-2-17 Ch. 26, Art. III tit. 43 22-130 tit. 43, ch. 34 16-91 43-8-1(3) 22-310 43-12-1 22-125 43-24A-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VIII 43-24A-22 Ch. 22, Art. VIII 43-32-1 22-251 44-12-130 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IX 44-12-136 Ch. 22, Art. IX tit. 45 Char. § 5.103 45-9-21 2-139 tit. 46, ch. 3 22-125 46-3-1 et seq. 22-125 22-165 22-167 46-5-1 22-191 46-5-1(b)(8), (9) 22-190 46-5-134.2 10-1 46-5-134.2(a)(4) 10-1 46-5-134.2(d)(2) 10-1 46-5-134.2(f) 10-1 46-5-134.2(j)(1) 10-1 46-5-134.2(j)(5) 10-1 46-7-15 22-125 tit. 48, ch. 6, art. 4 22-90 tit. 48, ch. 8 10-1 48-5-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II, 
Div. 2 48-5-355, 
48-5-356 22-125 48-6-90 et seq. 22-90 48-6-93 22-125 48-6-93(d) 22-92 48-6-95, 48-6-96 22-91 48-7-31(d)(2) 22-91 48-13-5 22-113 48-13-5 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II, Div. 4 48-13-5- 
48-13-26 22-120 48-13-6, 48-13-7 22-118 48-13-7 22-119 22-121 48-13-10 22-121 48-13-10(e) 22-122 48-13-10(g) 22-123 48-13-13(3) 22-124 48-13-20 22-126 22-128 48-13-21 22-126 22-128 48-13-55 22-125 49-13-16 22-125 50-14-1 et seq. 2-46 50-18-99 2-274  
