THE CODE OF WOODSTOCK, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2004 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
____________ 
 
> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WOODSTOCK, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Donnie Henriques 
Mayor 
____________ 
Warren Johnson - Ward 1 
Chris Casdia - Ward 2 
Bob Mueller - Ward 3 
Liz Baxter - Ward 4 
Bud Leonard - Ward 5 
Rob Usher - Ward 6 
City Council 
____________ 
Jeffrey S. Moon 
City Manager 
____________ 
Eldon Basham 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Rhonda Pezzello 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1989 Code, as supplemented through December 16, 2002, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1989 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Brad Christy, Code Attorney, and Sharon Allbritton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Rhonda L. Pezzello, City Clerk, Patricia Quigley, City Manager, and Eldon Basham, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodstock, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 2004. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF WOODSTOCK, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN: PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of the City of Woodstock, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 98, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 13, 2004, not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, and as an alternative to fine or imprisonment, to sentence any offender upon the conviction to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares or other public works for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after April 13, 2004, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. Chapter 50—Land Development Ordinance is not part of this codification as it will be codified separately. 
Section 8. This ordinance shall be effective September 14, 2005. 
Passed and adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia on the 13 th day of September, 2005. 
      William E. Dewrell, Mayor 	
 	 
Attest: 
      Rhonda L. Pezzello, City Clerk 	
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS  
Subpart A - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this part is the city's Charter as set forth in 1975 Ga. Laws (Act No.393), page 4160. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CREATION, INCORPORATION, POWERS 
 
Section 1.10. - Incorporation. 
The City of Woodstock, Georgia, in the County of Cherokee, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. Under that name, said city shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the corporation; shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with, may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will and may exercise in conformity with this charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever.  
Section 1.11. - Corporate Boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of the City of Woodstock shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The current boundaries of the City of Woodstock at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof to be retained permanently in the office of the City of Woodstock and to be designated, as the case may be: "Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia." Alterations in these boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entries upon or additions to such map or description. Such entries or additions shall be made by and under the direction of the mayor. Photographic, typed or other copies of such map or description certified by the mayor and council shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and shall have the same form and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(c)  The corporate boundaries of the City of Woodstock shall further include the following tracts or parcels of land: All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in land lots 1208 and 1241 of the 15th District, 2nd Section, Cherokee County, Georgia, and being sixty (60) acres, more or less, and being more particularly described as all of land lot 1208 of the 15th District, 2nd Section, Cherokee County, Georgia, being forty (40) acres more or less, and the north one-half of land lot 1241 of the 15th District, 2nd Section, being twenty (20) acres, more or less. 
(d)  The corporate boundaries of the City of Woodstock shall further include the following tracts or parcels of land: 
(1)  All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 15th District, 2nd Section, Cherokee County, Georgia, being a portion of original Land Lot Nos. 807, 808 and 850 and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING in the original Southeast corner of Land Lot No. 807, said point also being the common land lot corner of Land Lot Nos. 807, 808, 850 and 849; thence along the original land lot line on the East side of Land Lot No. 850 South 00 degrees 50 minutes 40 seconds West a distance of 1,158.12 feet to an iron pin; thence leaving the aforesaid land lot line and along and adjacent to an existing barbed wire fence the following courses and distances: North 57 degrees 40 minutes 30 seconds West a distance of 139.13 feet; North 67 degrees 56 minutes 30 seconds West a distance of 727.77 feet; North 53 degrees 40 minutes 20 seconds West a distance of 165.30 feet; North 62 degrees 23 minutes 50 seconds West a distance of 215.27 feet; North 51 degrees 06 minutes 45 seconds West a distance of 248.88 feet to an iron pin, said iron pin being located on the original land lot line on the West side of Land Lot No. 850; thence along the original land lot line on the West side of Land Lot No. 850 North 01 degrees 40 minutes 10 seconds East a distance of 404.74 feet to an iron pin; thence continuing along the original land lot line on the West side of Land Lot No. 807 North 01 degrees 41 minutes 40 seconds West a distance of 670.82 feet to an iron pin; thence leaving said land lot line South 89 degrees 52 minutes 15 seconds East a distance of 331.90 feet to a concrete monument; thence North 01 degrees 41 minutes 40 seconds West a distance of 671.79 [feet] to an iron pin; thence South 89 degrees 52 minutes 15 seconds East a distance of 500.02 feet to an iron pin located on the Southwesterly right-of-way of the L & N Railroad (100-foot right-of-way); thence along said right-of-way in a Southwesterly and Southerly direction a distance of 1,606.49 feet to an iron pin; thence leaving said right-of-way North 89 degrees 28 minutes 05 seconds West a distance of 806.62 feet to an iron pin, said iron pin being located on the original land lot line on the East side of Land Lot No. 807; thence along said original land lot line South 00 degr ees 28 minutes 30 seconds West a distance of 488.93 feet to the point of beginning. 
Said tract containing 64.71 acres and being more particularly shown on [a] plat of survey prepared by Martin-Adams & Associates, registered surveyors, dated February 18, 1982. 
(2)  All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the 15th District, 2nd Section, Cherokee County, Georgia, being a portion of original Land Lot Nos. 808 and 849 and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING in the original Southwest corner of Land Lot No. 808, said point also being the common land lot corner of Land Lot Nos. 807, 808, 850 and 849; thence along the original land lot line on the West side of Land Lot No. 808 North 00 degrees 28 minutes 30 seconds East a distance of 488.93 feet to a rock painted blue; thence leaving said land lot line South 89 degrees 28 minutes 05 seconds East a distance of 806.62 feet to an iron pin, said iron pin being located on the Westerly right-of-way of L & N Railroad (100-foot right-of-way); thence along the Westerly right-of-way of L & N Railroad in a Southerly and Southwesterly direction a distance of 2,019.52 feet to an iron pin; thence leaving the aforesaid right-of-way North 55 degrees 44 minutes West a distance of 154.92 feet to an iron pin; thence continuing North 56 degrees 10 minutes West a distance of 298.75 feet to an iron pin, said iron pin being located on the original land lot line on the West side of Land Lot No. 849; thence along the original land lot line on the West side of Land Lot No. 849 North 00 degrees 50 minutes 40 seconds East a distance of 1,158.12 feet to the point of beginning. 
Said tract containing 30.52 acres and being designated as Tract III on [a] plat of survey prepared by Martin-Adams & Associates, registered surveyors, dated February 18, 1982. 
(3)  All that tract or parcel of land situated, lying and being in the 15th District and 2nd Section of Cherokee County, Georgia, being all of Land Lots 706 and 707 and part of Land Lots 708, 734, 735, and 779, containing 175.46 acres, more or less. All of said property is more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING at the northwest corner of Land Lot 708 and from said point of beginning running thence due east, along the north line of Land Lots 708, 707 and 706, 61.71 chains to the northeast corner of Land Lot 706; thence due south, along the east line of Land Lot 706, 17.06 chains; thence South 01 degree 00 minutes West, 2.41 chains; thence South 00 degrees 30 minutes West, 2 chains; thence South 00 degrees 30 minutes East, 2 chains; thence due South, along the east line of Land Lot 735, 10 chains; thence due West 20 chains to a point on the West line of Land Lot 735; thence due South, along the East lines of Land Lots 734 and 779, 19.05 chains; thence due West 5 chains; thence due North 10.58 chains, to a point on the South line of Land Lot 734; thence due West, along the South line of Land Lot 734, 11.22 chains; thence due North 10 chains; thence due West 5 chains; thence due North 10 chains; thence due East 1.52 chains to the southwest corner of Land Lot 707; thence due North, along the West line of Land Lot 707, 11 chains; thence due West 21.52 chains to a point on the West line of Land Lot 708; thence due North, along the West line of Land Lot 708, 10.5 chains to the point of beginning. 
Less and except the following described parcel being the right-of-way for I-575: 
Being a tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 708 of the 15th Land District, Cherokee County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at a point lying 200 feet left, northwest of, and opposite Project Number I-575-1(1)07 Phase 2 Survey Centerline Station 711 + 32.87, said point being a point on the existing west property line between the grantor and lands now or formerly owned by UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: thence northeasterly along a straight line lying 200 feet left, northwest of, and parallel to Project Number I-575-1(1)07 Phase 2 Survey Centerline a distance [of] 520.87 feet to a point lying 200 feet left, northwest of, and opposite Project Number I-575-1(1)07 Phase 2 Survey Centerline Station 716 + 53.74, said point being a point on the existing north property line between the grantor and lands now or formerly owned by W. J. MILLWOOD; thence easterly along said property line, which follows a straight line, a combined distance of 294.86 feet to a point lying 35.13 feet right, southeast of, and opposite Project Number I-575-1(1)07 Phase 2 Survey Centerline Station 718 + 31.66, said point being a point on the existing north property line between the grantor and lands now or formerly owned by BILL KOWITZ; thence easterly along said property line, which follows a straight line, a distance of 206.33 feet to a point lying 200 feet right, southeast of, and opposite Project Number I-575-1(1)07 Phase 2 Survey Centerline Station 719 + 54.01; thence southwesterly along a curved line lying 200 feet right, southeast of, and parallel to Project Number I-575-1(1)07 Phase 2 Survey Centerline an arc distance of 63.03 feet to a point lying 200 feet right, southeast of, and opposite Project Number I-575-1(1)07 Phase 2 Survey Centerline Station 718 + 93.13; thence southwesterly along a straight line lying 200 feet right, southeast of, and parallel to Project Number I-575-1(1)07 Phase 2 Survey Centerline a distance of 802.53 feet to a point lying 200 feet right, southeast of, and opposite Project Number I-575-1(1)07 Phase 2 Survey Centerline Station 710 + 90.61, said point being a point on the existing south property line between the grantor and lands now or formerly owned by UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: thence westerly along said property line, which follows a straight line, a combined distance of 291.64 feet to a point lying 31.98 feet left, northwest of, and opposite Project Number I-575-1(1)07 Phase 2 Survey Centerline Station 713 + 39.70, said point being a point on the existing west property line between the grantor and lands now or formerly owned by UNITED STATES OF AMERICA; thence northerly along said property line, which follows a straight line, a distance of 276.56 feet back to the point of beginning. 
Said tract or parcel of land containing 7.292 acres and being bound on the north by lands now or formerly owned by W. J. MILLWOOD and by lands now or formerly owned by BILL KOWITZ; on the northwest and southeast by other lands of the grantor; and on the south and west by lands now or formerly owned by UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. 
(4)  All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 1133, 1134, 1171 and 1172 of the 15th District, 2nd Section, Cherokee County, Georgia, as per plat of survey by Gaskins Surveying Company dated December 4, 1985, being more particularly described as follows: 
Commencing at a steel post located on the south line of Land Lot 1133, said steel post being located 66.2 feet easterly from the southwest corner of Land Lot 1133; from said steel post and point of beginning; thence south 85 degrees 18 minutes 45 seconds east a distance of 106.91 feet to an iron pin; thence south 02 degrees 56 minutes 06 seconds east a distance of 405.97 feet to an iron pin; thence south 20 degrees 37 minutes 57 seconds east a distance of 229.72 feet to an iron pin; thence south 76 degrees 41 minutes 04 seconds west a distance of 489.97 feet to an iron pin; thence north 21 degrees 08 minutes 10 seconds west a distance of 200.40 feet to an iron pin; thence north 55 degrees 04 minutes 57 seconds west a distance of 134.57 feet to an iron pin; thence south 54 degrees 46 minutes 31 seconds west a distance of 108.03 feet to an iron pin; thence south 30 degrees 49 minutes 31 seconds west a distance of 108.93 feet to an iron pin; thence south 32 degrees 34 minutes 11 seconds west a distance of 49.72 feet to an iron pin; thence south 65 degrees 39 minutes 29 seconds west a distance of 49.98 feet to an iron pin; thence north 52 degrees 13 minutes 16 seconds west a distance of 49.88 feet to an iron pin; thence north 24 degrees 00 minutes 46 seconds west a distance of 193.49 feet to an iron pin; thence north 55 degrees 40 minutes 19 seconds west a distance of 110.81 feet to an iron pin; thence south 84 degrees 58 minutes 28 seconds west a distance of 84.60 feet to an iron pin; thence north 5 degrees 39 minutes 11 seconds west a distance of 494.30 feet to an iron pin; thence north 10 degrees 21 minutes 36 seconds west a distance of 733.50 feet to an iron pin; thence north 10 degrees 21 minutes 36 seconds west a distance of 147.98 feet to an iron pin; thence south 88 degrees 39 minutes 41 seconds east a distance of 566.60 feet to an iron pin; thence south 11 degrees 03 minutes 51 seconds east a distance of 148.39 feet to an iron pin; thence south 11 degrees 03 minutes 51 seconds east a distance of 205.21 feet to an iron pin; thence south 88 degrees 14 minutes 54 seconds east a distance of 844.53 feet to an iron pin located on the westerly right-of-way of Neese Road; thence south 36 degrees 28 minutes 21 seconds east a distance of 85.92 feet to an iron pin, thence south 34 degrees 19 minutes 24 seconds east a distance of 112.58 feet to an iron pin; thence south 27 degrees 28 minutes 12 seconds east a distance of 98.16 feet to an iron pin; thence north 80 degrees 57 minutes 06 seconds west a distance of 301.05 feet to an iron pin; thence north 0 degrees 14 minutes 40 seconds east a distance of 14.06 feet to an iron pin; thence north 84 degrees 52 minutes 50 seconds west a distance of 232.39 feet to an iron pin; thence south 09 degrees 01 minutes 38 seconds east a distance of 376.36 feet to an iron pin, the same being located at the point of beginning. Said property being shown on said plat of survey as 33.23 acres of land. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the following property is deannexed and excluded from the corporate limits of the City of Woodstock: 
ALL THAT TRACT or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 1218 and 1159 of the 15th District, 2nd Section, Cherokee County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
BEGINNING AT AN IRON PIN FOUND AT THE INTERSECTION OF THE southwestern right-of-way of Georgia Highway #92 and the east Land Lot Line of Land Lot 1218, said District and Section; running thence south 01 degrees 31 minutes 16 seconds west along the east Land Lot Line of Land Lot 1218, 470.81 feet to an iron pin; thence north 68 degrees 08 minutes 03 seconds west 218.42 feet to an iron pin; thence north 04 degrees 01 minutes 41 seconds west 205.74 feet to an iron pin; thence North 35 degrees 55 minutes 26 seconds west 352.93 feet to a point on the south side of Georgia Highway #92; thence easterly and southeasterly along the southerly and southwesterly side of Georgia Highway #92, 450.0 feet to an iron pin found and the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(f)  Any property contained within any annexation ordinance which has been adopted by the City Council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
(1985 Ga. Laws (Act No. 128), page 3869, § 1; 1986 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), page 4004, § 1; 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 813), page 5598, § 1)  
Section 1.12. - Powers Defined. 
(a)  The government of the City of Woodstock shall have all rights, powers, privileges and authority herein conferred or herein enlarged and such other powers as may be necessary or desirable including all rights, powers, privileges and authority, whether expressed or implied, that may now or hereafter be granted to municipal corporations by the Constitution of Georgia and laws of this State. 
(b)  The rights, powers, privileges and authority heretofore enjoyed, herein retained or herein claimed shall subsist, notwithstanding the repeal of any law, until any such rights, powers, privileges or authority be altered or taken away by amendment to this charter. 
(c)  The city, in addition to the rights, powers, privileges and authority expressly conferred upon it by this charter, shall have the right, power, privilege and authority to exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, morals, and general welfare of said government and its inhabitants, and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein and to do and perform all of the acts pertaining to its local affairs, property and government, which are necessary or proper in the legitimate exercise of its corporate powers and governmental functions. 
(d)  No enumeration of any right, power, privilege or authority hereinafter made, and no repeal of any law under which the government derives any right, power, privilege or authority, shall be construed as limiting or abolishing any right, power, privilege or authority hereinabove set forth.  
Section 1.13. - Specific Powers. 
The corporate powers of the government of the City of Woodstock to be exercised by the governing authority, may include the following: 
(1)  To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(2)  To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions; to license and regulate such privileges, occupations, trades and professions; and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; 
(3)  To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city; to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(5)  To acquire, dispose of and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal or mixed property in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(6)  To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(7)  To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under Section 36-262 of the Code of Georgia, 1933 [now repealed], or under other applicable Public Acts as are or may be enacted; 
(8)  To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewer and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same and the manner to which such remedies shall be enforced; 
(9)  To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services not to exceed periods of 20 years; to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with such regulations by the Public Service Commission; 
(10)  To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of and light roads, alleys and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; 
(11)  To grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; 
(12)  To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals and charitable, cultural, educational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use thereof; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Section 36-262 of the Code of Georgia, 1933 [now repealed], or other applicable Public Acts as are or may be enacted; 
(13)  To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(14)  To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas and heating and air-conditioning codes and to regulate all housing, building and building trades; to license all building trades and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures; 
(15)  To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots and public disturbances; 
(16)  To regulate or prohibit junk dealers; pawnshops; the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the use and sale of firearms; and to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials; the use of lighting and heating equipment; and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; 
(17)  To regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; 
(18)  To license, tax, regulate or prohibit professional fortune telling or palmistry; 
(19)  To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(20)  To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(21)  To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(22)  To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(23)  To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(24)  To provide for or regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collecting and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper and other recyclable materials; and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(25)  To regulate or to levy, fix, assess and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(26)  To levy a fee, charge or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a sewer service charge, fee or sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; 
(27)  To charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees, and to change the same from time to time, such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; 
(28)  To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(29)  To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement, whether on public or private property; 
(30)  To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(31)  To establish minimum standards for and to regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing and housing for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(32)  To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court shall work out such sentence in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares in the city, or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(33)  To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of loitering, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness and disturbing the peace in the corporate limits of the city; to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein; to prohibit or regulate by ordinance such other conduct and activities within said city which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this State, are deemed by the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the city or to the welfare of the citizens thereof; 
(34)  To regulate and license or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl; to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also, to provide for their disposition by sale, gift or humane destruction when not redeemed, as provided by ordinance; to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(35)  To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city; 
(36)  To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; 
(37)  To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(38)  To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefor; 
(39)  To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city, and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(40)  To make, ordain and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order and good government of the city; 
(41)  To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(42)  To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen; 
(43)  To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city; and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city; and 
(44)  To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia.  
Section 1.14. - General Powers. 
In addition to all other powers herein granted, the city shall be vested with any and all powers which municipal corporations are or may hereafter be authorized or required to exercise under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein, and any and all powers which the city was heretofore authorized to exercise upon the effective date of this charter.  
Section 1.15. - Construction. 
The powers of the city shall be construed liberally and in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the city, as stated in this charter. It is the intention hereof to grant the city full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the city and all of its affairs.  
Section 1.16. - Exercise of Powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies or employees shall be carried into execution, as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities shall be carried into execution, as provided by ordinances of the governing authority and as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia.  
Section 1.17. - Ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the governing authority.  
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNING BODY 
 
Section 2.10. - Legislative Branch; Creation; Composition; Number; Election. 
The legislative authority of the government of the City of Woodstock, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six councilmen. The mayor and councilmen shall be elected in the manner provided by Article V of this charter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.11. - Terms and qualification of office. 
The members of the council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor unless he has been a resident of the city for a period of one year immediately prior to the date of the election for mayor. No person shall be eligible to serve as a councilman unless he has been a resident of the ward for which he is offering as a candidate for a period of one year immediately preceding the date of the election for councilmen. The person elected to serve as mayor shall continue to reside in the city and each person elected to serve as councilman shall continue to reside in the ward from which elected during their respective terms of office. The mayor and each councilman shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Woodstock and each of them shall meet the qualification standards required for members of the Georgia House of Representatives, as are now or may in the future be prescribed by the Georgia Constitution. 
(1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 4815, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-541.1, terms for all municipal officers, the term of office is four years unless otherwise provided by local law.  
Section 2.12. - Vacancy; Forfeiture of Office; Filling of Vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Forfeiture of Office. The mayor or any councilman shall forfeit his office if he: (1) lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; (2) wilfully and knowingly violates any express prohibition of this charter; or (3) is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(c)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or council shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by the call of a special election to fill said unexpired term, if any, pursuant to chapter 3 of title 21, known as the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
(1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 601), page 3641, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008) 
Editor's note— O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 3, has been repealed and replaced by O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.) the Georgia Election Code (see O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1).  
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and Expenses. 
The mayor may receive as compensation for his or her services an amount of not more than $1,200.00 per month. Each city council member may receive as compensation for his or her services an amount of not more than $950.00 per month. The mayor and council members shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2016) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Nov. 14, 2016 repealed the former § 2.13, and enacted a new § 2.13 as set out herein. The former § 2.13 pertained to composition and expenses and derived from Ord. No. 2008-002, adopted Mar. 10, 2008.  
Section 2.14. - Inquiries and Investigations. 
Upon the affirmative vote of at least three members fo the council, or in the event of a tie, the mayor and three council members, the council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished, as provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.15. - General Power and Authority of the Council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or by this charter, the council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Woodstock, as provided by Article 1. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations not inconsistent with this charter, the Constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia which it shall deem necessary, expedient or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Woodstock and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)  The council may by ordinance create, change, alter, abolish or consolidate officers, agencies and departments of the city and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies and departments expressly provided for by this charter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.16. - Election of the mayor; vacancy. 
The mayor shall be elected by city election and his term of office shall be for four years. In the case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the governing authority shall thereupon call a special election to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 3, known as the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
(1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 601), page 3641, § 2; 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 364), page 4837, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008) 
Editor's note— The Georgia Municipal Election Code has been replaced by the Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-541.1 and the charter amendment to section 5.10, the mayor's office is four years.  
Section 2.17. - Duties of Mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(a)  preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(b)  be the official head of the city for the service of process and for ceremonial purposes; 
(c)  have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; and 
(d)  sign all written contracts entered into by the council on behalf of the city and all other contracts and instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.17A. - Mayor's veto power. 
(a)  Every ordinance adopted by the city council shall be presented promptly by the council to the mayor. 
(b)  The mayor shall have the right to veto any ordinance that was approved by the council by the affirmative vote of three members and the negative vote of zero members or the affirmative vote of three members and the negative vote of one member, unless all councilmembers were present at the meeting at which said ordinance was approved. 
(c)  The mayor, within ten calendar days of receipt of an ordinance subject to a veto, shall return it to the council with or without the mayor's approval. If the ordinance has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the council. If the ordinance is neither approved or disapproved, it shall become law at 12:00 Noon on the tenth calendar day after its adoption. If the ordinance is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council a written statement of the mayor's reasons for the veto. The council shall record upon the ordinance the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(d)  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be considered by the council at its next meeting and, should the city council then or at its next general meeting adopt the ordinance by the affirmative vote of at least three members, it shall become law and shall not be subject to any further veto by the mayor. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 550), page 3569, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.18. - Limitation on Terms of Service. 
Repealed, internally omitted. 
(1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 364), page 4837, § 2; 1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 550), page 3569, § 3; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.19. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tem, or in his absence or disability for any reason, any one of the council members chosen by the council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor, and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.30. - Organization Meeting. 
The council shall meet for organization on a date set by the mayor and council, running concurrently for two years. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor or mayor pro-tem and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will well and truly perform the duties of (mayor or councilman, as the case may be) of the city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Following the induction of members, the council, by majority vote of all the members thereof, shall elect one of their number to be mayor pro tem, who shall serve for a term of one year and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.31. - Regular and Special Meetings. 
(a)  The council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meetings on any weekday or hour it may fix and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(b)  Special meetings of the council may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members as provided by ordinance. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members present. With such consent, any business which may be transacted in a regular meeting may be conducted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the council shall be public and shall be held in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-1 through 50-14-6 as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.32. - Rules of Procedure. 
The council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.33. - Quorum; Voting. 
Four elected officials shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the council. As an elected official, the mayor counts as one of the four elected officials to consitute a quorum. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal but any members of the council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. The affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter; provided, however, that the affirmative vote of five councilmembers shall be required to exercise the power or eminent domain within the corporate boundaries of the city. In the event of a tie vote on any question, the mayor shall cast a vote to break the tie, thus provided a quorum is present, the mayor's vote to break a 1-1 or 2-2 vote shall be sufficient to pass or fail a motion. 
(2006 Ga. Laws, (Act No. 875), § 1; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.34. - Action Requiring an Ordinance. 
(a)  Except as herein provided, every official action of the Council which is to become law shall be by ordinance. Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Woodstock hereby ordains…." 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the council and read at a regular or special meeting of the council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, ordinances, except emergency ordinances and zoning ordinances as said terms are defined in Section 2.35 of the City Charter, shall not be adopted until the next regular meeting of the council following the meeting of their initial introduction. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the Clerk shall distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilman and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the council may designate. 
(Ord. of 5-23-2006(1), § 1; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.35. - Emergency Ordinances. 
(a)  Emergency Ordinances. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or public peace, the council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services or authorize the borrowing of money, except as provided by law. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmen shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it is adopted, unless otherwise stated in the ordinance, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this Section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this Section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Zoning Ordinances. Zoning Ordinances shall refer to the use by the City of Woodstock of its power to zone real property as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-3 including, but not limited to, the right to grant variances from its zoning ordinance and further by way of illustration, but not limited to, the use by the City of Woodstock, Georgia of its power to zone by: 
(A)  The adoption of a zoning ordinance; 
(B)  The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which changes the text of the zoning ordinance; 
(C)  The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which rezones property from one zoning classification to another; 
(D)  The adoption of an amendment to a zoning ordinance which zones property to be annexed into the municipality; 
(E)  The grant of a permit relating to a special use of property; or 
(F)  The adoption of a zoning map (in conjunction with a zoning ordinance) which shows the zones and districts and zoning classifications of property therein. 
(Ord. of 5-23-2006(1), § 2; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.36. - Codes of Technical Regulations. 
(a)  The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that (1) the requirements of section 2.37 for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of such adopted code of technical regulations; as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.37. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 2.37. - Signing, Authenticating; Recording; Codification; Printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. Every ordinance shall be signed by the mayor as a matter of course after adoption. 
(b)  The council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto, with this charter and any amendment thereto, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known as [and] cited officially as "The Code of the City of Woodstock, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price, as fixed by the council. 
(c)  The council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment in this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the council. Following publication of the first Code of the City of Woodstock and at all times, thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 
 
Section 3.10. - Organization and General Provisions; Administrative and Service Departments. 
(a)  The council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city as they shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices and agencies or of any departments, offices and agencies hereinafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the function or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city. 
(b)  The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees and positions as may be provided by this charter or by ordinance and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the mayor and council. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. Vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed by this charter for an original appointment. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(e)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 3.13. - Boards, Commissions and Authorities. 
(a)  All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the council for such terms of office and such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by applicable State law. 
(b)  Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or any applicable State law. 
(c)  No member of any board, commission or authority shall assume office until he shall have executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance of the council and administered by the mayor or city clerk. 
(d)  Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of four members of the council. 
(e)  Members of boards, commissions and authorities may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance. 
(f)  The qualifications required of members of boards, commissions and authorities shall be as prescribed by ordinance. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by applicable State law, each board, commission or authority of the city government shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman for terms of one year and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or applicable State law as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 3.20. - City Manager. 
The council may appoint a city manager. The duties and authority of the city manager shall be established by ordinance of the council and, in so doing, the council may specifically delegate to the city manager any of the administrative or budgetary duties of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 3.30. - City Attorney. 
The council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized by ordinance, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 3.40. - City Clerk. 
The council may appoint a city clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council, to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the council may direct. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 3.41. - Tax Collector. 
The city council may appoint a tax collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other monies belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city, and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 3.42. - Consolidation of Functions. 
The city council may consolidate any two or more of the positions of city clerk, city tax collector and city accountant, or any other positions, or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. The council may also perform all or any part of the functions of any of the positions or offices in lieu of appointing other persons to perform the same. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 3.50. - Personnel Policies. 
The council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning (1) the method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; (2) the administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto and transfer of employees within the classification plan; (3) hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; and (4) such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the City of Woodstock. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 
 
Section 4.10. - Municipal Court; Creation. 
There is hereby established a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Woodstock which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power and authority to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which, under the laws of Georgia, are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. Said court shall be presided over by the judge of said court. In the absence or disqualification of the judge, the judge pro tem shall preside and shall exercise the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 4.11. - Judge and Solicitor. 
(a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge or solicitor unless he/she shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges and solicitors shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. The judge and solicitor shall be appointed by the council and shall serve at the discretion of the council. The compensation of the judge and solicitor shall be fixed by the council. 
(b)  The judge pro tem shall serve in the absence of the judge, shall have the same qualifications as the judge, shall be appointed by the council and shall take the same oath as the judge. 
(c)  Before entering on duties of his/her office, the judge and solicitor shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state, that he/she will truly, honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his/her office to the best of his/her ability without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the council. 
(d)  In the absence of a solicitor, the solicitor may appoint a substitute to stand in his/her stead. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008; Ord. of 5-13-2013, § 1)  
Section 4.12. - Convening. 
Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 4.13. - Jurisdiction; Powers. 
(a)  The Municipal Court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Woodstock and for violations of its ordinances. The Municipal Court may also try and punish for crimes occurring within the City of Woodstock to the extent that the Municipal Court is authorized to exercise jurisdiction over said crimes or offenses by state law. The Municipal Court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $1,000.00 or six (6) months in jail. The Municipal Court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00, or imprisonment for six (6) months or both, and as an alternative to fine or imprisonment, to sentence any offender upon the conviction to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares or other public works for a period not exceeding 30 days. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of State law. 
(c)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the City of Woodstock, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a State law has been violated. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of said court. 
(f)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoenas and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by State law. 
(g)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the City of Woodstock granted by State law generally to mayor's, recorder's and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 90-04-23, 4-23-1990; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8, the court may sentence any offender upon conviction to labor in a city work gang for a period not exceeding 30 days.  
Section 4.14. - Appeal. 
The right of appeal, and any bond as may be required to secure the cost on appeal to the Superior Court of Cherokee County from the municipal court, shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the probate court; provided, that any person who fails to file his appeal within ten days of the date of his conviction shall be deemed to have waived any such right. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 4.15. - Rules for Court. 
With the approval of the council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the council may adopt in part or in total the rules and regulations relative to the procedure of the operation of the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted for said court shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 
 
Section 5.10. - Election and term of mayor and council. 
The governing authority of the City of Woodstock in Cherokee County, Georgia, shall be vested in a mayor and six councilmembers. The mayor of said city shall be elected on the first Tuesday in November following the first Monday in November for a term of four years, and the person so elected shall take office beginning at 12:00 a.m. on January 1 and be clothed with all rights and privileges of the mayor regardless of whether or not the Ceremonial "Oath of Office/Swearing In" has taken place. The Oath of Office/Swearing In shall take place at the first Regular Meeting in January of the following year. The councilmembers of said city shall be elected on the first Tuesday in November following the first Monday in November for a term of four years each, and the person so elected shall take office beginning at 12:00 a.m. on January 1 and be clothed with all the rights and privileges of a Councilmember regardless of whether or not the Ceremonial "Oath of Office/Swearing In" has taken place. The Oath of Office/Swearing In shall take place at the first Regular Meeting in January of the following year. The mayor and all councilmembers shall be elected by a city-wide majority vote. The councilmembers from wards 1, 3, and 5 shall be elected in 2001 and every four years thereafter. The councilmembers for wards 2, 4, and 6 shall be elected in 1999 and every four years thereafter. The mayor shall be elected in 2001 and every four years thereafter. The hours for holding such election shall be 7:00 A.M. until 7:00 P.M. The mayor and council of the City of Woodstock in office on the effective date of this Act shall continue in office until the expiration of their terms and the election and qualification of their successors, as provided in this Act. In the event of a vacancy as of the effective date of this Act, the governing authority shall thereupon call a special election to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the term so vacated, pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 3, known as the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
(1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 4815, § 2; 1984 Ga. Laws (Act No. 601), page 3641, § 3; 1987 Ga. Laws (Act No. 364), page 4837, § 3; 1998 Ga. Laws (Act No. 930), page 4517, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008) 
Editor's note— The effective date of this amended section is April 20, 1998. All references to The Georgia Municipal Election Code are changed to O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2, the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.).  
Section 5.11. - Registration of Voters. 
Voter registration is now pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2, The Georgia Election Code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008) 
Editor's note— Voter registration is now pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2, the Georgia Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.).  
Section 5.12. - Qualifying; Nomination of Candidates; Absentee Ballots. 
The council may, by ordinance, prescribe rules and regulations governing qualifying fees, nomination of candidates, absentee ballots, write-in votes, challenge of votes and such other rules and regulations as may be necessary for the conduct of elections in the City of Woodstock. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 5.20. - Division of city into six wards. 
The City of Woodstock shall be divided into six (6) Wards as follows and as depicted on Exhibit "A" attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference: 
WARD 1 
TRACT ONE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being property located to the west of Interstate I-575 and being located in Land Lots 804, 781, 732, 709, 710, 731, 782, 730, 711, 712, 657, 658 and 729. 
TRACT TWO: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being located to the northeast of Ridgewalk Parkway and to the east of Interstate I-575 and to the northwest of Main Street, and being located in Land Lots 634, 663, 706, 707, 708, 709, 732, 733, 734, 735, 780, 778, 779, 781, 804, 805, 806, 807, 808, 849, 850, 851, 852, 853, 879, 880, 878, and 992. 
TRACT THREE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being located east of Interstate I-575 and to the east of Northeast Georgia Railroad tracks and to the west of Main Street and being located in Land Lots 922, 923, 950, 995 and 1022. 
TRACT FOUR: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being to the east of Ridge Trail and the south of Ridgewalk Parkway and to the east and north of Whitfield at Ridgewalk as more particularly described in Tract Forty-Four above and to the northwest of the Northeast Georgia Railroad tracks, said property being located partially in Land Lot 878, partially in Land Lot 923 and partially in Land Lot 922. 
TRACT FIVE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Alta At Ridgewalk more particularly shown on that certain plat recorded in Plat Book 74, Page 20, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
TRACT SIX: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Whitfield at Ridgewalk Subdivision Unit One as more particularly shown on the final plat recorded in Plat Book 77, Pages 118—120, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia and being Whitfield at Ridgewalk Subdivision Phase Two recorded in Plat Book 76, Pages 195—198, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
TRACT SEVEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being to the north of Rope Mill Road and to the south of the southerly Land Lot Line of Land Lots 923, 924 and 925 and to the west of the Northeast Georgia Railroad tracks, said property being any portions of Land Lots 948, 949, 950, 996 and 995 not included in Tracts Forty-Six, Forty-Seven or Forty-Eight above. 
TRACT EIGHT: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Northtowne Subdivision more particularly shown on that Final plat for Northtowne, recorded in Plat Book 55, Page 112, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
TRACT NINE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being to the northeast of Rope Mill Road and being all of Millpark Subdivision as per Final Plat for Millpark Development recorded in Deed Book 99, Pages 58—60, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
TRACT TEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia being more particularly shown on that Final Plat of Survey for Garden Street, Phase I, recorded at Plat Book 108, Pages 37—41, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia and on that Final Plat of Survey for Garden Street, Phase II, recorded at Plat Book 108, Pages 81—83, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
TRACT ELEVEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N04-032. 
TRACT TWELVE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N04-033. 
TRACT THIRTEEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-066. 
TRACT FOURTEEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-065. 
TRACT FIFTEEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-064. 
TRACT SIXTEEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-063. 
TRACT SEVENTEEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-059. 
TRACT EIGHTEEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-062. 
TRACT NINETEEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-061. 
TRACT TWENTY: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-053. 
TRACT TWENTY-ONE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-052. 
TRACT TWENTY-TWO: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-051. 
TRACT TWENTY-THREE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-050. 
TRACT TWENTY-FOUR: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-049. 
TRACT TWENTY-FIVE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-048. 
TRACT TWENTY-SIX: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-047. 
TRACT TWENTY-SEVEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-046. 
TRACT TWENTY-EIGHT: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-055. 
TRACT TWENTY-NINE 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-054. 
TRACT THIRTY: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-045. 
TRACT THIRTY-ONE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-025. 
TRACT THIRTY-TWO: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-025A 
TRACT THIRTY-THREE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-024. 
TRACT THIRTY-FOUR: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N04-023. 
TRACT THIRTY-FIVE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-022. 
TRACT THIRTY-SIX: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-022A 
TRACT THIRTY-SEVEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-028. 
TRACT THIRTY-EIGHT: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-26. 
TRACT THIRTY-NINE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-014. 
TRACT FORTY: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-012. 
TRACT FORTY-ONE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-011. 
TRACT FORTY-TWO: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-010. 
TRACT FORTY-THREE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N05-009. 
TRACT FORTY-FOUR: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N06-008. 
TRACT FORTY-FIVE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N06-009A. 
TRACT FORTY-SIX: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N06-010. 
TRACT FORTY-SEVEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N06-011. 
TRACT FORTY-EIGHT: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N06-013A. 
TRACT FORTY-NINE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 92N06-013. 
WARD 2 
TRACT ONE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being within the city limits of the City of Woodstock and being to the west of Interstate I-575 and being in Land Lots 1158, 1159, 1160, 1161, 1162, 1215, 1216, 1217, 1218, 1219, 1220, 1229, 1230, 1231, 1232, 1233, 1288, 1289. 
TRACT TWO: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being within the city limits of the City of Woodstock as shown on that certain plat for Montclair at Ridgewalk Subdivision, recorded in Plat Book 90, Pages 95—98, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
TRACT THREE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being within the city limits of the City of Woodstock as shown on that certain plat for The Magnolias at Ridgeview Walk, Phase One, recorded in Plat Book 72, Pages 120—122, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia and that certain plat for The Magnolias at RidgeWalk, Phase Two, recorded in Plat Book 74, Pages 180—183, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
TRACT FOUR: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying within the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being in Land Lot 948 southwest of Rope Mill Road. 
TRACT FIVE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being within the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and lying and being east of I-575 and being in Land Lots 925, 926, 927, 946, 947, 998, 997, 1019, 1020, 1066, 1067,1069, 1070, 1091, 1092, 1094, 1095, 1138, 1139, 1140, 1141, 1142, 1162, 1163, 1164, 1165, 1166, 1167, 1210, 1211, 1212, 1213, 1214, 1215, 1234, 1235, 1237 and 1238. 
TRACT SIX: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being within the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and lying and being in Land Lot 1209, west of Stonecroft Lane and north of Stonecroft Subdivision, Unit 1, as per plat recorded at Plat Book 53, Pages 164—165, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia. 
TRACT SEVEN: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being within the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and lying and being in Land Lot 1167, LESS AND EXCEPT any portion of Tax Parcel Numbers: 15N18 023; 15N18 025; 15N18 024; 15N18 025B,and 15N18 025A lying and being in Land Lot 1167. 
TRACT EIGHT: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being within the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and lying and being in Land Lots 1096, 1137, and 1168 and being part of Tax Map and Parcel Numbers 15N18 019, 15N18B 063, 15N18B 064, 15N18B 064B and 15N18 009. 
TRACT NINE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being within the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and lying and being in Land Lot 1093, LESS AND EXCEPT Tax Parcel Numbers: 92N06 009A; 92N06 010; 92N06 011; 92N 06 013A and 92N06 013. 
TRACT TEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being within the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and lying and being in Land Lot 1068, LESS AND EXCEPT 
Tax Parcel Numbers: 92N05 055; 92N05 054; 92N05 045; 92N05 053; 92N05 052; 92N05 051; 92N05 050; 92N05 049; 92N05 048; 92N05 047; 92N05 046; 92N05 028; 92N05 026; 92N05 025; 92N05 025A; 92N05 024; 92N05 023; 92N05 022; 92N05 022A; 92N05 014; 92N05 012; 92N05 011; 92N05-010; 92N06 009; 92N06 008; 92N06 009A. 
TRACT ELEVEN: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being within the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and lying and being in Land Lot 1021, LESS AND EXCEPT property more particularly shown on the Final Plat of Survey for Garden Street, Phase I, recorded at Plat Book 108, Pages 37— 41, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia AND on that Final Plat of Survey for Garden Street, Phase II, recorded at Plat Book 108, Pages 81—83, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia AND the following Tax Map and Parcel Numbers: 
92N05 055; 92N05 054; 92N05 053; 92N05 061; 92N05 062; 92N05 059; 92N05 063; 92N05 064; 92N05 065; 92N05 066; 92N04 033; 92N04 032. 
WARD 3 
TRACT ONE 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia located to the east of Main Street and to the northwest of Arnold Mill Road being all such property located in Land Lots 1022, 1023, 1024, 879, 880, 993, 994, 995, 950, 951, 952, 920, 921, 922, 923 and 953. 
TRACT TWO: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia located to the southeast of Arnold Mill Road and to the west of Neese Road, being all such property located in Land Lots 990, 991, 1024, 1025, 1026, 1027, 1065, 1064, 1063, 1062, 1061, 1099, 1098, 1097, 1100, 1136, 1134, 1133, 1172, 1171, 1170, 1169. 
TRACT THREE: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being in Land Lots 1096, 1137 and 1168 LESS AND EXCEPT any part of said Land Lots that are within Tax Map and Parcel Numbers 15N18 019, 15N18B 063, 15N18B 064, 15N18B 064B and 15N18 009. 
TRACT FOUR: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia lying and being in Land Lot 1167 and being part of Tax Parcel Numbers: 15N18 023, 15N18 025; 15N18 024, 15N18 025B; and 15N18 025A. 
TRACT FIVE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, being located to the southeast of Trickum Road to the north of Highway 92 and being located in Land Lots 1174, 1130, 1175, 1129, 1128, 1127, 1104, 1176, 1177, 1178. 
TRACT SIX: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, being located to the east of Neese Road and to the North of Highway 92 and all such property located in Land Lots 1100, 1133, 1101, 1132, 1173 and 1172. 
WARD 4 
TRACT ONE 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being located to the south of Highway 92 and being that portion of Land Lot 1210 which is part of Stonecroft Subdivision Unit 1 as more particularly shown on that certain Plat of Survey for Stonecroft Subdivision, Unit 1, filed in Plat Book 53, Pages 164—165, Records of Cherokee County, Georgia and all of Land Lot 1209 less and except that portion of Land Lot 1209 located to the west of Stonecroft Lane and north of Stonecroft Subdivision as referenced above. 
TRACT TWO: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being south of Highway 92 and located in Land Lots 1173, 1205, 1204, 1203, 1174, 1175, 1202, 1176, 1201, 1248, 1247, 1177, 1178, 1199, 1200, 1250, 1271, 1270, 1269, 1251, 1252, 1253, 1197, 1198, 1242, 1241, 1208, and 1207. 
TRACT THREE: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being located to the east of Woodlands Parkway and being in Land Lot 1108. 
TRACT FOUR: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, north of Highway 92 and lying and being in Land Lots 1179, 1180, 1126, 1125, 1198 & 1197, less and except any portion of Land Lot 1125 that is located in Tax Parcel Numbers: 15N 24K 080A; 15N24K 079; 15N24K 080; and 15N24K 081. 
TRACT FIVE: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, and in Land Lot 1053 and being any property not part of Tax Map and Parcel Numbers 15N23G 032A, 15N23G 074A and 15N23G 105A. 
TRACT SIX: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, and being in Land Lot 1036 and being Tax Map and Parcel Number: 15N23 G 105A. 
TRACT SEVEN: 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Land Lot 1037, less and except Tax Parcel Number: 15N 23 065 located in Land Lot 1037. 
WARD 5 
TRACT ONE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being to the east of Arnold Mill Road and to the east of Neese Road and to the north and to the west of Trickum Road and lying and being in Land Lots 990, 989, 988, 1028, 1029, 1030, 1031, 1058, 1059, 1060, 1102, 1131, 1130, 1103, 1032, 1056 and 1057. 
TRACT TWO: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and lying to the east of Trickum Road and being located in Land Lots 1056, 1034, 1055, 1106, 1035, 981, 982, 1054 and 1107. 
TRACT THREE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and lying and being in Land Lots 1108 which lies to the west of Woodlands Parkway. 
TRACT FOUR: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being Land Lots 1053 and 1036 LESS AND EXCEPT any portion of Tax Parcel Numbers 15N23G 032A, 15N23G 074A, and 15N23G 105A. 
TRACT FIVE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 1037 and 1036 in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and being 15N23 065. 
WARD 6 
TRACT ONE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia located to the west of I-575 and lying and being in Land Lots 854, 855, 856, 857, 872, 873, 874, 927, 928, 929, 930, 931, 932, 933, 934, 939, 940, 941, 942, 943, 944, 945, 946, 999, 1000, 1001, 1002, 1003, 1018, 1017, 1016, 1071 and 1090. 
TRACT TWO: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, located to the east of I-575 and to the south of Ridgewalk Parkway and located in Land Lots 852, 853, 854, 875, 876, 877 LESS AND EXCEPT any portions of said Land Lots that are a part of the following properties: 
1.  Montclair At Ridgewalk Subdivision —All that tract and parcel of land being known as Montclair At Ridgewalk Subdivision, as more particularly shown on that plat of survey recorded in Plat Book 90, Pages 95—98, Cherokee County, Georgia Deed Records. 
2.  Alta At Ridgewalk Subdivision —All that tract and parcel of land being known as ALTA AT RIDGEWALK Subdivision, as more particularly shown on that plat of survey recorded in Plat Book 74, Page 20, Cherokee County, Georgia Deed Records. 
TRACT THREE: 
All that tract and parcel of land lying and being in the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, located in Land Lot 924, less and except any portions of said Land Lot located within the following properties: 
1.  The Magnolias At Ridgewalk —All that tract and parcel of land being known as Phase Two of The Magnolias At Ridgewalk Subdivision, as more particularly shown on that plat of survey recorded in Plat Book 74, Pages 180-183, Cherokee County, Georgia Deed Records. 
2.  Alta At Ridgewalk —All that tract and parcel of land being known as ALTA AT RIDGEWALK Subdivision, as more particularly shown on that plat of survey recorded in Plat Book 74, Page 20, Cherokee County, Georgia Deed Records. 
3.  Whitfield At Ridgewalk —All that tract and parcel of land being known as Whitfield at Ridgewalk Subdivision, as more particularly shown on that plat of survey recorded in Plat Book 75, Pages 92—94, Cherokee County, Georgia Deed Records. 
Now, therefore, the Mayor and Council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia hereby ordains that should any conflict exist between the written legal description contained herein and the depiction shown on Exhibit "A", the written description contained herein shall control. 
Now, therefore, the Mayor and Council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia hereby ordain that, in the event any property annexed into the City of Woodstock, Georgia is not included in the legal description outlined in this Ordinance, said annexed property will be considered part of the Ward to which it is adjacent. In the event that the annexed property is adjacent to more than one Ward, said annexed property will become part of the Ward which shares the greatest amount of linear footage with the annexed property. 
Now, therefore, the Mayor and Council of the City of Woodstock hereby ordain that, in the event any property is annexed at any point in the future into the City of Woodstock, Georgia by ordinance and said ordinance does not include a specific reference to a Ward, then said annexed property will be considered part of the Ward to which it is adjacent. In the event that the annexed property is adjacent to more than one Ward, said annexed property will become part of the Ward which shares the greatest amount of linear footage with the annexed property. 
Now, therefore, the Mayor and Council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia hereby ordain that, in the event any property currently within the city limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia is not included in the legal description outlined in this Ordinance, said omitted property will be considered part of Ward 1. 
(1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 4815, § 3; 1998 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1900), page 4517, § 3; Ord. of 4-11-2006; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008; Ord. of 1-28-2013)  
Section 5.21. - Election of one councilman from each ward by electors of entire city. 
Each ward shall be entitled to one councilman who shall be a resident of the ward at the time of his election and for 12 months prior thereto, and each councilman shall be elected by a majority vote of the electors of the entire city. 
(1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 4815, § 4; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 5.30. - Grounds for Removal. 
The mayor or any councilman shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(a)  incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(b)  conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(c)  failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(d)  wilful violation of any express prohibition of this charter; 
(e)  abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(f)  failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 5.31. - Procedure for Removal. 
Removal of an elected officer from office may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(a)  By action of two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office, as herein provided, shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the council to the Supreme Court of Cherokee County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(b)  By information filed in the Superior Court of Cherokee County, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE AND FISCAL 
 
Section 6.10. - Property Taxes. 
All property subject to taxation for State or county purposes, assessed as of January 1 in each year, shall be subject to the property tax levied by the City of Woodstock. The council, by ordinance, shall elect to use the county assessment for the year in which the city taxes are to be levied and shall request the county to furnish appropriate information for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.11. - Tax Levy. 
The council shall be authorized to levy an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city, not to exceed ten mills, for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, and for any other public purpose as determined by the council in its discretion. The council is also authorized to provide for sufficient levy to pay principal and interest on general obligations. The City of Woodstock is hereby exempted from the provisions of Georgia Code sections 92-4101 through 92-4104, inclusive [now repealed]. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.12. - Tax Due Dates and Tax Bills. 
The council shall provide, by ordinance, when the taxes of the city shall fall due and in what length of time said taxes may be paid and shall provide, by ordinance, for the payment of taxes due to the city in installments or in one lump sum and when and how and upon what terms such taxes shall be due and payable, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.13. - Collection of Delinquent Taxes. 
The council may provide, by ordinance, for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi.fa. issued by the city clerk, tax collector or finance officer and executed by the finance officer or designee under the same procedure provided by the laws governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by the use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property upon which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment date of each year, which lien shall be superior to all other liens, except that it shall have equal dignity with those of federal, State or county taxes. In cases of hardship, the council shall have discretionary authority to waive any and all penalties imposed by this charter on delinquent taxes, fees, assessments or on other amounts due to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008; Ord. No. 5336-A-2018, 8-27-2018)  
Section 6.14. - Licenses; Occupational Taxes; Excise Taxes. 
The council, by ordinance, shall have full power to levy such license and specific or occupation taxes upon the residents of the City of Woodstock, both individual and corporate, and on all those who transact or offer to transact business therein, or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein, as the council may deem expedient for the public health, safety, benefit, convenience or advantage of the city; to classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful; to require such persons to procure licenses; to compel the payment of such licenses by execution or any other lawful manner; and to make laws and regulations necessary or proper to carry out the powers herein conferred and to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof. The council shall have full power and authority to levy an excise tax not prohibited by general law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.15. - Sewer Service Charges. 
The council, by ordinance, shall have the right, power and authority to assess and collect fees, charges and tolls for sewer services rendered both within and without the corporate limits of the City of Woodstock and to provide for the cost and expense of providing for the collection and disposal of sewage through the sewerage facilities of said city. If unpaid, said sewer service charge shall constitute a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be second in priority only to liens for county and city property taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.16. - Sanitary and Health Services Charge. 
The council shall have authority by ordinance to provide for, to enforce, to levy and to collect the cost of sanitary and health services necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms and corporations residing in or doing business in said city benefiting from such service. Such authority shall include the power to assess, levy and collect annual or monthly sanitary taxes or fees in such amount or amounts, and based upon and in accordance with such classification of property and sanitary service or service provided, as may be fixed by ordinance. Said sanitary taxes and the assessment thereof shall be a charge and lien against the real estate in respect to which said taxes are so assessed, and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except liens for county and city property taxes, and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.17. - Special Assessments. 
The council shall have power and authority to assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers or other utility mains and appurtenances against abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent 30 days after their due dates, shall thereupon be subject, in addition to fi. fa. charges, to a penalty of ten percent and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate of seven percent per annum from date due until paid. A lien shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens, except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes, and said lien shall be enforceable by the same procedures and under the same remedies as provided for in this Article for city property taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.18. - Transfer of Executions. 
The city clerk or chief financial officer shall be authorized to assign or transfer any fi. fa. or execution issued for any tax or for any street, sewer of [or] other assessment in the same manner and to the same extent as provided by Georgia law regarding sales and transfers of tax fi. fas. Such transfer or assignment, when made, shall vest the purchaser or transferee with all right, title and interest, as provided by Georgia law governing sales and transfers of tax fi. fas.; provided that, upon levy of execution and sale of property pursuant to such tax fi. fas, whether assigned, transferred or executed by the city, the owner of such property, in fee simple or lesser interest, shall not lose his right to redeem the property in accord with the requirements of redemption of property sold under State or county ad valorem tax fi. fas., as said requirements now exist or as may be hereinafter provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.20. - General Obligation Bonds. 
The council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purposes of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the State. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.21. - Revenue Bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the council, as provided by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved March 31, 1937, known as the Revenue Bond Law (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), as now or hereafter amended, or by any other Georgia law, as now or hereafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008) 
Editor's note— The Revenue Bond Law is codified as O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 80, art. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 36-80-20 et seq.).  
Section 6.22. - Short-Term Notes. 
Pursuant to applicable State law, the city may obtain temporary loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.30. - Fiscal Year. 
The council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department or institution, agency and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by State or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.31. - Preparation of Budgets. 
The council shall provide, by ordinance, the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvements program and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budgets and programs. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.32. - Submission of Operating Budget to City Council. 
On or before a date fixed by the council, but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget and such other comments and information as he may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message and all supporting documents, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.33. - Action by Council on Budget. 
(a)  The council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor; except, that the budget, as finally amended and adopted, must provide for all expenditure required by law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves and revenues, constituting the fund availability of such fund. 
(b)  The council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. If the council fails to adopt the budget, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriation ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose or activity, as set out in the budget document. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.34. - Property Tax Levies. 
As the next order of business following adoption of the operating budget, the council shall levy, by ordinance, an annual tax on all real and personal property within the City of Woodstock. The tax rate set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the City of Woodstock. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.35. - Additional Appropriations. 
The council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose, but any such additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.36. - Capital Improvements Budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The council shall have power to accept with or without amendments or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening the lives, health or property of the inhabitants, when passed by [a] two-third[s] vote of the membership of the council. 
(b)  The council shall adopt the final capital improvements budget for the current fiscal year not later than the second council meeting of each year. No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall elapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made, shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, the mayor or city manager, as appropriate, may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his recommendations thereon. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a vote of the council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.40. - Contracting Procedures. 
All contracts shall be made or authorized by the council and no contracts shall bind the city unless reduced to writing and approved by the council. All contracts and all ordinances or resolutions making contracts or authorizing the same, shall be drawn by the city attorney or shall be submitted to him before authorization by the council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 6.41. - Centralized Purchasing. 
(a)  The council shall, by ordinance, prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the City of Woodstock. 
(b)  The coucil may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the City of Woodstock for governmental or other purposes at a public sale or by sealed bids after advertisement in the official legal organ is pubished pursuant to O.G.C.A. § 36-37-6 (Sale of municipal property). Such property shall be sold for such consideration as the city shall deem equitable and just for the city; provided, that the city shall reserved the right to refuse any or all offers or bids on such property. 
(c)  The council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor or city manager, as appropriate, and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(d)  Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the council may authorize the mayor or city manager, as appropriate, to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008; Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND REGULATORY FUNCTIONS 
 
Section 7.10. - Streets. 
The council is hereby vested with the power to lay out, open, widen, change, straighten, alter, improve, vacate, abandon and otherwise to exercise complete control over the streets, alleys, squares and sidewalks of the City of Woodstock. The council shall provide for the removal of any and all obstacles and nuisances in regard to the streets, alleys or sidewalks or other public places within the city and shall adopt appropriate ordinances to accomplish this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 7.11. - Municipal Utilities. 
The council shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, build, maintain and operate a system of waterworks, electric lights, sewerage and gas distribution; to establish rates and charge fees for services rendered in any of said systems; to finance any of said systems through appropriate bond issues in accordance with the laws of Georgia; to exercise the power of eminent domain in regard to any of said systems, both within and without the corporate limits; and to contract to furnish the services of any of said systems to consumers outside the corporate limits of the City of Woodstock. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 7.12. - Sewers and Drains. 
The council shall have the power and authority to provide for the establishment, extension and maintenance of a system of sewers and drains, together with a sewerage disposal system. This power includes the authority to extend said system beyond the corporate limits. For these purposes, the city is granted the power of eminent domain both within and without its corporate limits. The council may provide by ordinance for reasonable connection fees for tapping on to the water and sewer lines of said city, and may compel citizens to tap into the same when such service is made available. They may cause said connection to be made when the owners refuse and issue executions to be made for the amount so expended, which execution shall create a lien on the property connected with said water and sewerage systems from the date of the order or connection. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 7.13. - Right-of-Way. 
The City of Woodstock shall have the right, easement and franchise of laying the necessary mains, pipes, conduits and drains for waterworks and sewerage system purposes along the highways in the County of Cherokee without cost; it shall have full power and authority to enact and enforce such rules, regulations and ordinances as may be necessary to protect the water basin and watershed, from which the water supply is taken, from contamination and to protect said waterworks and sewerage system, including the mains, pipes and conduits, whether the same be situated within or without the corporate limits of said city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 7.14. - Eminent Domain. 
The council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, build, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be taken under Chapter 36-202 of the Georgia Code [now repealed], subject to such amendments as shall be enacted, or any other applicable Georgia law. 
(Ord. No 2008-0002, 3-10-2008) 
Editor's note— Refer to section 2.33, Quorum voting.  
Section 7.20. - Power to Regulate and License. 
The council shall have the power and authority to provide by ordinance for the registration and licensing of any trade, business, occupation, vocation, profession or any and every other undertaking pursued for the purpose of personal gain or profit of whatever nature, engaged in or carried on within the limits of the City of Woodstock, regardless [of] whether or not the subject has an office or establishment within said city. The council shall be authorized to fix the amount, terms and manner of issuing and revoking licenses, provided that this authority is subject to the Constitutions and laws of the United States and the State of Georgia. This power is conferred for the purpose of regulation under the police powers of the city and for the purpose of raising revenue for the operation of the city government through the imposition of a tax or fee on the privilege of operating within the city. This authority extends over individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations and their agents, and any other legal entity capable of transacting business. 
(Ord. No 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 7.21. - Franchises. 
The council shall have authority to exercise control over the use of streets of the City of Woodstock. The power is hereby conferred upon the council to grant franchises for the use of said city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, gas companies telecommunciation companies, transportation companies and other similar companies. This franchise right extends to, but is not limited to, the erection of poles, stringing of wires, laying of pipes, lines and conduits both above and below the ground surface. The council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration of such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 20 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in the registration book to be kept by him. The council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 7.22. - Building, Housing, Electrical and Plumbing Regulations. 
The council shall have the power and authority to enact such reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem necessary or expedient regarding the construction and maintenance of buildings, remodeling of buildings, plumbing and electrical wiring and equipping of buildings, in order to promote the safety and welfare of its citizens and to guard against fire or other property damage. This power may, in the discretion of the council, be exercised by adoption of any such standard building, housing, gas, heating and air-conditioning, electrical and plumbing codes as may be deemed appropriate. The council shall be empowered to engage the necessary personnel to enforce such rules and regulations, as adopted, and to charge reasonable fees for inspections and permits, and may require the obtaining of a permit as a condition precedent to any construction, building, electrical or plumbing work. The council may enact all ordinances necessary to enforce such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 8.10. - Official Bonds. 
The officers and employees of the City of Woodstock, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 8.11. - Existing Ordinances and Regulations. 
Existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Woodstock not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified or amended by the council. Existing rules and regulations of departments or agencies of the City of Woodstock not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified or amended. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 8.12. - Section Captions. 
The captions to the several sections of this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 8.13. - Penalties. 
The violation of any provisions of this charter for which penalty is not specifically provided for herein is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 8.14. - Specific Repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Woodstock in the County of Cherokee, approved March 8, 1939 (1939 Ga. Laws, page 1384), is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 8.15. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part or parts held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
Section 8.16. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0002, 3-10-2008)  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. The Charter is derived from 1975 Georgia Law p. 4160 (Act No. 393). 
Georgia Laws 
Year 	Page 	Act No. 	Section 	Charter 
Section 
1981 	4815 	722 	1 	2.11 
			2 	5.10 
			3, 4 	5.20, 5.21 
1984 	3641 	601 	1 	2.12 
			2 	2.16 
			3 	5.10 
1985 	3869 	128 	1 	1.11 
1986 	4004 	899 	1 	1.11 
1987 	4837 	364 	1 	2.16 
			2 	2.18 
			3 	5.10 
1992 	5598 	813 	1 	1.11 
1996 	3569 	550 	1 	2.17A 
			3 	2.18 
1998 	4517 	930 	1 	5.10 
		1900 	3 	5.20 
2006 		875 	1 	2.33 
 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE—ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Charter of those ordinances included in the 1989 Code and ordinances adopted subsequent thereto which effect the Charter of Woodstock, GA. 
Ord. No. 	Date 	Section 	Charter Section 
Ord. of 	4-11-2006 		5.20 
Ord. of 	11-28-2006(1) 	1 	2.34 
		2 	2.35 
2008-0002 	 3-10-2008 		2.10—8.16 
	 1-28-2013 		5.20 
Ord. of 	 5-13-2013 		4.11 
Ord. of 	11-14-2016 		2.13 
5336-A-2018 	 8-27-2018 		6.13 
  
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS  
ARTICLE I. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 2001 Ga. Laws (Act No. 80), page 3793, as adopted by referendum on November 6, 2001. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Section 1. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this Act, the term: 
(1)  Ad valorem taxes for city purposes means all ad valorem taxes for city purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Woodstock, including, but not limited to, taxes to retire bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  Homestead means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
(3)  Senior citizen means a person who is 62 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under this Act is made. 
(b)  (1)  Each resident of the City of Woodstock who is a senior citizen is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Woodstock ad valorem taxes for city purposes on the homestead owned and occupied by such resident as a residence as follows: 
(A)  For the taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2002, and prior to January 1, 2003, in the amount of one-half of the full value of that homestead; 
(B)  For all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2003, for the full value of that homestead. 
(2)  The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount under subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of this subsection shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an affidavit with the governing authority of the City of Woodstock or the designee thereof giving the person's age and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Woodstock or the designee thereof to make a determination as to whether such person is entitled to such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Woodstock or the designee thereof shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the applicant for the exemption. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the applicant occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper affidavit as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application and file such affidavit thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act to notify the governing authority of the City of Woodstock or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, county taxes, or county school district taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by this Act shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other homestead exemption applicable to City of Woodstock ad valorem taxes for city purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2002. 
Editor's note— This act passed local referendum in special election held November 6, 2001.  
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws found in the Related Laws. 
Georgia Laws 
Year 	Page 	Act No. 	Section 	Related Laws 
Section 
2001 	3793 	80 	1 	1 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Woodstock, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(a), (b). 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
Advise and consent of the council. Advise and consent of the council shall mean an affirmative vote of the majority of the entire city council. 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(5). 
City. The term "city" means the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
City council and council. The terms "city council" and "council" mean the City Council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Woodstock, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(3). 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Cherokee County, Georgia. 
Court. The term "court" shall mean the municipal court of the city. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(8). 
Gender. Words of one gender includes all other genders. 
State Law reference— Gender, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(4). 
Governing authority and governing body. The terms "governing authority" and "governing body" shall mean the city council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(5). 
Judge. The term "judge" shall mean the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, whether acting by themselves or acting as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
State Law reference— Definition of "may," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(10). 
Mayor. The term "mayor" shall mean the mayor of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(11). 
Municipality. The term "municipality" shall be synonymous with the term "city," "town" or "municipal corporation." 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(6). 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(12). 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" shall mean a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
Other officials or officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "city clerk," "street superintendent," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
State Law reference— Definition of "person," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(14). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(15). 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(16). 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Reasonable time or notice. The term "reasonable time or notice" shall mean such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" shall mean a legislative act of the municipal governing body of a special or temporary character. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(19). 
State. The term "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street and road. The terms "street" and "road" include any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the city, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Tense of words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(7). 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(23). 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(24).  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of such sections nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references, charter references, related law references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.  
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances or resolutions passed subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. Repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, may be excluded from the Code by their omission from affected reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of The Code of Woodstock, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of Woodstock, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be, or by setting them out at length in the repealing ordinance or resolution.  
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances or resolutions inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 (excluding surcharges) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, and as an alternative to fine or imprisonment, to sentence any offender upon the conviction to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares or other public works for a period not exceeding 30 days. 
(2)  In those cases where the municipal court has jurisdiction to try cases involving the violation of state law, the court will impose those penalties as provided by state law. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(4)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(5)  Code enforcement violation fines. All code enforcement violations as in this Code or the adopted City of Woodstock Property Maintenance Code shall be deemed as a misdemeanor and shall carry a minimum fine of $100.00 per violation (excluding surcharges). Each day that the violation continues after a citation has been issued, shall be deemed to be a separate offense and will constitute a fine of $100.00 a day (excluding surcharges) until the violation has been remedied. The code official at his discretion may allow for additional time to remedy the violation prior to the citation being issued. All fees for activities and services performed shall be determined by the judge of the municipal court following a citation. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 90-04-23, 4-23-1990; Ord. of 10-8-2012(1); Ord. of 11-28-2016) 
State Law reference— Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2).  
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of Code. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.  
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-10. - Prior offenses, penalties, contracts or rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any the following ordinances or portions of ordinances, which ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed or agreement. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(6)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(7)  Adopting or amending any development order. 
(8)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(9)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(10)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(11)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code. 
(12)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  Providing traffic or parking regulations for specific locations. 
(14)  Amending the zoning map or zoning atlas, or rezoning specific property. 
(15)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(16)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(17)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(18)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(19)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(20)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(21)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(22)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(23)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(24)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(25)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(5); any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-11(20); any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(24); building inspector; duties, § 18-41; administration of electrical code, § 18-62; courts, ch. 26; elections, ch. 30; emergency management, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 54; personnel, ch. 70; planning, ch. 74; taxation, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Departments established. 
(a)  The following departments of the city are established: 
(1)  Administration; 
(2)  City clerk; 
(3)  Community development; 
(4)  Economic development; 
(5)  Finance; 
(6)  Fire; 
(7)  Parks and recreation; 
(8)  Police; 
(9)  Public works. 
(b)  Each department may be headed by a director who shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as provided by law or as prescribed from time to time by the city manager. Department directors shall report to the city manager. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-1; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004; Ord. No. 05-9-13, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 2008-0019, 9-8-2009) 
Charter reference— Organization and general provisions, § 3.10.  
Sec. 2-2. - City manager. 
(a)  The position of city manager is created. The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation and monitoring of the city budget and implementation of the council policy. 
(b)  The financial and budget duties of the city manager shall be to: 
(1)  Prepare and present an annual budget to the city council. 
(2)  Monitor expenditures on authorized budgets for all departments. 
(3)  Prepare quarterly financial reports to the city council. 
(4)  Establish centralized purchasing guidelines. 
(5)  Prepare requests for review on all public works projects, equipment purchases and service contracts. 
(6)  Review and approve expenditures by all departments. 
(c)  The personnel duties of the city manager shall be to: 
(1)  Administer policies for managing city operations; 
(2)  Administer personnel policy; 
(3)  Approve hiring of personnel along with department heads; 
(4)  Supervise department heads; 
(5)  Plan with departments for longterm growth and objectives; and 
(6)  Dismiss for cause any city personnel, other than department heads, and suspend department heads for up to three days. All employees retain the right of appeal to the city council. 
(d)  Administrative polices and personnel decisions made by the city manager may be vetoed by the city council only. Personnel decisions may be appealed to the city council. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-2) 
Charter reference— City manager, § 3.20.  
Sec. 2-3. - City attorney. 
(a)  The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council, and shall serve until a successor is appointed and has qualified. No person shall be so appointed unless he is a member in good standing of the state bar and has been actively engaged in the practice of law for at least three years preceding his appointment. 
(b)  Before entering upon the duties of his office, the city attorney shall take the oath prescribed by this Code for city officers. 
(c)  The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in such capacity shall: 
(1)  Advise the council or its committees or any city officer, when thereto requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of city business; 
(2)  Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the council or any committee thereof; 
(3)  Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to him by the council, or any of its committees, or by any city officer; 
(4)  Prepare for execution or approve as to form all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party and approve, as to form, all bonds required to be submitted to the city; 
(5)  Defend any and all suits and actions at law or equity brought against the city, unless otherwise directed by the city council; 
(6)  Make immediate report to the city council of the outcome of any litigation in which the city has an interest; 
(7)  Make an annual report to the city council of all pending litigation in which the city has an interest and the status thereof; and 
(8)  Keep complete records and accurate records of the following, which records shall forever remain the property of the city: 
a.  All suits in which the city had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties, the nature of the action, the disposition of the case or its status, if pending, and the briefs of counsel; and 
b.  All written opinions prepared by the city attorney and all certificates or abstracts of titles furnished by him to the city, or any department official thereof. 
(d)  The city attorney shall be compensated at an hourly rate to be set from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-3) 
Charter reference— City attorney, § 3.30.  
Sec. 2-4. - Hours of operation. 
All administrative units shall be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays. The units shall be closed on weekends and legal holidays. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-4; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 2-5. - Daily deposit required. 
All administrative units shall turn over monies received each day to such persons as designated from time to time by the city council to make deposits of city funds. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-5)  
Secs. 2-6—2-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC RECORDS 
 
Sec. 2-41. - Official records of city; keeping and maintaining. 
It shall be the policy of the city council to make each and every record kept and maintained by the city council and officers, agents and employees of the city available to the public for reading, inspecting, examining and copying the same, provided that those records which by order of a court of this state or by law are prohibited from being open to inspection by the public shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-21)  
Sec. 2-42. - Custodian designated. 
The city clerk is made the official custodian of the records of the city, including records made by its officers, agents and employees of every nature whatsoever. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-22)  
Sec. 2-43. - Removal from city hall restricted. 
The custodian of the records of the city shall not allow any person to take away from the city hall or any other place where the records are lawfully stored any records for any purpose whatsoever, unless by competent and lawful court order, except by motion of the governing body. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-23)  
Sec. 2-44. - Examination or inspection. 
Any person desiring to see, inspect, examine or copy any record made by any officer, agent or employee of the city or any record of the city council shall make written request and present the same in person to the city clerk, and it shall be the duty of the record custodian at that time to designate a time certain within a period of 72 hours from the date of such request when such records will be available to the applicant, provided that persons desiring to inspect records of the police and fire services departments which are open to public inspection shall present the inspection request directly to the appropriate department. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-24) 
State Law reference— Inspection of public records, O.C.G.A., § 50-18-70 et seq.  
Sec. 2-45. - Presence of custodian required; hours limited. 
In order to preserve the authenticity and correctness of any and all records of the city, no person shall be allowed to see, inspect, examine or copy the same unless within the presence of the records custodian of the city or some person designated by the records custodian, and such examination shall be made during regular business hours when the city offices are kept open to the public. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-25)  
Sec. 2-46. - Cost of certified copies. 
The city shall charge for furnishing certified copies or records of the city in accordance with a fee schedule as established from time to time by the city council. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-26)  
Sec. 2-47. - Records construed. 
The records referred to in this article shall include not only the minutes of the city council, all contracts of the city, all ordinances and resolutions enacted by the city council, all memoranda and records kept by the city clerk of every nature whatsoever, all records of the city departments, including municipal court records and police docket, but shall also include all other records kept and maintained by any officer, agent, servant or employee of the city concerning matters pertaining to the city, except those records not open to the public inspection by order of a court of this state or by law. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-27)  
Sec. 2-48. - Destruction of obsolete records. 
(a)  There is established a records management committee, which shall be composed of the mayor, the mayor pro tem, the city manager and the chief of police. 
(b)  The committee is responsible for records management activities and shall designate a person or officer to act for and in behalf of the city council in directing and coordinating all record management matters, including maintenance and security of records. 
(c)  No record shall be destroyed except in accordance with approved retention schedules. 
(d)  Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the city council which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered and the volume destroyed. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-28) 
State Law reference— Records management programs for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99; records as public property, disposing of records other than to approved retention schedule a misdemeanor, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-102.  
Secs. 2-49—2-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ETHICS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-81—2-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ETHICS IN GOVERNMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ethics in Government Act, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or mayor pro tem containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
Governing authority and member of the governing authority mean the mayor or any councilmember of the city and any member appointed to any board or commission of the city. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-48; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Ethics and Efficiency in Government Act, O.C.G.A. § 28-11-1 et seq.; code of ethics and conflict of interest, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq.; conflict of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; ethics in government, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-102. - Intent. 
It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that they protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-47; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999)  
Secs. 2-103—2-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CODE OF ETHICS 
 
Sec. 2-121. - Conflict of interest. 
No elected official, appointed officer or employee of the city or any city agency shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair his independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government or affairs of the governmental body by which he is employed without proper legal authorization, or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others. 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise, from any person, firm or corporation which to his knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he is employed; however, an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign. 
(5)  Represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the council by which he is employed. 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he has a financial interest. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-41)  
Sec. 2-122. - When disclosure required. 
(a)  Any elected official, appointed officer or employees of the city who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the council. 
(b)  The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the council and he shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. 
(c)  Any elected official, appointed officer or employee of any city agency or political entity who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such agency or entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-42)  
Sec. 2-123. - Contracts rescindable. 
Any violation of this division which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale shall render the contract or sale voidable as to that party, at the option of the council. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-43)  
Sec. 2-124. - Use of public property. 
No elected official, appointed officer or employee of the city or any city agency or entity shall use property owned by such governmental body for personal benefit, convenience or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-44)  
Sec. 2-125. - Limits on holding office, employment. 
(a)  Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or appointive office in the city, or otherwise be employed by the city government or any city agency during the term for which he was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
(b)  No appointive officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-45)  
Sec. 2-126. - Forfeiture of office. 
(a)  Any city officer or employee who willfully conceals a financial interest or willfully violates any of the requirements of this division shall, upon conviction, be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his office or position. 
(b)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his office or position, as described in subsection (a) of this section, shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-46)  
Sec. 2-127. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No member of the governing authority shall: 
(1)  By conduct, give a reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of official acts. 
(2)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise or thing of value for himself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties. 
(3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his official position for his or another person's private gain. 
(4)  Use his official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public. 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties. 
(6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him by virtue of being a member of the governing authority. 
(7)  Use his position to request or require an employee to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
c.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business or political purposes; and 
d.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation. 
(8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved. 
(9)  Use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself or persons having an interest. 
(b)  The prohibition of subsection (a)(2) of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value. 
(2)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service. 
(3)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction. 
(4)  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with state law. 
(c)  The prohibition of subsection (a)(5) of this section shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by section 2-128 are made to the board or board chairperson 30 days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-49; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 2-128. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he has reason to believe may be affected by his official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement 30 days prior to the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he has at the time such matter is presented to the mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he has an interest. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-50; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 2-129. - Disqualification. 
A member of the governing authority shall disqualify himself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-51; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999) 
State Law reference— Conflict of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-130. - Prohibited contracts. 
The following contracts are prohibited: 
(1)  The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of the designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds. 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan. 
(3)  Contracts entered into in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6. 
(4)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency. 
(5)  Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority, or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city manager following disclosure. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-52; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, code of ethics and conflict of interest, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-20 et seq..  
Sec. 2-131. - Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governing authority. 
The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding 12-month period a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-53; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 2-132. - Complaints. 
Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro tem. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor shall: 
(1)  Immediately remove the names of the ethics board members who are appointed by the member of the governing authority against whom the complaint is lodged so that they are not considered to serve on the investigative committee; then 
(2)  Randomly draw three members' names from the remaining board of ethics pool, who, along with the city attorney as legal counsel, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. 
The investigating committee shall have the right to request supporting documentation from the complaining party if the committee deems it reasonable to avoid the pursuit of frivolous complaints. If the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. If the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided in this division. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-54; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999; Ord. No. 04-04-13, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 1237, 8-9-2010) 
Charter reference— Inquiries and investigations, § 2.14. 
State Law reference— Ethics in government, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-133. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  Composition. 
(1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of seven registered voters of the city to be appointed as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction or official action of the city. 
(2)  The mayor shall appoint three qualified registered voters of the city, and councilmembers shall each designate two qualified registered voters of the city to provide a pool of 15 individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of the term of their appointer to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
(3)  The city attorney shall maintain a listing of these 15 qualified registered voters of the city. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified seven members of the board of ethics have been appointed. The only exception will be that the names of the ethics board members who are appointed by the member of the governing authority against whom the complaint is lodged will be removed from the pool of qualified citizens and will not be allowed to serve on the hearing board for said complaint. 
Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. 
(4)  The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  Duties and powers. The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs. 
(2)  Hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of complaint. 
(3)  Prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this division and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this division. 
(4)  Receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this division. 
(5)  Make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this division. 
(6)  Hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints. 
(7)  Report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-55; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999; Ord. No. 1237, 8-9-2010) 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 3.13. 
State Law reference— Ethics in government, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-134. - Compensation. 
The compensation of the board of ethics shall be set at $50.00 per meeting, to be paid only to those members who attend such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-13, 3-13-2001)  
Sec. 2-135. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
In the event the investigating committee determines a complaint warrants a hearing, the board of ethics, as appointed in this division, shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 60 days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to the mayor and council within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-56; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 2-136. - Penalty and member rights. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of this division shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city; a fine greater than $100.00 but less than $500.00 to be imposed by the governing authority. 
(b)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-57; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999)  
Sec. 2-137. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Code 1989, § 2-3-58; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999)  
Secs. 2-138—2-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LEGISLATIVE BODY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-161—2-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS OF GOVERNING BODY 
 
Sec. 2-181. - Time and date of meetings; special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Monday of each month beginning at 7:00 pm unless otherwise ordered by the city council. A regular work session will be held the third Monday of each month beginning at 7:00 pm unless otherwise ordered by the city council. 
(b)  Special meetings of the council may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the council. Notice of such meetings shall be served on all other members by email at the email address designated by the council member and by telephone personally at the telephone number designated by the council member. In the event the staff member is unable to contact a council member to provide such notice by telephone personally the staff member shall, in the presence of another staff member for verification purposes, leave at least three messages, or attempt to leave at least three messages about the called meeting, not less than 15 minutes apart at least two hours in advance of the called meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmen are present when the special meeting is called. Notice of any special meeting may be waived in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice of any special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members present. With such consent, any business which may be transacted in a regular meeting may be conducted at the special meeting. 
Personally: Shall mean a two-way verbal conversation between a staff member (either the mayor, city manager, city clerk or a staff member assigned the duty of contacting the elected officials and the elected official). 
Telephone personally: Shall mean a two-way conversation between two parties (one being the elected official and one being a staff member assigned the duty of notifying the elected officials)— a voice mail or message left with spouse/family member is not sufficient. 
Failure to personally contact each elected official as required by the Charter and this policy will cause the meeting to be cancelled or delayed until all members are notified. 
(c)  Each councilmember shall attend each meeting of the city council, unless he is prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. 
(d)  All meetings of the city council shall be open to the public except as otherwise provided by state law. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-1; Ord. No. 94-07-11, 7-11-1994; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004; Ord. of 11-28-2006(1) ; Ord. No. 2008-0001, 3-10-2008) 
Charter reference— Regular and special meetings, § 2.31. 
State Law reference— Open meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-182. - Presiding officer; rules of order. 
(a)  The mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special or called meeting and shall immediately call the council to order. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the conduct of council meetings. 
(c)  The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any councilmember who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the city council in the manner provided by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, for appealing decisions of presiding officers. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-2) 
Charter reference— Rules of procedure, § 2.32.  
Sec. 2-183. - Roll call; quorum. 
(a)  Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk shall enter the names of those present in the minutes. 
(b)  A majority of all the members elected to the council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the council and an affirmative vote of a majority of such number shall be sufficient to permit the conduct of all business except that for which a larger vote has been mandated by this code. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-3) 
Charter reference— Quorum; voting, § 2.33.  
Sec. 2-184. - Agenda; order of business. 
(a)  An agenda shall be drawn up for all council meetings. The deadline for subjects being placed on the agenda shall be seven days prior to the date of the meeting. Persons interested in addressing the council must place their name, address and the nature of their business on the agenda. 
(b)  The business of the city council shall be taken up in the following order unless otherwise determined by the mayor: 
(1)  Meeting called to order by the mayor. 
(2)  Pledge of allegiance and prayer. 
(3)  Recognition of guests and visitors. 
(4)  Consent agenda. 
(5)  Petitions and communications. 
(6)  Approval of minutes. 
(7)  New business. 
(8)  Informational/emergency items. 
(9)  Mayor and city manager's moments. 
(10)  Public comment. 
(11)  Adjournment. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-4; Ord. No. 91-05-20, 5-20-1991; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 2-185. - Minutes. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be present at each meeting to record the minutes. 
(b)  The yea and nays of the members present shall be recorded on the minutes on any question taken upon the request of a councilmember. 
(c)  Unless a reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a councilmember, such minutes may be approved without a reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-5)  
Sec. 2-186. - Executive session. 
The city council may, upon call therefor by the presiding officer or upon motion duly carried by a councilmember, meet in executive session to discuss matters exempted from state law open meeting requirements. Attendance at such sessions shall be limited to the mayor and members of the council and such invitee's as shall be invited with the unanimous consent of the city council. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-6) 
State Law reference— Exceptions to open meeting requirements, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3.  
Sec. 2-187. - Compensation and expenses. 
(a)  The mayor may receive as compensation for his services an amount of not more than $850.00 per month. Each city councilmember may receive as compensation for his services an amount of not more than $500.00 per month. The mayor and councilmembers shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
(b)  The mayor and councilmembers may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in carrying out their duties. Elected officials will adhere to the same policy guidelines as outlined in the administrative policy and procedures of HRM-5 "Travel While on City Business," as now or hereafter amended with the exception of approval procedures for reimbursements. Such expenses shall include, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Mileage reimbursement for the use of a personal automobile while conducting city business. 
(2)  Travel and lodging expenses and fees incurred in conjunction with training seminars, conventions or city business or city business conducted outside the city. 
Expenses may be reimbursed only after the submission of receipts for such expenses to the city manager and the approval by majority vote of the city council at a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(c)  No elected official may request disbursement of city funds for any advertisement, club dues, charities or other projects, functions or entities without first submitting the request in writing to the city manager and the approval by majority vote of the city council at a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-7; Ord. No. 02-01-09, 1-9-2002) 
Editor's note— Exercising its home rule powers, the mayor and council increased its level of compensation from the level provided in the Charter, § 2.13, on December 11, 2001. 
Charter reference— Composition and expenses, § 2.13.  
Sec. 2-188. - Indemnity. 
(a)  The city shall undertake to defend all civil, criminal or quasicriminal actions, except those specifically excluded under O.C.G.A. § 45-9-21, as amended, brought or maintained against the mayor and members of the city council, arising out of the performance of their duties during their term of office, whether based upon negligence, violations of contract rights, or violations of civil, constitutional, common law or statutory rights, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court costs, deposition costs, witness fees and compensation and all other costs, expenses and fees. 
(b)  The city shall pay any claim or civil judgment against the mayor and members of the city council whose defense the city undertook pursuant to subsection (a) of this section to the extent the claim or civil judgment exceeds any policy of liability insurance or contracts of indemnity insuring or indemnifying the mayor and members of the city council which may be in effect. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-8; Res. No. 90-12-17, 12-17-1990)  
Secs. 2-189—2-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - COMMITTEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Construction board of adjustment procedures, § 18-81 et seq.; parks and recreation board, § 62-41 et seq.; planning commission and authorities, § 74-31 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-211. - Standing committees. 
(a)  The following shall be standing committees of the city council: 
(1)  Community development. 
(2)  Finance and budget. 
(3)  Public services. 
(b)  Each committee, except finance and budget, shall be composed of three council members, appointed by the mayor; who shall serve for one year terms. No council member shall serve on less than one committee. A council member shall serve on a committee on which he did not serve during the previous year. No council member shall serve more than two consecutive years on the same committee. 
The finance and budget committee shall consist of the entire city council body. 
(c)  The mayor shall serve as an ex officio member of each committee. He shall be informed of each committee meeting, entitled to participate fully in the discussions and meeting, and entitled to review any investigation conducted by any committee. In the event of a tie vote on any question, the mayor shall cast a vote to break the tie. 
(d)  The mayor and council may appoint any ad hoc committees as they deem necessary or desirable. 
(e)  The committees shall so meet when so directed by the mayor, the chairman of the committee or any two members of the committee. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-11; Ord. No. 91-05-20, 5-20-1991; Ord. No. 99-12-14, 12-14-1999; Ord. of 1-24-2006) 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 3.13.  
Sec. 2-212. - Committee reports. 
Any business coming before the city council relating to an area of concern of a committee may be referred to that committee for investigation, review and/or recommendation to the mayor and council. Each standing or special committee, whenever required by the mayor or council, shall examine any matter referred to such committee, and make a report thereof at the next regular meeting of the council. Such reports need not be in writing unless so directed by the mayor. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-12; Ord. No. 91-05-20, 5-20-1991) 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 3.13.  
Sec. 2-213. - Chair appointments. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of existing ordinances of the city, the chairperson of any and all committees, boards or commissions, whose members are appointed by the city council, shall be elected by the members of such committee, board or commission for a term of one year, at the first scheduled meeting of each calendar year. Such election shall be made by a majority vote of the members present at such meeting, provided that a quorum of the appointed members is present at such meeting. If a quorum of the appointed members is not present, such election shall be postponed until a quorum of the appointed members is present. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-13; Ord. No. 96-01-09, 1-9-1996) 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 3.13.  
Secs. 2-214—2-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
 
Sec. 2-231. - Preparation. 
(a)  All ordinances, resolutions, contracts and agreements shall be prepared by or referred to the city attorney as provided in subsection (b) of this section. No ordinances, resolutions, contracts and agreements shall be prepared for presentation to the council, or requested in writing by the mayor. 
(b)  All ordinances, resolutions, contracts and agreements shall have been approved, before presentation to the council, as to form and legality by the city attorney or his representative and shall have been examined by the mayor or his representative where there are administrative matters involved. 
(c)  All ordinances, resolutions, contracts and agreements shall have first been referred to the department head who has jurisdiction over the subject matter of the ordinance, resolution, contract or agreement. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-21) 
Charter reference— Ordinances and resolutions must be in writing, § 2.34; procedures for adoption of ordinance book to be maintained, § 2.37.  
Sec. 2-232. - Introduction and adoption. 
(a)  Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects requiring action by the city council must be introduced by a member of the council, provided that the mayor, city manager or city attorney may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the council, and any councilmember may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinance, resolution, matter or subject be adopted. 
(b)  No ordinance, other than emergency ordinances, shall be passed by the city council unless it shall first have been presented at the preceding regular or special meeting of the city council. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of the conflict, hereby repealed. 
(c)  No ordinance shall relate to more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title. 
(d)  No ordinance, or section thereof, shall be amended or repealed unless the new ordinance contains the title of the ordinance or section amended or repealed, and when practicable all ordinances shall be introduced as amendments to this Code. 
(e)  An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives the affirmative vote of a majority of the whole council. 
(f)  All ordinances shall take effect on the day following passage by the city council unless otherwise provided therein. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-22; Ord. No. 93-03-22, 3-22-1993) 
Charter reference— Emergency ordinances may be enacted without a delay, § 2.35.  
Secs. 2-233—2-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 24, 2010, repealed Art. V and supplied provisions for a new Art. V to read as set out herein. Former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1989, §§ 2-6-1—2-6-35; Ord. No. 99-07-27, adopted July 27, 1999; and Ord. No. 05-01-25, §§ 2-6-1—2-6-35;, adopted Jan. 25, 2005. 
Charter reference— Centralized purchasing authorized, § 6.41. 
 
Sec. 2-251. - In general. 
In lieu of a purchasing ordinance, the mayor and council has adopted a purchasing policy to be incorporated into the Woodstock Council Policy Manual known as CPM #200-0006. 
(Ord. of 5-24-2010)  
Sec. 2-252. - Purchasing card ordinance for elected officials. 
In addition to this Purchasing Card Ordinance, the mayor and council has adopted a purchasing policy located in the Woodstock Council Policy Manual known as CPM #200-0006 and a credit card policy known as CPM #200-0007. 
A.  Overview. The Georgia General Assembly established guidelines and penalties into the Official Code of Georgia Annotated ("O.C.G.A.") which provides that no municipal corporation shall issue government purchasing cards or government credit cards to elected officials on or after January 1, 2016, until the governing authority of the municipal corporation, by public vote, has authorized the issuance and has promulgated specific policies regarding the use of such government purchasing cards or government credit cards for elected officials of such municipal corporation. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this policy is to set requirements and standards for the City of Woodstock, Georgia Purchasing Card Program. The policy is not intended to replace current State of Georgia statutes but is intended to comply with such state laws and establish more efficient guidelines for elected officials using such purchasing cards. At no time should a city issued purchasing card or credit card be used for personal purchases regardless of the circumstances. Utilizing the purchasing card or credit card for personal use or for any item or service not directly related to such official's public duty may result in disciplinary action including, but not limited to, felony criminal prosecution. All purchases utilizing a government purchasing card or government credit card must be in accordance with these guidelines and with state law. 
C.  Scope. This purchasing card policy, as required by state law under O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c), applies to the use of government purchasing cards or government credit cards used by elected officials authorized to be issued such government purchasing cards or government credit cards. The below list of officials have been authorized by the governing authority of the city to use such government purchasing cards or government credit cards and must abide by all of the applicable state laws and this purchasing card policy. 
1.  Mayor 
2.  City council 
D.  Public inspection. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(b) any documents related to purchases using government purchasing cards or government credit cards incurred by elected officials shall be available for public inspection. 
E.  Transaction limits. Transaction limits are hereby established to insure compliance with state purchasing laws, maintain proper budgetary controls, and to minimize excessive use of any individual credit line. Individual monthly card limits cannot exceed those established by the municipal governing authority. The established single transaction limit for each card must be less than $2,000.00. The established monthly card limit is based upon the city's budgetary constraints and is not to exceed $5,000.00 per month. Any exceptions to the standardized limits must have express written approval by the municipal governing authority and must be added to this policy by amendment or addendum. 
F.  Purchasing restrictions. 
1.  Elected Officials may not use a government purchasing card or government credit card for the following: 
a.  Any purchases of items for personal use. 
b.  Cash refunds or advances. 
c.  Any transaction amount greater than the transaction limits set for by this policy. 
d.  Items specifically restricted by this policy, unless a special exemption is granted by the municipal governing authority. 
e.  Alcohol or liquor of any kind. Such purchases should not be made with the purchasing card and may not be reimbursed by the city. 
f.  Purchases or transactions made with the intent to circumvent the city purchasing policy, transactional limits, or state law. 
2.  Elected Officials may use government purchasing cards or government credit cards to purchase goods and/or services not prohibited by this policy or state law. Such purchases include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Purchases of items for official city use which fall within the transactional restrictions of this policy. 
b.  Purchase of lodging, fuel, food, non-alcoholic beverages, or education and training materials while on city business. 
c.  Emergency purchases necessary to protect city property. 
G.  Administrator. The city designates the chief financial officer (CFO) or his designee, as the program administrator of government purchasing cards or government credit cards. Such administrator shall: 
1.  Serve as a liaison between the city's cardholders and the issuers of such cards. 
2.  Maintain the cardholder agreement for all cardholders. 
3.  Provide instruction, training, and assistance to cardholders. 
4.  Maintain account information and secure all cardholder information. 
5.  Keep cardholders up-to-date on new or changing information. 
6.  Upon receipt of information indicating fraudulent use or lost/stolen cards immediately report it to appropriate parties, including the issuer. 
7.  Ensure all card accounts are being utilized properly as set forth by state law and this policy. 
8.  Define the city's policy and procedures for proper documentation and storage of receipts, logs, and approvals required under this policy. 
9.  Identify any changes to named persons authorized to use a government purchasing card or government credit card. 
10.  Any other duties assigned by the municipal governing authority. 
H.  Accounting and auditing. The administrator, in an effort to ensure compliance with city policy and state law, will conduct monthly reviews and audits of all government purchasing card or government credit card transactions. The review is designed to ensure compliance, identify non-compliance issues and misuse, and through corrective measures assist the city with improving compliance. The monthly review and audit should happen within five days of the start of a new month. After completing the monthly audit the administrator shall notify cardholders of any violations or questions the administrator has that occurred within that previous month. Depending on the severity of the violation, the Administrator may suspend or revoke the use of the government purchasing card or government credit card after notification to the cardholder and to the municipal governing authority, but only after consultation with the city attorney. Any unresolved violations should be reported to the municipal governing authority and the city attorney in writing within five business days. 
I.  Violations. The use of a government purchasing card or government credit card may be suspended or revoked when the Administrator, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that the cardholder has violated the approved policies or state law regarding the use of the government purchasing card or government credit card. The government purchasing card or government credit card shall be revoked whenever a cardholder is removed from office with the city and shall be suspended if such elected official has been suspended from office. 
J.  Agreement. Before being issued a government purchasing card or government credit card under this policy and state law, all authorized users of government purchasing cards or government credit cards shall sign and accept below indicating that such user will use such cards only in accordance with the policies of the city and with the requirements of state law. 
;sig; 
Name Printed 
;sig; 
Signature 
Date: 
(Res. of 7-27-2015, Att. A)  
Secs. 2-253—2-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— By referendum and resolution, the city participates in a one-percent local option sales tax. 
Charter reference— Finance and fiscal powers of city council, art. VI; purchasing and contracting procedures, §§ 6.40, 6.41. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(1); any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement saved from repeal, § 1-11(2); any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved from repeal, § 1-11(4); any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(19); taxation, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Local government financial management standards and procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-401. - Returned check charge. 
There shall be a service charge on all checks returned to the city or any of its subsidiaries on any checks not validated within ten days. The charge shall be set from time to time by the city council. Further legal action shall be taken at the expense of the check writer. 
(Code 1989, § 3-1-1)  
Sec. 2-402. - Fiscal year. 
The city shall operate on a fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending June 30. 
(Code 1989, § 3-1-2) 
Charter reference— Fiscal year established, § 6.30. 
State Law reference— Establishment of fiscal year, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3.  
Sec. 2-403. - Financial statement required. 
Within six months after the close of the fiscal year, a statement of revenues and expenditures which represents the financial condition of the city and shows all municipal accounts as of the close of the preceding fiscal year shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. 
(Code 1989, § 3-1-3)  
Sec. 2-404. - Preparation of budget. 
(a)  The city manager is designated as the budget officer of the city. The budget officer shall be responsible for formulating the proposed budget, publishing required notices and administering the budget as adopted. 
(b)  A proposed budget shall be prepared and shall be prefaced by a summary of its contents and showing in detail all estimated income, including the proposed property tax levy, and all proposed expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall show comparative figures for actual and estimated income and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year. Separate items shall be included for at least the following: 
(1)  Administration, operation and maintenance expenses of each department or office of the city, including a breakdown of salaries and wages for each such unit; 
(2)  Interest and debt redemption charges; 
(3)  Proposed capital expenditures, detailed by departments and offices when practicable; 
(4)  Cash deficits of the preceding year; 
(5)  Contingent expenses in an amount not more than three percent of the total amount of administration, operation and maintenance expenses; and 
(6)  Such reserves as may be deemed advisable by the council. 
(c)  The total of proposed expenditures in the budget shall not exceed the total of anticipated revenue. 
(Code 1989, § 3-1-4) 
Charter reference— The proposed budget must be prepared not later than 30 days before the beginning of the fiscal year, § 6.32. 
State Law reference— Local government budget procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.  
Sec. 2-405. - Budget hearing. 
(a)  The budget officer shall publish in one or more newspapers of general circulation within the city a copy of the budget summary and notice of the time and place of a budget hearing. The city clerk shall keep on file a copy of the budget summary, as well as the entire budget, for public inspection. A budget hearing shall be held not less than ten days after the initial advertisement. 
(b)  The budget hearing shall be conducted by the city council at least one week before adoption of the budget. Citizens may present oral or written questions on the entire budget during this hearing. 
(Code 1989, § 3-1-5) 
Charter reference— Action by council on budget, § 6.33.  
Sec. 2-406. - Adoption of budget. 
(a)  The city council may adopt the budget by ordinance or resolution at any advertised public meeting held at least one week after the meeting advertisement is published. 
(b)  The budget must be adopted not later than July 30 of the fiscal year. 
(c)  The budget officer shall publish in one or more papers of general circulation within the city notice of the availability in the city clerk's office of the adopted budget summary and budget. 
(Code 1989, § 3-1-6) 
Charter reference— Action by council on budget, § 6.33.  
Sec. 2-407. - Budget amendments. 
(a)  The city council may amend the budget during or after the budget hearing, except that no proposed amendment shall be effective without a public hearing if it: 
(1)  Adds a new item of appropriation in an amount exceeding one percent of the total amount of appropriations as stated in the initially approved budget; or 
(2)  Increases or decreases any item of appropriation by more than ten percent. 
(b)  Notice of hearing on any amendment shall be advertised at least three days before the date set therefor. Any such amendment must be published in full in the same manner as an original publication and must be read in full at the hearing and before adoption. 
(Code 1989, § 3-1-7) 
Charter reference— Authority of city council to amend budget, § 6.33(a).  
Sec. 2-408. - Transfer of appropriations. 
(a)  The city council may at any time during the fiscal year transfer by ordinance part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department or office. 
(b)  The city council may by ordinance transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or office to another, except that no appropriation for debt service or capital improvements may be reduced or transferred during any fiscal year. 
(c)  The expenditures may not exceed the total budgeted expenditures. 
(Code 1989, § 3-1-8)  
Sec. 2-409. - Emergency appropriations. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the city council may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a budget, for a purpose which was not foreseen at the time of the adoption, or for which adequate provision was not made. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property or the public peace, and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues or surplus. If there is no surplus, then temporary borrowing in notes may be made, provided that any such borrowed amounts are included as an appropriation in the next succeeding year's budget. 
(Code 1989, § 3-1-9)  
Sec. 2-410. - Lapse of appropriations. 
(a)  Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the next succeeding year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. 
(b)  An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
(Code 1989, § 3-1-10)  
Sec. 2-411. - Capital program. 
(a)  A five-year capital program may be submitted to the city council at the same time that the budget is introduced for approval. Such capital program shall include the following information: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken for the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
(b)  The capital program may be revised each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
(Code 1989, § 3-1-11) 
Charter reference— Capital improvements budget, § 6.36.  
Secs. 2-412—2-420. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 2-421. - Short title, authority and applicability. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the Development Impact Fee Ordinance of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, or for brevity the Impact Fee Ordinance. 
(b)  Authority. This article has been prepared and adopted by the city council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, in accordance with the authority provided by Article 9, Section 2 Paragraph 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq., as amended, and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. 
(2)  This article shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of city and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 1, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-422. - Findings purpose and intent. 
(a)  Findings. The city council of the city finds and declares: 
(1)  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city; and 
(2)  That certain public facilities, as herein defined, have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development; and 
(3)  That it is fair and equitable that new growth and development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. 
(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this article is to impose impact fees as hereinafter set forth for certain public facilities as hereinafter defined. 
(2)  It is also the purpose of this article to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in the city cnd to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
(c)  Intent. This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the City of Woodstock Comprehensive Plan as it may be adopted or amended in accordance with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq.; and the applicable minimum standards and procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning and the Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements both as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 2, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-423. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
The provisions of this article shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(1)  Rules of construction. Unless otherwise stated in this article the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
a.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between words or phrases as used in this article and as used in other codes regulations or laws of the city, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this article. 
b.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption illustration, summary, table or illustrative table the text shall control. 
c.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
d.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
e.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association or any other legal or similar entity. 
f.  The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
g.  The conjunction "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
h.  The use of "either......or" indicates that the connected items conditions provisions or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
i.  The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
j.  The article, section and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this article are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this article. 
(2)  Definitions. As used in this article the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below: 
Administrator means the city manager of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, or the city manager's designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this article. 
Building permit is the permit required for new construction or an interior finish pursuant to the applicable building code. 
Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
Capital improvements element means that portion of the City of Woodstock Comprehensive Plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement, as most recently adopted or amended by the city council. 
City means the City of Woodstock, a legal subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
City council means the city council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
Commencement of construction, for private development, means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development or building permit; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project. 
Comprehensive plan means the City of Woodstock Plan or Planning Elements as adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq.) and the applicable Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs. 
Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work "day or other designation when used in the text. 
Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
Development means any action which creates additional demand on or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; any change in use of land, a building, or structure; or the connection of any building or structure to a public utility. 
Development approval means written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit land disturbance permit, or other approval for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction. 
Development impact fee means the payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of the city. 
Excess capacity means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
Feepayor means that person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his or her legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this article has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. 
Individual assessment determination means a finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this article, or if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
Individual assessment study means the engineering financial or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by the city in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of "net present value". 
Project means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or other development approval, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
Project improvements means site specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project, and that are not system improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by the city shall be considered a project improvement. 
Property owner means that person or entity that holds legal title to property. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
Public facilities means (A) Parks open space and recreation areas and related facilities; and (B) Roads, streets and bridges including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping and any local components of state or federal highways. 
Service area means a geographically defined area as designated in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide additional public facilities capacity needed to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying, and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three percent of the total of all other system improvement costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc. 
Unused or excess impact fee means any individual impact fee payment from which no amount of money or only a portion thereof has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 3, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-424. - Imposition of development impact fees. 
Any person who after the effective date of this article engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(1)  Construction not subject to impact fees. The following projects and construction activities do not constitute development as defined in this article and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees. 
a.  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development as defined in this article that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property. 
b.  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
c.  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
d.  Placing or replacing a manufactured home in a manufactured home park on a prepared manufactured home pad in existence and operation prior to the effective date of this article. 
e.  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or buildout of a development project. 
f.  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential housing unit that does not increase the number of housing units. 
g.  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool. 
(2)  Grandfathered projects. 
a.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this article shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
b.  Any building for which a valid and complete application for a building permit has been received prior to the effective date of this article may proceed without payment of fees otherwise imposed by this article provided that: 
1.  All fees and development exactions in effect prior to the effective date of this article shall be or have been paid in full; and 
2.  Said construction shall be commenced pursued and completed within the time established by the building permit. 
(3)  Method of calculation. 
a.  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this article shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, shall be calculated on the basis of the establishment of service areas, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
b.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of credits for the present value of ad valorem taxes or other revenues as established in the Capital Improvements Element of the comprehensive plan and which: 
1.  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new growth and development; and 
2.  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category and in the same service area for which an impact fee is imposed. 
c.  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this article shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of the city and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
d.  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee may also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
e.  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs as set forth in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 4, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-425. - Fee assessment and payment. 
(a)  Fee schedule. 
(1)  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. 
(2)  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
a.  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee based on the nearest designation the administrator can determine. 
b.  In making such determination the administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
c.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. 
(b)  Timing of assessment and payment. 
(1)  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  All development impact fees shall be collected no earlier than the time of issuance of a building permit and no later than as a prerequisite to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building. 
(3)  As used herein the term shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase in the demand placed on those public facilities as defined herein. 
(4)  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the actual use prior to issuance of an interior finishes permit or approval of a certificate of occupancy. An adjustment may result in a refund to the feepayor or payment of the marginal increase of the adjusted fee over the amount already paid. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any future change in demand for public facilities in excess of the average demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the building permit shall be assessed such additional fee as would otherwise have been due. Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined herein) or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the building permit. If such circumstances exist an additional permit fee shall be charged. 
(c)  Individual assessment determinations. Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
(1)  At their option an applicant for development approval may petition the administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project in lieu of the fee established on the fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as attachment A. 
(2)  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. Each individual assessment study shall: 
a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or 
b.  Be based on actual relevant and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in the city or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and 
c.  Provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. 
(3)  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this article. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. 
(4)  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by the city and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Fee certification. Upon application to the administrator, a developer may receive a certification of the development impact fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as attachment A or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. Such certified schedule or fee shall establish the development impact fee due for a period of 180 days from the date of certification even if new or revised rate schedules are adopted in the interim. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 5, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-426. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Exemption policy. The city finds that certain office, retail trade or industrial uses that create unusually high investment, economic or job creation benefits represent extraordinary economic development and employment growth of public benefit to Woodstock in proportion to the creation of such benefits. 
(1)  To encourage such development projects, the city council may consider granting a reduction in the impact fee for such a development project upon the determination and relative to the extent that the business or project represents extraordinary economic development and employment growth of public benefit to the city, in accordance with exemption criteria, as adopted by the city council. 
(2)  It is also recognized that the cost of system improvements otherwise foregone through exemption of any impact fee must be funded through revenue sources other than impact fees. 
(b)  Process for exemption approval. An application for exemption shall be considered under the following procedures: 
(1)  Application for exemption approval must be made by the building permit applicant to the administrator. A building permit may be issued upon approval of an exemption, or may be issued without payment of applicable impact fees following receipt of a complete exemption application and pending its approval, but a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until a decision regarding the exemption has been made or until such time that the application for exemption is otherwise withdrawn by the applicant and payment of impact fees have been paid. 
(2)  Documentation must be provided to the administrator that demonstrates the applicant's eligibility for an exemption. This documentation shall address, but need not be limited to, all applicable exemption criteria adopted by the city. This documentation constitutes the application for exemption. 
(3)  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall determine whether an application for exemption addresses the exemption criteria adopted by the city and is complete. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. 
(4)  The administrator or the city council shall determine the eligibility for and extent of exemption, in accordance with the standards and procedures contained in the exemption criteria adopted by the city council. If action by the city council is required, the application for exemption shall be considered as soon as practically possible, at a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council that falls at least two weeks after a complete application for exemption has been received by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 6, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-427. - Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
(a)  Maintenance of funds. 
(1)  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this article shall be maintained in one or more interest bearing accounts until expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all city funds generally, and as set forth in Georgia law. 
(2)  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements within each service area wherein fees are collected. 
(3)  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this article. 
(b)  Expenditures; restrictions. 
(1)  Expenditures from the impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements within the service area for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
(2)  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article the following shall be considered general revenue of the city, and may be expended accordingly: 
a.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
b.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by the city for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and 
c.  Any portion of the impact fee (but not to exceed three percent) of the total collected and allocated by the Administrator for administration of the impact fee ordinance and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  Annual report. 
(1)  The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the city council as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility and service area. 
(2)  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs DCA and submitted to DCA in conjunction with the annual update of the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 7, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-428. - Credits. 
When eligible feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. 
(1)  Credits restrictions. 
a.  Except as provided in subsection b. below, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this article. 
b.  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his or her predecessor in title or interest) prior to the effective date of this article for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of the city, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
c.  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements, or for system improvements not included for impact fee funding in the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Granting of credits. 
a.  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
1.  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive land use plan; 
2.  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the capital improvements element; and 
3.  The city council shall have explicitly approved, through written agreement, said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
b.  The credit allowed pursuant to this section shall not exceed the impact fee due for such system improvement unless a greater credit is authorized under a private agreement executed under the provisions of section 2-429 of this article. 
(3)  Guidelines for credit valuation. Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
a.  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the administrator of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
b.  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
c.  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that the city would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
d.  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest accepted by the city, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
e.  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned on a State of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the city council in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
(4)  Credits application. 
a.  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the administrator. A developer must present a valid contract between the developer and the city to the administrator at or before the time of development/impact fee assessment. 
b.  The administrator, in his or her sole discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
c.  Any credit approved by the administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
(5)  Credits abandoned building permits. In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the city, the amount paid and that the building permit was abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 8, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-429. - Refunds. 
(a)  Eligibility for a refund. 
(1)  Upon the request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a development impact fee has been paid the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
a.  Capacity is available in the public facilities for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or 
b.  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
(2)  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(b)  Notice of entitlement to a refund. When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within 30 days after the expiration of the six-year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." No refund shall be made for a period of 30 days from the date of said publication. 
(c)  Filing a request for a refund. All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. 
(d)  Payment of refunds. 
(1)  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
(2)  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
(3)  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, for any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by the city for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 9, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-430. - Private contractual agreements. 
(a)  Private agreements authorized. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the city and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including interproject transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project, provided that: 
(1)  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan; and 
(2)  The amount of any credit or reimbursement granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvements cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
(b)  Private agreements provisions. A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
(1)  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the city to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this article. 
(2)  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
(3)  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this article, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do business within the State of Georgia, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
(c)  Private agreements procedure. 
(1)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review, negotiation and submission to the city council. 
(2)  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the city council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 10, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-431. - Periodic review and amendments. 
(a)  Ordinance amendments. This article may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. 
(b)  Capital improvements element periodic review. 
(1)  Update. At least once each year, the city council shall review and may update the capital improvements element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The capital improvements element update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The capital improvements element update shall be submitted to the regional development center for their review, in accordance with the Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements as adopted by the Board Of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Amendment. In conducting a periodic review of the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees the city council may determine to amend the capital improvements element. Amendments to the capital improvements element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements as adopted by the Board Of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: 
a.  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; 
b.  Add new public facility categories for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas or make changes to system improvement projects; 
c.  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area; or 
d.  Make any other revisions needed to keep the capital improvements element up to date. 
(c)  Continuation of validity. Failure of the city council to undertake a periodic review of the capital improvements element shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to periodically review such data shall not invalidate this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 11, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-432. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Eligibility to file an appeal. Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the city or who have already received a written determination of individual assessment refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. 
(b)  Appeals process. 
(1)  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor (hereinafter the appellant) must file a written appeal with the administrator within 15 days of the decision or receipt of written determination from which the appeal is taken. 
(2)  Such written appeal shall constitute an application for relief, shall be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought, and shall include: 
a.  The name and address of the appellant; 
b.  The location of the affected property; 
c.  A copy of any applicable written decision or determination made by the administrator (from which the appeal is taken). 
(3)  Within 15 days after receipt of the appeal, the administrator shall make a written final decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. 
(4)  Appeals from the final decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council within 30 days of receipt by the appellant of the administrator's decision. Delivery by hand or certified mail to, or posting upon the property at, the address given by the appellant in the application for relief shall constitute "receipt by the appellant" under this provision. 
(5)  The city council shall thereafter hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days provided that at least two weeks written notice thereof can be given to the appellant. The city council shall decide the issue within a reasonable time following the hearing, but in no case more than 15 days following the hearing, unless the appellant agrees to an extension to a later date. Any party making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the hearing to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. 
(c)  Payment of impact fee during appeal. 
(1)  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. 
(2)  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a development approval, and by making such payment shall not be estopped from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 12, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 2-433. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement authority. 
(1)  The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel as the administrator may designate from time to time. 
(2)  The administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this article and shall have the right to issue a written notice, a stop work order or citation for violations, as the administrator in his or her sole determination may deem appropriate to the circumstances. Refusal of written notice of violation, stop work order or citation under this article shall constitute legal notice of service. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. 
(3)  The administrator may suspend or revoke any building permit or withhold the issuance of other development approvals if the provisions of this article have been violated by the developer or the owner or their assigns. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this article shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(2)  Proceeding with construction of a project that is not consistent with the project's impact fee assessment such as the use category claimed or units of development indicated shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(3)  Failure to take corrective action following the receipt of a citation shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(4)  A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law, including the general penalty provisions of the City of Woodstock Code of Ordinances section 1-7. In addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the city council shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this article, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, including but not limited to injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this article and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0008, § 13, 5-12-2008)  
Secs. 2-434—2-450. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PAYMENTS BY CREDIT CARDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-03-22, adopted Mar. 22, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been included as Art. VII, §§ 2-451—2-453 to read as set out herein. 
 
Sec. 2-451. - Authorized. 
All sums due the city, including but not limited to ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees, permit fees and registration fees, may be paid by the use of credit cards. The director of finance, with the approval of the city manager, shall establish the procedures for acceptance of credit card payments for amounts due the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-22, 3-22-2005)  
Sec. 2-452. - Discounted fees approved. 
A credit card agreement made pursuant to this article may provide for the acceptance of the credit card payments from the credit card company at a discount from the face amount of the payment or for the withholding of administrative fees from the face amount of the payment. Such discounted fee is granted in exchange for the improved governmental cash flow, reduction of administrative expenses and increased public convenience as a result of credit card payments. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-22, 3-22-2005)  
Sec. 2-453. - Personal liability for final payment. 
No person making payment by credit card to the city is relieved from liability for the underlying obligation except to the extent that the city actually receives final payment of the obligation in cash or its equivalent. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, the underlying obligation for the money due is not extinguished. All applicable penalties, interest and collection fees on the unpaid amount shall be due from the person making the payment by credit card. Such penalties, interest and fees on an unpaid amount shall accrue from the date the unpaid obligation was first due under the applicable statute or ordinance. The city shall follow the collection procedures for the unpaid amount that would have otherwise been applicable had the credit card payment not been attempted. 
(Ord. No. 05-03-22, 3-22-2005)  
Secs. 2-454—2-520. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 2-521. - Establishment; composition of board. 
The city youth advisory council shall consist of 16 students who attend Woodstock High School. Four students will be selected from each grade level. Individuals chosen to be part of this board shall be selected by the principal of Woodstock High School in consultation with faculty members. The mayor shall appoint a chairperson for a term of one year. The youth advisory council shall also have a vice chair and secretary to be elected by its members for a one-year term. The secretary shall keep a record of all meetings for the youth advisory council. In the absence of a secretary an appointed member will be secretary pro tem. The youth advisory council shall not have responsibility or authority over public officials or employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 001-2007, 1-9-2007)  
Sec. 2-522. - Term of office. 
The youth advisory council members terms of office shall expire contemporaneously with graduation, transfer, or withdrawal from Woodstock High School, or at the request of the youth advisory council faculty advisor and principal. It is the intention of the program that youth appointees will serve for the duration of their attendance at Woodstock High School with freshmen serving through all four years until graduation. 
(Ord. No. 001-2007, 1-9-2007)  
Sec. 2-523. - Advisors. 
The city's director of community affairs will serve as an advisor, as well as Woodstock High School appointing a faculty advisor. The two advisors' role will be to give direction and guidance to keep the council informed and help them reach a consensus, without official voting privileges. 
(Ord. No. 001-2007, 1-9-2007)  
Sec. 2-524. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The youth advisory council shall meet once a month during the school year on the third Monday of every month from 10:00—11:30 in council chambers. Woodstock High School administration will arrange for transportation to and from city hall. Should council chambers not be available, arrangements will be made to meet at Woodstock High School. 
(b)  The youth advisory council shall make recommendations to and assist the city council and city staff on a variety of issues, both focusing on youth as well as concerns of the broader community. 
(c)  Each month the youth council will be briefed by a city department director, their staff and/or council members on a variety of issues. 
(d)  Each youth council member is expected to serve in an ex officio capacity on at least one other city committee or advisory group. 
(e)  A simple majority of members shall constitute a quorum. A vote of the simple majority of the quorum shall be required for any action taken by the youth advisory council. 
(f)  Additional meetings may be called by the chair or vice chair after a minimum of 24 hours notice to the other council members and advisor. 
(g)  Each youth advisory council member shall be expected to attend all regular and special meetings as may be held. If a member is unable to attend a meeting, he/she should notify the secretary or advisor. After three absences without special circumstances, the member will be removed from the youth advisory council automatically, and a letter from the advisor or mayor will be sent to the member and principal with a formal notice of removal. 
(Ord. No. 001-2007, 1-9-2007)  
Secs. 2-525—2-550. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 2-551. - Definition of municipal records. 
Records means all documents, papers, letter, maps, books (except books in formally organized libraries), microfilm, magnetic tape, laserfische or other material, regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in performance of functions by any employee, committee, board elected official, department, or other agency of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 007-2007, § 1, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-552. - Additional definitions. 
Court record means all documents, papers, letters, maps, books (except books formally organize in libraries), microfilm, magnetic tape, or other material, regardless of physical form or characteristics made or received pursuant to law or ordinance or in the necessary performance of any judicial function created or received by an official of the Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, and any superior, state, juvenile, probate or magistrate court. Court record includes records of the offices of the judge, clerk, prosecuting attorney, public defender, court reporter, or any employee of the court. 
Department director means the officer who by ordinance or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the City of Woodstock, GA, that creates or receives records. 
Georgia State Archives means an establishment maintained by the department for the preservation of those records and other papers that have been determined by the department to have sufficient historical and other value to warrant their continued preservation by the state and that have been accepted by the department for deposit in its custody. 
Governing body means the Mayor and Council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
Permanent record means any record of the City of Woodstock, GA, for which the retention period on a records retention schedule is given as permanent. 
Records center means an establishment maintained by the department primarily for the storage, processing, servicing, and security of public records that must be retained for varying periods of time but need not be retained in an agency s office equipment or office space. 
Records manager means the person designated in section 2-555. 
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-556. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, utilization, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records undertaken to reduce costs and improve efficiency of record keeping. "Records management" includes management of filing and microfilming equipment and supplies; filing and information retrieval systems; files, correspondence, reports, and forms management; historical documentation; micrographics; retention programming; and vital records protection. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation recording or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
Retention schedule means a set of disposition instructions prescribing how long, where, and in what form a record series shall be kept. 
Vital record means any record vital to the resumption or continuation of operations, or both; to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of government in the state; or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to citizens of the city/state. 
(Ord. No. 007-2007, § 2, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-553. - Municipal records declared public property. 
(a)  All municipal records as defined in section 2-551 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(b)  No person is permitted to take away from the city hall or any other place where the records are lawfully stored any records for any purpose whatsoever, unless by competent and lawful court order except by motion of the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 007-2007, § 3, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-554. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Woodstock, GA to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for their management from creation to ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Georgia Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 007-2007, § 4, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-555. - Designation of records manager. 
The city clerk and the successive holders of said office shall serve as records manager for the city. 
(Ord. No. 007-2007, § 5, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-556. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records manager shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the mayor and council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of record keeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records manager to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the mayor and council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, scanned, microfilmed or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department director do not exempt the department director or the records in the department director's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department director as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 007-2007, § 6, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-557. - Duties of records manager. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article the records manager shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department directors in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department directors/coordinator, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system, scanning and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Georgia State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records retention schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(8)  Disseminate to the mayor and council and department directors/coordinators information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(9)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, scanning, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the records of the city are carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(10)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records retention schedules or through records destruction authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(11)  Report annually to the mayor and council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city; and 
(12)  Bring to the attention of the mayor and council noncompliance by department directors/coordinators or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Georgia Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 007-2007, § 7, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-558. - Duties and responsibilities of department directors. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article department directors shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records manager in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department director and his other staff are responsible; 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, scanning, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article; and 
(4)  Assign the duties of records coordinator to at least one person in their department to act on behalf of the department in implementing the records management program and open records requests in coordination with the records manager. 
(Ord. No. 007-2007, § 8, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-559. - Records retention schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records manager, in cooperation with department directors, shall prepare records retention schedules on a department by department basis listing all records series created or received by the department and the retention period for each series. Records retention schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records retention schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records manager on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the record keeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption a records retention schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department director and the governing body. 
(d)  Before its adoption a records retention schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the Georgia Archives Department. If a schedule is not accepted for filing the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records manager shall submit the records retention schedules to the Georgia Department of Archives. 
(Ord. No. 007-2007, § 9, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-560. - Implementation of records retention schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records retention schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-559 shall be implemented by department directors according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records retention schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record; the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit; or the department director requests in writing to the records manager that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records retention schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records manager from the mayor and council. 
(d)  The records manager shall maintain a certificate of destruction which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the date approved for destruction by council, the dates covered and the volume destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 007-2007, § 10, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-561. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records retention schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records manager has submitted to and received back from the Georgia Archives Department authorization for the request. 
(Ord. No. 007-2007, § 11, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 2-562. - Records management committee. 
(a)  Creation. A records management committee consisting of the following: human resources director/risk manager, zoning administrator, finance director, chief building official, police chief and mayor shall be established. The records manager shall serve as the secretary to this committee. 
(b)  Responsibilities. The RMC shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Assisting the records manager in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program for the city; 
(2)  Reviewing the performance and participation of the program on an annual basis; 
(3)  Proposing changes and improvements to the records retention policy if needed; 
(4)  Planning, formulating and prescribing records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures; 
(5)  Monitoring records retention schedules in compliance with the State of Georgia Records Retention Schedule for Local Government Records. 
(c)  The RMC will review all lists of records proposed to be destroyed, for pending open records requests, records pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or when a department director requests in writing to the RMC that certain records be retained for a period longer than that established by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 007-2007, § 12, 3-12-2007)  
Secs. 2-563—2-599. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 2-600. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-601. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-602. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Woodstock. 
Covered account means (i) An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-603. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water and sewer utility accounts. 
(c)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(d)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(e)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following way: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-604. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant, whether citizen or legal resident alien, shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer in the form of a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system. 
(b)  If the customer uses the city's on-line bill payment system, each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-605. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by finance management on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the chief financial officer and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any outside request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the chief financial officer and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-606. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website will verify that the card name matches the covered account name. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-607. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-608. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to finance management. If finance management in its discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by finance management: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify the city's debt collector within 24 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to finance management. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to finance management, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If finance management in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by finance management: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-609. - Program administration. 
The finance manager is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The chief financial officer is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the chief financial officer, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The finance manager will report to the chief financial officer at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The finance manager is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The finance manager shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-610. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the finance manager shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Secs. 2-611—2-649. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 
 
Sec. 2-650. - Short title. 
Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 2, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-651. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 1, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-652. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means City of Woodstock. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 2, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-653. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318; 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 2, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-654. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 2, 11-17-2008)  
Sec. 2-655. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0021, § 2, 11-17-2008)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Specific power to regulate sale and transport of intoxicating liquors, § 1.13(16). 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; public drinking, § 58-35; personnel drug and alcohol use prohibited, § 70-5. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. tit. 3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate parking means one parking space for each 100 square feet of customer service area within the premises of an applicant. 
Administrator means the city manager or his designee. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine. 
Bar means any premises at which a retailer licensed to sell alcoholic beverages derives 75 percent or more total annual gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
Barrel means 31 gallons when applied to brewers and 53 gallons when applied to distillers. 
Brewer means a manufacturer of malt beverages. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which malt beverages are manufactured, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in Code section 3-5-36. As used in this paragraph, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food; provided, however, that when determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales, barrels of malt beverages sold to licensed wholesale dealers, or to the public for consumption off the premises, shall not be used. 
Brown-bagging means the bringing, taking or carrying of any alcoholic beverage into a business licensed to operate within the city, but not licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, provided that bringing an alcoholic beverage into a house, apartment, room or other unit designed for private residential occupancy shall not fall within this definition. 
Brown-bagging establishments means bring-your-own-bottle establishments that may not hold a license to sell and may not sell or serve any alcoholic beverages. They must be in a zoning district that allows such use. 
Building code means and includes all building, plumbing and electrical codes and any similar technical code of the city. 
Business area means any street length between intersections where 50 percent or more is in use for business purposes. 
Case means a box or receptacle containing not more than 288 ounces of malt beverages on the average. 
Central business district (CBD) means any premises located in the DT-CBD zoning district. 
Church means any permanent building which houses the main sanctuary in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is publicly designated as a church, but shall not include a residence also used for religious purposes. The term "church" shall not include the temporary housing or leased space of a religious group in an otherwise commercial center. 
College means only those state, county, city, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Distance means the measurement in horizontal lineal feet as defined in section 6-25. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Distiller means a manufacturer. In the case of distilled spirits, "manufacturer" means any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; provided, however, that a vintner that blends wine with distilled spirits to produce a fortified wine shall not be considered a manufacturer of distilled spirits. 
Family means any person related to the holder of such license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to civil law. 
Good moral character means the propensity of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner. 
(1)  A judgment of guilt is a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used in and of itself as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that: 
a.  At the current time he has the ability to, and is likely to, serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner; and 
b.  He is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he seeks a business license or business permit. 
(2)  The following criminal records shall not be used, examined or requested by the city in a determination of good moral character when used as a requirement to obtain a business license or business permit: 
a.  Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction. 
b.  Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction. 
c.  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner. 
d.  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison. 
Grocery store means a retail establishment which has a total retail floor space of at least 10,000 square feet of which at least 85 percent is reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic items and conducts all of its sales inside the building containing its retail floor space, licensed under this chapter for the retail sales of only wine and malt beverages for consumption off the premises. 
Indoor recreation establishment means an indoor facility that contains regulation-size courts or alleys where physical sporting activity takes place and equipment related to the activity is available for rent or sale. 
License means the authorization by the city council to engage in the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages in the city and a person, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Licensee means a person, real or artificial, holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 40. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Non-alcohol retail establishment means any business located within the zones, any private club, restaurant, music hall, theater, cigar shop, bowling alley or any other establishment providing entertainment in the normal course of business in which the owners or their employees or agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume on the premises the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Park means any public lands owned or controlled by the city or any county of the state, in and upon which play facilities are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building, wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. The term "premises" shall also include any privately owned or leased courtyard or patio which is architecturally visibly defined. 
Private club means a corporation organized and existing under state laws, having at least 100 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, semiannual or annual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofitable purposes; no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with a suitable kitchen, dining room space and equipment; and maintaining and using a sufficient number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests; provided that no member, officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one nor more than three families customarily reside and shall not include an apartment house having facilities for housing four or more families; or any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application. 
Restaurant means any means any business which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Retail means retail sales packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail package liquor store means a retail business establishment owned by an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other business entity: 
(a)  Primarily engaged in the retail sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine in unbroken packages, not for consumption on the premises; and 
(b)  Which derives from such retail sale of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages at least 75 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of a combination of distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine. 
Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term shall have the same meaning as the term "retail package liquor store." 
School means any state, county, city, church or other private school that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall include the adjacent open land or fenced areas used for school purposes but this shall not include any portion of a private school, where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Service area means that in the event a lounge, private club or restaurant is located adjacent to an indoor recreational establishment and within the same building or structure, the recreational area is defined as being within the service area of such lounge, private club or restaurant and the consumption of alcoholic beverages within the recreational area is permitted. 
Shopping center means more than one commercial establishment planned and developed as a unit and providing parking facilities in common on the site. This shall also include a mall or strip center. 
Wholesaler means any person, firm or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale any alcoholic beverages. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-1; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 00-04-11, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 1547, Att. A, 5-9-2011; Ord. No. 2008-007, § 1, 6-16-2008; Ord. No. 3567-2015, 9-14-2015; Ord. of 1-9-2017, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 5265-2018, §§ 1, 2, 7-23-2018) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2; educational entities, O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690.  
Sec. 6-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of: 
(1)  Promoting the health and general welfare of the community; 
(2)  Establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Protecting and preserving schools and churches; 
(4)  Giving effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable consideration being given, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values; and 
(5)  Protecting against the evils of concentration of the retail outlets for alcoholic beverages in one area or ownership or to prevent undesirable persons from engaging in or having any interest in alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-2; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995) 
Charter reference— Specific powers of city, § 1-13.  
Sec. 6-3. - Compliance with chapter required. 
(a)  No person shall sell or offer for sale in the city at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Familiarity with chapter. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of each licensee and employee thereof to be familiar with this chapter. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of each licensee to provide all new employees at the time of their employment, and all employees annually, with an orientation and training on the alcoholic beverage ordinance; provided that, the failure of the employer to provide such orientation and training or of the employees to participate shall not be a defense for an employee who does not follow the provisions of the alcoholic beverage ordinance; and provided that, a licensee shall keep a record of such orientation and training, which shall be subject to inspection. 
(3)  Licensees shall be responsible for compliance with this chapter by their officers, agents, and employees. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-3; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 05-06-27, 6-26-2005; Ord. of 1-9-2017, § 3)  
Sec. 6-4. - License required. 
(a)  No malt beverages, wines, distilled spirits or any other alcoholic beverage shall be stored, delivered, sold or manufactured in the city except under a license issued pursuant to this chapter and then only for the specific beverage and manner of sale provided in the license. 
(b)  The requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code and if other provisions of this Code conflict with this chapter then this chapter shall control. 
(c)  All breweries and distilleries operating under a state manufacturer's license shall be subject to the same restrictions as retailers and retail consumption dealers with the following maximum sales limits as in accordance with state law: 
(1)  Distilleries: 500 barrels annually and 2,250 milliliters per consumer per day for off premise consumption. 
(2)  Breweries: 3,000 barrels annually and 288 ounces per consumer per day for off premise consumption. 
(3)  Brewpubs: 10,000 barrels annually, up to 5,000 barrels of which can be may be sold to licensed wholesalers. 
(Ord. of 1-9-2017, § 3; Ord. No. 5265-2018, § 3, 7-23-2018) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 9, 2017, § 3, amended § 6-4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 6-4 pertained to penalties; revocation of license, and derived from Code 1989, § 9-1-26; and Res. No. 95-01-10, adopted Jan. 10, 1995.  
Sec. 6-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 9, 2017, § 3, repealed § 6-5, which pertained to license required and derived from Code 1989, § 9-1-4; and Res. No. 95-01-10, adopted Jan. 10, 1995.  
Sec. 6-6. - Types of licenses; number of licenses; renewal. 
(a)  Licenses which may be issued under this chapter include: 
(1)  Manufacturing: 
a.  Malt beverages. 
b.  Wine. 
c.  Distilled spirits. 
(2)  Wholesale: 
a.  Malt beverages. 
b.  Wine. 
c.  Distilled spirits. 
(3)  Retail: 
a.  Malt beverages. 
b.  Wine. 
c.  Distilled spirits. 
d.  Consumption on premises/ancillary tasting room (malt beverages and wine only) (hereinafter referred to as an "ancillary tasting room license"). 
(4)  Consumption on the premises: 
a.  Malt beverages. 
b.  Wine. 
c.  Distilled spirits. 
(b)  A person doing business at more than one place shall take out and pay for a separate license for each place of business. 
(c)  Licenses may be renewed as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq. 
(d)  No license may be renewed if the licensee could be denied a new license under this chapter, except as provided in section 6-26. 
(e)  Licensed malt beverage manufacturers and licensed distilled spirit manufacturers shall be permitted to sell their respective beverages to the public as permitted by state law, O.C.G.A. 3-5-24.1(b) and O.C.G.A. 3-4-24.2(b), subject to the taxation requirements for consumption and retail, in addition to all other provisions of this section. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-10; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 2009-0002, 3-9-2009; Ord. No. 1547, Att. A, 5-9-2011; Ord. No. 5265-2018, § 4, 7-23-2018) 
State Law reference— Authority to grant license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; license required, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-3.  
Sec. 6-7. - Application procedure. 
The provisions of chapter 86, article III, pertaining to occupational license taxes, shall apply in addition to the following: 
(1)  All applications for new licenses under this chapter shall be accompanied by a payment in cash or by certified check, for all the minimum fees and occupational taxes provided for in this Code for the classification into which the applicant falls. 
(2)  The city application shall include a photostatic or other copy of all the appropriate state applications and other application forms developed by the administrator. 
(3)  The application shall also contain a form of oath providing that the information disclosed in the application is true and correct, and providing further that the applicant will abide by, observe and conduct his business according to the rules and regulations prescribed by the city, the acts of the general assembly, known as the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, as now or hereafter amended, and the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue in respect thereto. The oath shall be taken by the applicant and the agent in charge of the establishment if different from or additional to the applicant, and the oath shall be taken by the true owners. 
(4)  Any false statement, or material misrepresentation in any application under this chapter, shall be grounds for the revocation of any license granted under this article. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-6; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995) 
Cross reference— Occupational tax applications in general, chapter 86, article III. 
State Law reference— Power of city to grant, refuse, suspend or revoke alcoholic beverage license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; false application prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-27; false swearing prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-71.  
Sec. 6-8. - Liquor/package store—Retail distilled spirits minimum requirements. 
Any person seeking to license a liquor or package store—retail distilled spirits establishment—must demonstrate compliance with the following requirements prior to the acceptance of an application for said license: 
(1)  Proposed premises of the retail distilled spirits establishment is greater than one mile or 5,280 feet from another retail distilled spirits establishment licensed by the city. This distance is measured in accordance with section 6-25. 
(2)  Such premises shall be freestanding or if located in a shopping center or attached to any other building or establishment such premises shall have a floor area of not less than 5,000 square feet. 
(3)  Proposed premises is compliant with all zoning requirements for the requested use. 
(Ord. of 1-9-2017, § 4) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 9, 2017, § 4, repealed the former § 6-8 and enacted a new § 6-8 as set out herein. The former § 6-8 pertained to plans required and derived from Code 1989, § 9-1-7; Res. No. 95-02-14, adopted Feb. 14, 1995; Ord. No. 02-05-28, adopted May 28, 2002; and Ord. No. 2008-007, § 2, adopted June 16, 2008.  
Sec. 6-9. - Notice required. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses under this chapter shall give notice that an application has been filed and of the purpose of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the city council. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to have this notice published in the city's legal organ in the format stipulated by the administrator. The applicant shall bear the cost for this publication. 
(1)  The first advertisement shall not appear more than 30 days prior to the date of such initial consideration. 
(2)  Such publication shall be made in the newspaper in which city legal advertisements are published. 
(3)  The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, and the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the officers. The date, time and place the initial consideration and determination will be made by the administrator and a statement that any objections to the issuance must be in writing and received by the administrator on or before the date and time of the consideration by the city council. 
(b)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign or signs stating the following: 
"City of Woodstock ___________ license applied for. Any objection to this application must be in writing and received by the Administrator of the City of Woodstock License Division, at 12453 Highway 92, Woodstock, GA 30188, on or before 5:00 p.m., on the _____ day of ________, 20___." 
The sign or signs shall be at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property which adjoins the location so as to be clearly legible by persons using such public area. The sign required in this section shall be posted on the property from the date of the first publication of the legal advertisement through the date of the initial consideration by the supervisor. The cost and placement of the sign shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-8; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Res. No. 95-02-14, 2-14-1995; Ord. No. 98-06-23, 6-23-1998)  
Sec. 6-10. - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  No license shall be approved by the governing authority for any applicant who has not complied with the application provisions of this article. 
(b)  In addition to other application and licensing provisions as set forth in this article, it is the policy of the city that any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and be issued to, an owner who is a full time employee and, if not, then by and jointly to the owner and an agent who is a full time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the county owned by the owner. 
(1)  Where the applicant is a sole proprietor, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and shall be issued to, the sole proprietor if the sole proprietor is a full time employee and, if not, then by and jointly to the sole proprietor and an agent who is a full time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the county owned by the sole proprietor. 
(2)  Where the applicant is a partnership, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and shall be issued to, the partnership together with either a majority partner who is a full time employee and, if not, then by and jointly to a majority partner and an agent who is a full time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the county owned by the partnership. 
(3)  Where the applicant is a corporation, whether publicly traded or privately held, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and shall be issued to, the corporation together with an agent who is a full time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the county owned by the corporation. 
(4)  Where the owner is a private club, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by, and shall be issued to, the private club together with an officer of said club who is a full time employee and, if not, then by jointly to the private club together with an agent who is a full time employee responsible for the sale of alcoholic beverages as prescribed in this chapter, on the premises applied for or on other such premises in the county owned by the private club. 
(c)  An applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall make written application to the governing body of the city through the business license officer upon such forms to be prepared and approved by the governing body; provided that an applicant seeking more than one type of license or additional license must submit a separate application for each type of license sought. 
The written application upon the prescribed forms shall include each of the following: 
(1)  Information on the type of alcoholic beverage license sought. 
(2)  Information on the location which will be the site of the license sought, as follows: 
a.  The street address of the premises; 
b.  The names(s), home address(es), and home phone number(s) of the owners(s) of the premises; 
c.  Plans and renderings of the proposed premises, unless the city clerk certifies that such plans and renderings are on file, and the applicant certifies that such plans and renderings are correct; 
d.  A certification of zoning from the city certifying that the place of the proposed business is properly zoned therefore; and 
e.  A scale drawing from a registered surveyor identifying the location of the proposed premises and the distance to the nearest church, school, college, day care center, or residence located within 1,000 feet, by the appropriate method of measurement as defined in section 6-25, measurement of distances. If the license requested is for retail distilled spirits, the nearest retail distilled spirts establishment, liquor, or package store must also be identified within one mile or 5,280 feet, measured using the method under section 6-25. 
(3)  Information on the business at the location of the proposed licensed premises, as follows: 
a.  The name, street address, and phone number of the business. 
b.  A description of the nature and character of the business; and 
c.  A copy of the warranty deed if the business owns the premises; if the business leases the premises, a copy of the lease agreement. 
(4)  Information on the applicant, as follows: 
a.  If a sole proprietor, then from the sole proprietor the name, home address, home phone number, date of birth, Social Security number, county of residency and length of residency, country of citizenship, percent of ownership, and a statement of arrests; and, in addition, if no such partner is a full time employee, then the same information is required for an agent who is a full time employee, provided that the person so named must meet all requirements of this article; 
b.  If partnership, then for each partner owning ten percent or more, the name, home address, home phone number, date of birth, Social Security number, county of residency and length of residency, country of citizenship, percent of ownership, and a statement of arrests; and, in addition, if no such partner is a full time employee, then the same information is required for an agent who is a full time employee, provided that the person so named must meet all requirements of this article; 
c.  If the applicant is a publicly traded corporation, then the corporate name, corporate chief executive office, corporate address, and corporate phone number; and in addition if the corporate chief executive officer is not a full time employee, then for an agent who is a full time employee, the name, home address, home phone number. Date of birth, Social Security number, county of residency and length of residency, country of citizenship and a statement of arrests, provide that the person so named must meet all requirements of this chapter; 
d.  If the applicant is a privately held corporation, then the corporate name, corporate chief, executive officer, corporate address, and corporate phone number; and for each person owning ten percent or more, the name, home address, home phone number, date of birth, Social Security number, length of residency in the county, country of citizenship, percent of ownership, and a statement of arrests; and in addition if no such owner is a full time employee, then for an agent who is a full time employee, the name, home address, home phone number, date of birth, Social Security number, county of residency and length of residency, country of citizenship, and statement of arrests, provided that the person so named must meet all requirements of this chapter; and 
e.  If the applicant is a private club, then the private club name, private club chief executive officer, private club address, private club phone number, and as statement of arrests for the chief executive officer; and in addition if the chief executive officer is not a full time employee, then for an agent who is a full time employee, the name, home address, home phone number, date of birth, Social Security number, county of residency and length of residency, country of citizenship, and as statement of arrests, provided that the person so named must meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  The applicant shall furnish such other data, information or records as may be required by the governing body or its authorized officers in order to make a determination whether the applicant or agent meets the requirements of this article. 
(7)  The application must be sworn to by the applicant. 
(8)  In instances where the ownership of an existing licensed location is the same but the agent has changed, the new agent must apply, and all application provisions of this chapter shall apply, except that only information on the new agent shall be required on an abbreviated form provided through the city clerk or other designated official; provided that, a copy of the most recently approved application shall be attached; and further provided, that a certification must be made by the ownership or legally authorized designee other than the new agent, that all previous information on the most recently approved application remains true and correct to the best knowledge of the applicant. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-9; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 05-06-27, 7-27-2005; Ord. of 1-9-2017, § 5)  
Sec. 6-11. - Limitations on who can hold licenses. 
(a)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license or an interest in any other license under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  No person, related within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity under civil law to any wholesale licensee or employee thereof or any person with any interest therein, shall hold any other license or an interest in any other license issued under this chapter. 
(c)  No elected or full-time appointed official of the city or any person related within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity under civil law to such an official of the city shall own any interest in any license issued under this chapter unless one of the following conditions is met: 
(1)  The interest was obtained prior to election or appointment to office; 
(2)  The interest is declared in writing at the time the application for the license is made and the elected or full-time appointed official shall not participate in official action or consideration of the license; or 
(3)  The interest obtained in an ongoing business holding a license is declared in writing at the time of the acquisition and filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-10; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995) 
State Law reference— Ascertainable standards required to issue license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.  
Sec. 6-12. - Prohibition against issuance to persons with criminal convictions. 
(a)  No license under this chapter shall be issued, renewed or transferred to any person, partnership or corporation where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any felony or convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any misdemeanor relating to any alcoholic beverage business or any state law, county or municipal ordinance violation relating to any alcoholic beverage business. 
(b)  The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty or nolo contenders or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime or the suspension or revocation of any alcoholic beverage license owned in whole or in part by persons listed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-11; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to set standards for issue of license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.  
Sec. 6-13. - Residency requirements; registered agent. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-4-23, no retail dealer's license or tax stamps for distilled spirits shall be sold to any person unless an application is filed with the commissioner, accompanied by a certificate by the judge of the probate court of the county of the applicant's residency certifying that the applicant has been a bona fide resident of the State of Georgia for at least three years and at the current place of residency for 12 months immediately preceding the application and reside in a county where distilled spirits may be legally sold under O.C.G.A. title 3, Ch. 4, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 3-4-20 et seq.) in the city. 
(b)  All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses under this chapter except as otherwise provided for, either the applicant or an individual the applicant designates to act as their agent shall provide proof of residency acceptable to the administrator that they have been a bona fide resident of the State of Georgia for three years and at the current place of residency for 12 months immediately prior to making application for the license. If the applicant designates an agent, that agent shall meet the residency requirements as stated herein above prior to making application and will be designated to be responsible for any matter relating to the license. 
(c)  All applications for licenses under this chapter by a corporation shall name in the application one or more persons meeting the residency requirements of subsection (b) above as the registered officer of the corporation and such officer shall be registered with the secretary of state's office. This representative of the corporation shall receive all communications, notices, service or process or other papers or documents, on behalf of the corporation in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any city license. The application shall give the mailing address of such registered officer, and the mailing to any registered officer at that address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. 
(d)  Such registered officer shall be a representative of the licensee corporation and must be approved by the administrator. The administrator shall refuse to approve any registered officer who is not a bona fide resident in accordance with subsection (b) above or who has been convicted, within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any felony or convicted within five years immediately prior to the filing of the application of any misdemeanor relating to any alcoholic beverage business or any state law or county or municipal ordinance violation relating to any alcoholic beverage business. As used in this subsection, the term "conviction" shall have the same meaning as in section 6-12. 
(e)  If any registered officer shall cease to be the registered agent of the licensee corporation or shall cease to be a resident as specified in subsection (b) above or in any manner ceases to meet the requirements of subsection (d) of this section, the licensee shall notify the administrator in writing of such event and shall nominate a new registered officer within five days after such event occurs. Such new registered officer shall meet the requirements in subsections (c) and (d) of this section and must be approved by the administrator. The city shall charge a fee of $100.00 for a change of the corporation's registered officer; however, if the licensee corporation fails to notify the city and nominate a new registered officer within the five-day period, then the city shall charge an additional fee of $200.00 for a change of the corporation's registered officer and/or revoke the licensee's license. The application process includes the approval by the administrator of a revised application, fingerprinting of the applicant and a criminal history investigation. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-12; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 05-09-13, 9-13-2005; Ord. of 3-16-2006; Ord. No. 2009-0002, 3-9-2009) 
State Law reference— Certificate of residence required for retail license to sell distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-23; powers of local governing authority to grant licenses generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.  
Sec. 6-14. - Police investigation; tax record search. 
(a)  The administrator shall cause an inquiry to be made into the city tax records to determine if the applicant or other parties with an interest in an application for a license under this chapter has any outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent against his property or any other monies owing to the city. No license shall be issued or renewed until such debts are paid in full. 
(b)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any such permit or license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the state bureau of investigation, which shall search the files of the state crime information center for any instance of criminal activity during the two years immediately preceding the date of the application. The state bureau of investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the governing authority submitting the fingerprints. 
(c)  If the police department determines that the application is not in order, in view of the requirements of federal or state law or this Code and any police department investigation, the police department will issue a detailed report to the administrator regarding the reasons for the denial, and the administrator shall then notify the applicant of the reasons for not forwarding the application to the city council for consideration. 
(d)  All applicants shall furnish all reasonable data, information and records requested of them by the administrator or police department and failure to furnish such data, information, contracts, documents, financial statements and other records within 30 days of the request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. 
(e)  The police department shall require in addition to the licensee, fingerprinting and background investigation of any person having a 20 percent financial interest in the application. The police department may require additional information from any sibling of any person with a financial interest, and the nominated registered agent of any corporate applicant. Should the applicant fail to produce such persons within 30 days of the request, the application may be denied. 
(f)  Applicants by filing an application agree to produce for oral interrogation any person or persons requested by the police department and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. The failure to produce those persons within 30 days after being requested to do so may result in a denial of the application. 
(g)  The city may require 45 days for processing any application for a license required under this chapter. For investigative purposes, the chief of police may extend the 45 days' processing period according to the licensee's compliance should the chief deem it necessary. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-13; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995) 
State Law reference— Application investigation, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.  
Sec. 6-15. - License pending completion of building. 
Where a building in which any person intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of the application for the license, not in existence or not yet completed, a conditional license may be issued for the location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in the establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-14; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995)  
Sec. 6-16. - Time limit on opening business; continuity of business. 
(a)  All licensees under this chapter must, within 90 days after the issuance of a city license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute a forfeiture and cancellation of the issued licenses and no refund of license fees or occupational taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make written request to the administrator for an extension of time not to exceed 90 days; and the administrator at his discretion may grant or deny the request. 
(b)  Any license issued under this chapter shall automatically be null and void where the licensed business has not operated or been open to the public for six consecutive months. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-15; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995)  
Sec. 6-17. - Denial of license application. 
(a)  The city council must take action to consider an application for a license required by this chapter within 45 days of the administrator receiving a complete application. 
(b)  The city council may deny a city license under this chapter on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure to meet state requirements for state license; 
(2)  Failure to pay required fees and taxes; 
(3)  Failure to provide valid information, documents and the like required by this chapter; 
(4)  False information in the application or attached documents; 
(5)  Improper residency of applicant, owner or registered agent; 
(6)  Failure to pass review by the chief of police; 
(7)  Failure to post and maintain proper signs and advertisements required in this chapter; 
(8)  Failure to meet distance, location exterior surface or building requirements; 
(9)  Prior convictions as provided in this chapter; or 
(10)  Failure to meet any other requirements in this chapter for a license of the class applied for. 
(c)  All decisions denying a license shall be in writing, with the reasons for denial stated and shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant. 
(d)  The applicant has 30 days from the date of written notice of the denial of a license application within which to petition for reconsideration by the city council. The applicant will be granted an opportunity to present additional information, evidence and cross examine witnesses before the city council. The city council's decision will be final. 
(e)  An application which has been denied shall not be resubmitted for 12 months after the denial unless there is a substantial change therein which would affect the reason for denial originally. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-16; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 02-05-28, 5-28-2002) 
State Law reference— Ascertainable standards for denial, written notice of denial and an opportunity for a hearing are required by state law, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.  
Sec. 6-18. - Additional standards for issuance, transfer of license. 
(a)  In the issuance of licenses or the transfer or renewal of licenses required by this chapter, the city council may, in its discretion, issue or deny any application for a license, renewal or transfer of an existing store location based upon the following standards, in addition to standards previously set forth: 
(1)  Where there is evidence that, even though there is compliance with the minimum distance to schools and churches, the type and number of schools or number of churches in the vicinity cause minors to frequent the immediate area. 
(2)  Where there is evidence that the location or type of structure could create difficulty in police supervision. 
(3)  Where there is evidence that there are no licenses granted in the area or where there is evidence that the proposed area already is adequately supplied with such licenses. 
(4)  Where there is evidence that a license for the location would have an adverse effect on the property values in the area. 
(5)  Where there is evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking spaces for automobiles as required in the zoning ordinance. A licensee shall have sufficient parking on the premises so as to provide parking for his customers and so as to prevent parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
(6)  Where there is evidence that the licensee or his spouse is related to any distributor or wholesaler of malt beverages or employees thereof within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the civil law so that there might be special concessions granted the licensee to give him a competitive advantage over others not similarly privileged. 
(7)  For retail package license applicants, where there is evidence that the licensee applicant or his spouse is related in the first degree described therein to other licensees of malt beverages or wine in the city. 
(8)  Where there is evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold by the applicant or at the establishment to intoxicated persons or to a minor. 
(9)  Where there is evidence that the conducting of the business creates a disturbance, congregation of intoxicated persons, congregation of minors, allows minors to purchase, drink or possess alcoholic beverages on the premises, or causes the police to answer complaints or provide extra surveillance of the premises. More than three minors without the supervision of a parent or under supervision of an adult authorized by a parent shall be prima facie evidence of a congregation of minors. 
(b)  In addition to subsection (a) of this section and in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(2)  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(3)  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
(4)  If applicant's spouse shall not be able to meet the qualifications of an applicant, particularly if it appears that the applicant's spouse or another person is using the applicant as a guise or dummy to obtain a license. 
(c)  The applicant has 30 days from the date of written notice of the denial of a license application within which to petition for reconsideration by the city council. The applicant will be granted an opportunity to present additional information, evidence and cross examine witnesses before the city council. The city council's decision will be final. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-17; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995)  
Sec. 6-19. - Inspections. 
Any establishment holding a license issued under this chapter shall at all times, during the period allowable by law for operation of the business, be open to inspection by any officer of the police department or any license inspector of the city or to any person designated by the chief of police or the city manager. In addition, if the premises are being used after hours by employees or the owners or their agents, the premises may be inspected at this time by the designated persons in this section. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-18; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Res. No. 95-02-14, 2-14-1995)  
Sec. 6-20. - Open containers prohibited. 
(a)  No bottle or other container of alcoholic beverages shall be opened or consumed by any person on the premises, upon which the place of business is conducted and licensed under this chapter, whether the bottle or other container so opened or consumed was bought or obtained at that place of business or elsewhere unless the premises is licensed for consumption on the premises under this chapter, except in accordance with the provisions of section 6-117 in an entertainment district. 
(b)  No establishment licensed under this chapter to sell alcoholic beverages shall allow a person to leave those premises with alcoholic beverages in an open cup, bottle, can or other open container, except in accordance with the provisions of section 6-117 in an entertainment district. The provisions of this section shall not apply to city-sanctioned events. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-19; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Res. No. 95-02-14, 2-14-1995; Ord. No. 3336-2015, 3-23-2015; Ord. No. 3806, § II, 3-14-2016; Ord. of 1-9-2017, § 6)  
Sec. 6-21. - Hours and days of operation. 
(a)  Distilled spirits package sales. Licensees under this chapter or persons employed by a licensee shall be authorized to sell, offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer to others any packaged distilled spirits on Sunday only between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m.; and only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on Monday through Saturday. No person shall purchase, receive, or offer to receive from a licensee or person employed by a licensee any packaged distilled spirits except between the hours provided in this paragraph. 
(b)  Sales by consumption on premises licensees. No licensee under this chapter or person employed by a licensee shall sell, offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer to others any distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on Monday morning without a Sunday sales permit and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week; and it shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, receive or offer to receive from a licensee or person employed by a licensee any distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning without a Sunday sales permit and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. Notwithstanding the foregoing, on years where December 31 falls on a Sunday, sales for consumption on the premises shall be allowed on Mondays from 12:00 a.m. on December 31 until 2:00 a.m. on January 1. 
(c)  Malt beverages and wine package sales. No licensee under this chapter or person employed by a licensee shall sell, offer for sale, transfer or offer to transfer to others any packaged malt beverages or wine between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday night and 12:30 p.m. on Sunday and between the hours of 11:30 p.m. on Sunday night and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week; and no person shall purchase, receive or offer to receive from a licensee or person employed by a licensee any malt beverages or wine between the hours of 12:00 midnight on a Saturday night and 12:30 p.m. on Sunday and between the hours of 11:30 p.m. on Sunday night and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. 
(d)  Sales on election days. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b), the sale by wholesale and retail of alcoholic beverages (distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages), shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; however, nothing in this subsection shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(e)  Sunday sales. A Sunday sales permit is required for the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays, except for retail package sales. The following conditions are applicable to such sales: 
(1)  The establishment holds a valid city alcoholic beverage pouring license. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold and served for consumption on the premises on Sundays from 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served, and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(3)  Applicants for Sunday sales permits shall complete an application form furnished by the city administrator, supplying such information as may be requested. Prior to issuance of the permit, the applicant must make available records for determining whether the applicant meets the requirements of subsection (e)(2) of this section. The permit may be denied or revoked for failure to conform or failure to produce satisfactory evidence of conforming as referenced in section 6-106. 
(4)  Annual Sunday sales permit renewals shall be made in the same manner and during the same time periods as other alcoholic beverage license renewals. All holders and applicants of an alcoholic beverage license and Sunday sales license must make available records for audit purposes upon the request of the city administrator or his agent. The books, records, inventory, stock and facilities of any alcoholic beverage holder or applicant shall be open for inspection at any time by a city license inspector and agents of the city police department. 
(5)  Sunday sales permits are not transferable. 
(6)  The fee for issuance of the Sunday sales permit may be established and/or changed from time to time by the city council, and a schedule of fees shall be available in the city clerk's office. 
(7)  The Sunday sales permit shall be subject to the revocation procedures of section 6-4, and shall be automatically revoked if the alcoholic beverage license is revoked. 
(8)  When any application for a Sunday sales permit has been denied for a location, no application for a Sunday sales permit may be made for the same location for a period of 12 months from the date of filing of the application which was denied. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-20; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Res. No. 95-02-14, 2-14-1995; Ord. of 12-19-2006; Ord. of 11-14-2011; Ord. No. 3567-2015, Att. A; Ord. No. 1026-2015, 10-26-2015; Ord. No. 5233-2018, §§ 1, 2, 7-9-2018) 
State Law reference— Regulation of sale on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7; sale on Sunday, Christmas, election day, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20.  
Sec. 6-22. - Places where drinking prohibited during certain hours. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation owning or operating a place of business licensed under this chapter shall permit any person to drink any distilled spirits, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage upon the business premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and 6:00 a.m. on the following Monday morning without a Sunday sales permit (and then only in accordance with the hours of the Sunday sales permit) and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the other days of the week. 
(b)  No person shall drink any distilled spirits, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage while upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or public places of the city, upon or within any vehicle upon the premises or in any adjacent parking area of any business establishment holding a license under this chapter, except in accordance with the provisions of section 6-117 in an entertainment district. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the forgoing, the mayor and council may permit, with respect to special city sanctioned events, the consumption of distilled spirits, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverage while upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or public places of the city, upon a vote of the city council approving such action for such event. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-21; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Res. No. 95-02-14, 2-14-1995; Ord. No. 1547, Att. A, 5-9-2011; Ord. No. 3806, § III, 3-14-2016) 
State Law reference— Regulation of hours of sale, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-7, 3-3-20.  
Sec. 6-23. - Drive-in, curb service prohibited. 
(a)  Curb service by retail or consumption on the premises licensees under this chapter or delivery of any alcoholic beverages off the licensed premises, other than by wholesalers licensed under this chapter or by the state, is prohibited. 
(b)  Drive-in service windows at premises licensed under this chapter are prohibited. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-22; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995)  
Sec. 6-24. - Offenses involving minors. 
(a)  No person under 21 years of age shall buy or allow to be bought for him any alcoholic beverage from any place where these beverages are kept. 
(b)  No person in charge of, or employed in, any place of business where alcoholic beverages are kept, shall permit any person under 21 years of age to buy or allow to be bought for any person under 21 years of age any alcoholic beverages in or from the place of business or to frequent or loiter about the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(c)  No person shall furnish or serve any person under 21 years of age with any alcoholic beverage. A valid driver's license may be reasonably accepted by the person hereunder as sufficient evidence of age. 
(d)  No person under 21 years of age shall falsely represent his age, in any manner whatever, for the purpose of illegally obtaining any alcoholic beverages. 
(e)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. However, the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(f)  No person who is under 21 years of age shall have in his possession, or under his control, at any place whatever in the city, any alcoholic beverage. 
(g)  Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute an offense under this chapter and shall be punishable in the municipal court; provided, violation of this section by persons who have not yet reached the age of 17 shall be handled as provided by the juvenile court code of the state. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-23; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995) 
State Law reference— Furnishing to, purchase of or possession by person under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; dispensing, selling by person under 18 years of age, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24.  
Sec. 6-25. - Measurement of distances. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements, to determine distances, required by this chapter, for the issuance of city beverage licenses, shall be measured in lineal feet by the most direct route of travel as detailed below. 
(1)  Consumption on premises; shall be measured from any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of a license by the shortest route along a public thoroughfare (street, alley or sidewalk); as the traffic or pedestrian flows; to the nearest door of entry of any school, church, college or day care. Includes central business district (CBD). 
The table below lists the distance in feet which various types of alcoholic beverage consumption on premises establishments must meet from an existing regulated land use. 
Distance of Type Beverage Sales 
From Existing Land Use in Feet 	Church 	School 	Day Care Center 
Consumption on premises 	300 	300 	300 
Central business district Consumption on premises 	150 	150 	150 
 
(2)  Distance waiver for consumption on premises within the central business district—city council, in its sole discretion, may consider a reduction in these distance requirements, using the standards set forth in section 6-18, in addition to the information provided in the application. An applicant seeking a waiver, shall include the waiver requested in the notice required, section 6-9 and detail the request in the application. 
(3)  All other; shall be measured from any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of a license by the shortest route along a public thoroughfare (street, alley or sidewalk); as the traffic or pedestrian flows; to the property line of the tract on which is located the school ground, church, college campus or day care. 
The table below lists the distance in feet which various types of alcoholic beverage sales establishments must meet from an existing regulated land use. 
Distance of Type Beverage Sales 
From Existing Land Use ** 
in Feet 	Church 	School or 
College 	Day Care Center 	Liquor/Package Store 
Grocery store 	300 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
Retail malt beverages, wine 	300 	300 	300 	N/A 
Liquor/package store (retail distilled spirits) 	300 	600 	600 	5,280 
 
**See also O.C.G.A § 3-3-21 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-24; Ord. No. 00-04-11, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 05-09-13, § 9-13-2005; Ord. of 5-3-2006; Ord. of 1-9-2017, § 7) 
State Law reference— Sales of alcoholic beverages near churches, school buildings or other sites, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21.  
Sec. 6-26. - Existing licensed business; compliance. 
(a)  To prevent an unconstitutional taking of property, all licensees for alcoholic beverages within the city in compliance with city ordinance requirements involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure in effect at the time of first receiving the license and continuing to be in compliance therewith shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter involving residency, distance, location, parking and type of building structure. Renewals of such licenses shall also be deemed in compliance under this section to the extent provided in this subsection. 
(b)  Transfers of business ownership at the same location shall be deemed in compliance under this section with regard to the city Code requirements involving distance, location, parking and type of building structure, provided that such business complied with such requirements at the time a license was first issued for such business and further provided that such business has continuously been in compliance with such requirements. These transfers may be approved by the administrator, provided the transferee meets all of the license requirements for a new license. 
(c)  Business transfers to new locations and new licenses must comply with all requirements of this chapter and must be approved by the city council. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-25; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995)  
Sec. 6-27. - Penalties; revocation of license. 
(a)  Upon conviction in the municipal court of any violation of any provision of this chapter, unless otherwise provided, the punishment shall be as follows: 
(1)  First offense, a minimum fine of $500.00; 
(2)  Second offense, if within 12 months of the first offense, a minimum fine of $750.00; 
(3)  Third offense, if within 12 months of the second offense, a minimum fine of $1,000.00; or 
(4)  Otherwise punishment shall be as set by the municipal judge as allowed by the city Charter. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section, a license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended, revoked or placed on probation by the city council for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to pay excise fees or any other fees or taxes required by the city. 
(2)  Disorderly conduct of the establishment. 
(3)  Acts of disturbance on the establishment. 
(4)  Violence on the establishment. 
(5)  Gambling on the establishment. 
(6)  Conviction of violating this chapter by any court with jurisdiction. 
(7)  Charges of or conviction of a felony by the licensee. 
(8)  Creation or maintenance of a nuisance on the establishment. 
(9)  Any false statement or material misrepresentation given in the application for the license. 
(10)  For any and other just cause. 
(c)  If it comes to the attention of the city council or city manager that the licensee has violated any provisions of this chapter, the following procedures shall apply: 
(1)  The city manager or his designee shall issue a notice of objection which shall include the address of the location and the specific allegations as to the violations of any provision of this chapter or any other provision of this Code. The notice of objection shall also include the recommended action to be taken. Further, any license issued under this chapter may be temporarily suspended by the city manager in his notice of objection for any reason outlined in subsection (b) of this section if it is determined that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the public. The city manager will then notify the licensee in writing by certified mail or in person that a notice of objection has been filed and of any applicable temporary suspension. The notice to the licensee will include a copy of the notice of objection, and the time, place and date for a hearing before the city council on the matter. The hearing shall be within seven days of the date of the notice to the licensee. Extensions and necessary investigations will be granted and conducted at the discretion of the city council. 
(2)  At the hearing, the city and the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and examine witnesses. After this hearing, the city council shall issue a notice of decision at which time the council will dismiss or affirm the objection and/or temporary suspension, and in case of affirmation, the city council may suspend, revoke or place on probation the license of the licensee. 
(3)  The decision of the city council shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for their decisions and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(4)  The decision of the city council shall be final but may be appealed to the appropriate court within 30 days of the date of the written decision. 
(5)  The decision of the city council shall be binding upon the retail party or holder of the license. 
(d)  When the license of any establishment has been revoked, no further license shall be issued under this chapter to the same person, firm or corporation at that location for a period of 24 months from the date of revocation. 
(e)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to manufacture or deal in those products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the city council or any municipal officer. 
(f)  All owners or officers of establishments licensed under this chapter shall be criminally responsible for any violation of this chapter by an employee thereof; provided the municipal court may only impose a just fine under this subsection. 
(Ord. of 1-9-2017, § 8)  
Secs. 6-28—6-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE TAX AND REGULATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 86. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 6-61—6-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DISTILLED SPIRITS 
 
Sec. 6-81. - Additional application, fee, residency requirements. 
(a)  In addition to the license application requirements of this chapter in article I, a processing fee of $500.00, in addition to other fees and taxes required in this chapter, shall be deposited with the application to cover the expense of investigation and processing of the application and the fee shall be nonrefundable. 
(b)  In addition, the residency requirements of section 6-13 shall be extended, for the purposes of this section, to include residency within the State of Georgia for three years preceding the date of application. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-41; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 99-03-23, 3-23-1999; Ord. No. 05-09-13, § 9-13-2005; Ord. of 3-16-2006) 
State Law reference— Power of local governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; certificate of residency required, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-23.  
Sec. 6-82. - Limitation on number of licenses to be granted to applicant, family corporation. 
(a)  No application for a license to sell distilled spirits at retail shall be granted where the person applying for the license or any person who would have an interest therein or members of such person's family or any corporation in which the person owns an interest already holds any interest in two or more licenses to sell distilled spirits by the package at retail within the state. The term "family," as used in this section, shall mean any spouse, brother, sister, child or parent of the applicant or any other person who would have an interest in the license under this division. 
(b)  As used in this section, an interest in a license shall be deemed to exist if the person involved is the outright owner of the license; a co-owner of the license; a partner in a partnership which owns all or any part of a license; or a stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of a license. Notwithstanding any of the other provisions of this section, no one person shall be deemed to have more than one interest in any one license. 
(c)  All applications for a license under this division, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interest in retail liquor stores. This shall include the names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling at retail package liquor, together with any interest each person or any member of his family has in any other retail liquor store and any other similar information called for by the police department or administrator. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-42; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995) 
Cross reference— Other limitations against a related interest holding a license, section 6-11; similar provision for retail package dealers in malt beverages and wine, section 6-18(a)(7). 
State Law reference— Power of local governing authority to regulate license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; prohibition of holding interest in more than two retail dealer's licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-21.  
Sec. 6-83. - Restrictions on sale of other merchandise. 
A licensee of a retail establishment under this division shall not operate the business in connection with any other mercantile establishment; provided, this shall not prohibit a licensee from operating in the same building complex with other businesses. No retailer under this division shall sell, offer for sale, display or keep in stock at his place of business where packaged distilled spirits are offered for sale any other commodity except the following, all of which may be sold by the retailer at his option: 
(1)  Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits; 
(2)  Wines and malt beverages, when properly licensed; 
(3)  Glasses, stirring sticks and similar paraphernalia commonly used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages; 
(4)  Tobacco products; and 
(5)  Packaged ice. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-43; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority of local government to regulate sale, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.  
Secs. 6-84—6-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION 
 
Sec. 6-101. - Additional application, fee, structure requirements. 
In addition to the application and license requirements of this chapter in article I, the following shall be required for licenses under this division: 
(1)  Upon filing of the application, the city shall require the applicant to deposit a processing fee of $500.00 to cover the expense of investigation and processing of the application and that fee is not refundable. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  The dining area or service area of any business licensed under this division must be a minimum of 1,000 square feet. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-62; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 05-09-13, § 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 1547, Att. A, 5-9-2011) 
State Law reference— Local government authority to regulate, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; authority to adopt rules for issuance of license, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110.  
Sec. 6-102. - Manager's permit. 
(a)  Every person licensed under this chapter for the retail sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises shall employ one or more persons as manager for the licensed establishment. At least one manager shall be at the licensee's premises during all times that alcoholic beverages are being consumed thereon, and such manager shall be in charge of the premises and responsible for the actions of the employees and customers of the licensed establishment. Each such manager shall obtain a manager's permit as provided in this section, and this permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. 
(b)  Each person wishing to obtain a manager's permit must make application on a form provided by the police department within three days of the date of employment. Such application shall include proof of residency as required in article I, subsection 6-13(a) and (b) of this chapter. Upon receiving the completed application, the police department shall arrange to have the applicant photographed and fingerprinted and to place these records on file in the police department. The police department shall be authorized to issue a manager's permit after verifying the facts in the application. 
(c)  Licensees and managers under this section shall keep a copy of the permit on file at all times in the establishment and shall make these permits available for inspection during operating hours. 
(d)  Any person who has been convicted of a violation of any law or ordinance governing the sale of alcoholic beverages or sale or possession of illegal drugs in the past five years shall be ineligible to receive a manager's permit. 
(e)  If any manager of the licensee shall cease to be an employee of the licensee or shall cease to be a resident as required in subsection (b) above or in any manner ceases to meet the requirements of this section, the manager's permit shall be deemed null and void. 
(f)  Any person licensed under this chapter for the retail sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine for consumption on the premises may receive a manager's permit without duplicating the procedures sets forth in this section. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-63; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995; Ord. No. 05-09-13, § 9-13-2005; Ord. of 3-16-2006; Ord. No. 2009-0002, 3-9-2009; Ord. of 1-9-2017, § 9) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate licensee, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2; authority to adopt rules governing license to sell distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110.  
Sec. 6-103. - Happy hour promotions. 
(a)  All on-premises licensees are prohibited from selling or giving away alcoholic beverages under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Serving multiple drinks for a single price or offering all you can drink for a set price during a set time. 
(2)  Making a single price the basis for a required purchase of two or more servings. 
(3)  Serving alcoholic beverages by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(4)  Offering free drinks or reduced-price drinks to any segment of the population for any period of time as an inducement to patronize the premises. 
(5)  Selling alcoholic beverages for less than half the normal retail price, or selling alcoholic beverages in pitchers or in jumbo sizes for less than the normal retail price. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the dispensing of drinks in pitchers or in jumbo sizes, provided that such pitchers or jumbo sizes shall be available at all times that the licensee is open for business and the usual, customary or established retail price for such drinks shall not be reduced. 
(6)  Using coupons or other special promotional items as an inducement to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
(7)  Sponsoring, conducting or allowing contests or other promotions which have as their primary purpose increasing the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(8)  Offering or delivering any free alcoholic beverage to the general public. 
(9)  Offering alcoholic beverages under any special pricing or promotion of any nature whatsoever after 7:00 p.m. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to private functions not open to the public. The term "private function not open to the public" shall mean any function wherein the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person, firm or organization for a set period of time for valuable consideration. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-64; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate sale, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2.  
Sec. 6-104. - Servers limited to employees. 
Drinks shall be served only by employees of the establishments licensed for on-premises consumption. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-65; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995)  
Sec. 6-105. - Lewd dancing prohibited. 
No licensee under this division shall permit professional belly dancers, strip dancing, exotic dancing or any exhibitions of any like kind by whatever name called in connection with the operation of a restaurant, lounge or private club. 
(Code 1989, § 9-1-66; Res. No. 95-01-10, 1-10-1995) 
State Law reference— Prohibited conduct on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq..  
Sec. 6-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1547, Att. A, adopted May 9, 2011, deleted § 6-106 which pertained to on-premises consumption only allowed in central business district and derived from Code 1989, § 9-1-67; Res. No. 95-01-10, adopted Jan. 10, 1995; and Ord. No. 05-09-13, adopted Sept. 13, 2005.  
Sec. 6-107. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 012-2007, adopted July 9, 2007, deleted § 6-107 in its entirety. Former § 6-107 pertained to dangerous weapons prohibited and derived from Code 1989, § 9-1-68, and Res. No. 05-01-10, adopted Jan. 10, 1995.  
Sec. 6-108. - Premises. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, whether room, shop, or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, and may include an attached patio or deck when: 
(1)  It is separated from the general public by a permanent wall, fence, hedge or similar approved device; 
(2)  The location of the patio or deck does not encroach upon any public sidewalk, right-of-way, or other common area customarily used for ingress, egress, pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(3)  The location and plan shall first have been approved by the community development director, fire marshal, and building official. 
(Ord. No. 05-06027, 6-27-2005; Ord. No. 2009-0004, 5-18-2009)  
Secs. 6-109—6-115. - Reserved.  
Sec. 6-116. - Open containers provisions. 
The purpose of this section is intended to set forth certain exceptions and provisions applicable only to licensees whose establishments: 
(1)  Are located within an approved entertainment district. 
(2)  Possess a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
Except as specifically set forth in this section, all such licensees will remain subject to all other provisions of the city's alcoholic beverages ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 3806, § I, 3-14-2016; Ord. No. 3926, § I, 5-23-2016)  
Sec. 6-117. - Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted. 
(a)  Container. No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in their possession on the public streets and sidewalks, plazas, in parks and/or any other public place within an entertainment district any open alcoholic beverage container, which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. Any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises which is located within an approved entertainment district is authorized to dispense alcoholic beverages in a clear plastic cup for removal from the premises. 
(b)  Drinking from can, bottle, or glass prohibited. Except as specifically set forth in sections 6-116 through 6-119 herein with respect to a clear plastic cup, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, glass, cup, or container, on the public streets, sidewalks, plazas, rights-of-way, and public or private parking lots within the city. 
(c)  Purchase from licensed premises within an approved entertainment district allowed off premises. Alcoholic beverages purchased in accordance with this chapter may be consumed in the approved entertainment district except as prohibited in this section. Alcoholic beverages consumed pursuant to this provision must be purchased from a licensed establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within the approved entertainment district. Licensed establishments shall only be permitted to serve from their approved premises as approved on their alcohol license and shall not serve from temporary locations upon the premises unless specifically allowed by issuance of a special event permit in accordance with section 6-22(c). 
(d)  Consumption limited to certain areas in entertainment district. No alcoholic beverage purchased pursuant to this provision may be consumed outside the boundary of the approved entertainment district or within the approved entertainment district on any parcel used as a public park, church, day care center or school unless specifically allowed by issuance of a special event permit in accordance with section 6-22(c). 
(e)  Regulated hours. After midnight, consumption on premises licensees shall discontinue the sale of alcoholic beverages within clear plastic cups and shall not allow alcoholic beverages to be removed from their licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 3806, § I, 3-14-2016)  
Sec. 6-118. - Signage. 
Any licensed establishment that allows patrons to leave an establishment with an alcoholic beverage as regulated herein shall have an 11-inch by eight and one-half inch sign posted at the door for public view whereas a patron exiting the establishment can read the following: 
"All patrons leaving this establishment with an alcoholic beverage do hereby take full responsibility to only consume an alcoholic beverage served in a clear plastic cup not to exceed 16 ounces in size and obtained by an establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages in the entertainment district boundary outlined on the map below. Any individual that leaves the permitted area with an alcoholic beverage in an open container is in violation of city code and may be subject to a citation and/or fine." 
 
(Ord. No. 3806, § I, 3-14-2016)  
Sec. 6-119. - No abrogation of other laws. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to abrogate or otherwise impact any state law or local ordinance pertaining to public drunkenness, disorderly conduct, driving with an open container or under the influence of alcohol, or similar laws. 
(Ord. No. 3806, § I, 3-14-2016)  
Sec; 6-120. - Ancillary tastings permitted. 
The holder of a retail sales license, other than for distilled spirits, shall be eligible for an ancillary tasting license to provide samples of malt beverages and/or wine offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this ordinance. No location where distilled spirits are sold shall be eligible for an ancillary tasting license. 
(Ord. No. 2009-0002, 3-9-2009)  
Sec. 6-121. - Tasting limitations. 
(a)  Tastings shall be limited to malt beverages and wines only. Tastings shall be on limited occasions either when a customer requests a sample of a malt beverage or wine offered for sale within the premises or in conjunction with sampling designed to promote malt beverage or wine appreciation and education. 
(b)  Tastings of malt beverages or wine shall be limited to one consecutive two-hour period in any one day. Tastings shall not exceed two ounces, and no person shall consume more than eight ounces in any one day on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2009-0002, 3-9-2009)  
Sec. 6-122. - Serving limitations. 
(a)  Malt beverages and/or wine products used in conjunction with tasting shall be opened and poured by the licensee or a person who has obtained a manager's permit as specified in section 6-102. 
(b)  No open containers of malt beverages and/or wine shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(c)  Tastings are permitted on the licensed premises only as specified in section 6-108. 
(d)  Holders of an ancillary tasting license shall not charge for tastings, but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. 
(Ord. No. 2009-0002, 3-9-2009)  
Sec. 6-123. - Additional fee required. 
The annual fee for an ancillary tasting license shall be published in the adopted fee schedule for the City of Woodstock. 
(Ord. No. 2009-0002, 3-9-2009)  
Sec. 6-124. - Authority. 
(a)  Brown-bagging is prohibited within the corporate limits of the city unless the business has met the requirements of this article: 
Any establishment qualifying as a non-alcohol retail establishment may purchase an annual permit so as to permit brown-bagging on such premises. The fee for an annual permit shall be listed in the schedule of fees as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council, and shall be renewed annually. 
(Ord. No. 3567-2015, Att. A)  
Sec. 6-125. - Terms. 
(a)  A non-alcohol retail establishment must follow the license terms as listed in this chapter. 
(b)  Brown bagging shall be unlawful at all business establishments that do not obtain a brown bagging permit as provided for in this section. 
(Ord. No. 3567-2015, Att. A)  
Sec. 6-126. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Every establishment obtaining a brown-bagging permit and allowing brown bagging at such establishments, in addition to the rules contained in article I of this chapter, shall be subject to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  No bottle or other container of distilled spirits shall be in the possession or under the control of any owner, licensee, employee or agent of such establishment at any time. 
(2)  Possession of such bottle or container of distilled spirits shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of this provision. 
(3)  Bottles or other containers of distilled spirits must remain in the possession of, or under the control of, the person bringing such bottle or container into an establishment permitting brown bagging. 
(4)  The business is not to sell, distribute, store, or in any other way deal in the beverage. [See] O.C.G.A. § 3-3-3. 
(b)  Establishments holding brown-bagging permits shall not deny or restrict the privilege of brown-bagging by patrons or impose any admission charge, cover charge or minimum charge on brown-bagging patrons that is not also imposed upon all other patrons during the legal hours of sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Establishments holding brown-bagging permits shall comply with the alcohol regulations relative to business hours contained in section 6-21. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to operate an establishment governed under the provisions of this article without first obtaining a license from the business services division and paying such fees and taxes as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. Brown-bagging shall be subject to all general licensing and regulations as well as the licensing and regulations for consumption on the premises establishments. 
(e)  Brown-bagging shall include the following acts of non-licensed facilities: 
(1)  Any person who brown-bags; 
(2)  Any person participating in consumption of any alcoholic beverage being brown-bagged; 
(3)  Any person who consumes an alcoholic beverage on any premises holding a business license, except for those premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or otherwise exempted from the definition of brown-bagging by virtue of the private residential character of the occupancy; 
(4)  Any employee of the business establishment in whose presence brown-bagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs. 
(f)  The business license of any premises upon which brown-bagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the city. Any conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the municipal court to a charge of brown-bagging shall be admissible in a license suspension or revocation consideration or proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 3567-2015, Att. A)  
Secs. 6-127—6-130. - Reserved  
DIVISION 4. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE EXCISE TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 86. 
 
Sec. 6-131. - Penalties and revocation. 
(a)  Any licensee who fails to pay the taxes imposed in this division by the city, or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the city, within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent per month of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof. 
(b)  The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at a rate of one percent per month. Interest shall be assessed for each month, or fraction thereof, from the day of the month that the amount or any portion thereof should have been paid until the date of payment. 
(Code 1989, § 3-4-11; Res. No. 93-10-11, 10-11-1993)  
Sec. 6-132. - Malt beverages. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale of malt beverages within the city as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; and 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(Code 1989, § 3-4-1; Ord. No. 88-02-29, 2-29-1988) 
Charter reference— Excise taxes, § 6.14. 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80.  
Sec. 6-133. - Wine. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale or use of wine by the package an excise tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(Code 1989, § 3-4-2; Ord. No. 88-02-29, 2-29-1988; Ord. No. 01-08-28, 8-28-2001) 
Charter reference— Excise taxes, § 6.14. 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60.  
Sec. 6-134. - Distilled spirits—Retail package. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the package, excluding the sale of fermented beverages, of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax upon any fractional part thereof. 
(Code 1989, § 3-4-3; Ord. No. 88-02-29, 2-29-1988; Ord. No. 01-08-28, 8-28-2001) 
Charter reference— Excise taxes, § 6.14. 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on distilled spirits by the package, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80.  
Sec. 6-135. - Same—Consumption. 
There is levied an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the amount of three percent of the charge to the public for the beverage. This tax does not apply to the sale of fermented beverages. 
(Code 1989, § 3-4-4; Ord. No. 88-02-29, 2-29-1988) 
Charter reference— Excise taxes, § 6.14. 
State Law reference— Authority to impose excise tax on distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130.  
Sec. 6-136. - Payment of tax; records and reports; penalty. 
(a)  All taxes, except those levied in section 6-135, shall be imposed on the wholesale dealer, computable and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping or delivering alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer in the incorporated areas of the city, whether delivered to the dealer's place of business for resale, shall, as a condition to the privilege of carrying on such business in the city: 
(1)  Keep true and correct records of all sales, shipments and deliveries of such alcoholic beverages to each retail dealer; and such records shall be preserved for a period of one year and shall be made available on request for inspection by any duly authorized representative of the city. 
(2)  Collect from each retail dealer at the time of delivery of the alcoholic beverages the amount of tax due under the terms of this division and hold the same in trust for the city until such amount is remitted to the city as next provided. 
(3)  On or before the 20th of each calendar month make a verified and comprehensive report to the city clerk which shall correctly show all sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages made to or for retail dealers in the city for the month immediately preceding the report. The report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount collected under the terms of this chapter, including copies of all sales invoices to each retail dealer, and such other information as may be called for by the city council. The report shall be accompanied by remittance to the city clerk of all taxes collected or due as shown on the report. 
(b)  Failure of the wholesale dealer or distributor to remit the taxes required in this division will result in a penalty of ten percent of the tax due in addition to the tax due. 
(Code 1989, § 3-4-5; Ord. No. 88-02-29, 2-29-1988) 
State Law reference— Maintenance of records, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-6; unlawful distribution, sale, penalties, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-27.  
Sec. 6-137. - Distilled spirits by the drink. 
(a)  The tax imposed on retail consumption dealers by section 6-135 shall be payable as provided in this section. 
(b)  Every licensee shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverages served shall be itemized separately. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefore at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(c)  Every licensee or its agent is authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed in this division from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink sold within its licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the city manager to facilitate the collection of this tax. 
(d)  All taxes collected by any licensee or agent under this division shall be due and payable to the city on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective calendar month, as set forth in this division. 
(e)  On or before the 20th day of the month, a return for the preceding calendar month shall be filed with the city clerk in such form as the city clerk may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax under this division. 
(f)  All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(Code 1989, § 3-4-6) 
State Law reference— Imposition of municipal tax, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130.  
Sec. 6-138. - Requirements of wholesalers generally. 
All wholesalers shall comply with this chapter before they can sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any establishment in the city. Deliveries shall be made in a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as set out in this division, and shall be subject to inspection by duly authorized authorities of the city at all times when deliveries are made. 
(Code 1989, § 3-4-7; Ord. No. 88-02-29, 2-29-1988)  
Sec. 6-139. - Failure to collect taxes at delivery; failure to report or remit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any wholesale dealer or distributor, person, firm or corporation to deliver any alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer within the incorporated areas of the city without collecting the taxes provided for in this division at the time of delivery. 
(b)  If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports provided for in this division, the city council shall notify the party in writing, and if the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of the notice, the council may withdraw from the wholesale dealer or distributor the privilege of doing business in the city by notifying the state revenue commissioner of the failure and by notifying the retail dealer that further acceptance of deliveries from the wholesaler, until the taxes are paid, may subject the retail dealer to penalty for violation of section 6-140. 
(Code 1989, § 3-4-8)  
Sec. 6-140. - Unpaid taxes, sales are violation. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, firm or corporation to sell at retail within the incorporated areas of the city any alcoholic beverages on which the taxes provided for in this division have not been paid. 
(Code 1989, § 3-4-9; Ord. No. 88-02-29, 2-29-1988)  
Sec. 6-141. - Suspension, revocation or prohibition of retailer's license. 
A violation of this division or other sections of this chapter shall authorize the city council to suspend, revoke or place on probation, with or without conditions, the license of any retail party or holder in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in section 6-4. 
(Code 1989, § 3-4-10; Ord. No. 88-02-29, 2-29-1988; Res. No. 92-03-23, 3-23-1992)  
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Jan. 11, 2016, deleted the former Art. II, §§ 10-31—10-70, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to adult entertainment and derived from Code 1989, §§ 9-6-01—9-6-30, 9-6-32, 9-6-33; Res. No. 97-09-23, adopted Sept. 23, 1997. 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons, used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, electronically controlled, electrically controlled or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this article if he has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo-contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Licensing officer means the city clerk. 
Lingerie modeling studio means any place or establishment wherein the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee or required to make a purchase in order to view entertainment or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling swim suits, lingerie or similar undergarments. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Sexual device means any three dimensional object designed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, buttocks, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt plugs, nipple clamps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexual device shop means any place or establishment that regularly features sexual devices. This definition shall not be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, or any establishment that does not regularly advertise itself or hold itself out, in any medium, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests. Any place or establishment which meets the criteria in section 10-71 shall not be considered a sexual device shop. 
Sexually oriented business means any business or establishment defined in this article. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: 
a.  Anilingus. 
b.  Buggery. 
c.  Coprophagy. 
d.  Coprophilia. 
e.  Cunnilingus. 
f.  Fellatio. 
g.  Necrophilia. 
h.  Pederasty. 
i.  Pedophilia. 
j.  Piquerism. 
k.  Sapphism. 
l.  Zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016; Ord. of 9-25-2017) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-32. - Violation. 
In addition to any fine or imprisonment a court may impose, a violation of this article shall also be grounds for the immediate suspension or revocation of a license issued under this article. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-33. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety, morale and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials or entertainment, including sexually oriented materials or entertainment. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials or entertainment protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-34. - Sexually oriented business regulations. 
(a)  The following regulations shall apply to sexually oriented businesses: 
(1)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an erotic dance establishment or lingerie modeling studio without a valid sexually oriented business license issued pursuant to this article. 
(2)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment or lingerie modeling studio licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers or models for the preceding calendar year. 
(3)  No erotic dance establishment or lingerie modeling studio licensee shall maintain and retain for two years, the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers or models. 
(4)  No erotic dance establishment or lingerie modeling studio licensee shall employee or contract with persons under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(5)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to a sexually oriented business. 
(6)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on Christmas Day. 
(7)  No sexually oriented business licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(8)  A sexually oriented business licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(9)  All dancing or modeling shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(10)  No dancing or modeling shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(11)  No dancer or model shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(12)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer or model. 
(13)  No dancer or model shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(14)  All areas of an establishment licensed under this article shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(b)  If any portion of this section, or its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016) 
Charter reference— Specific power to promote welfare of citizens, § 1.13(44).  
Sec. 10-35. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-36. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city, any sexually oriented business without a license to do so. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-37. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any sexually oriented business including, but not limited to, any adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau, lingerie modeling studio, sexual device shop, or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-38. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee under this article to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-39. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage establishment, sexual device shop, or adult dancing establishment or any other sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-40. - Location. 
(a)  No sexually oriented business shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential purposes. 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located. 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined under this article is located. 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016) 
State Law reference— Restrictions on adult bookstores, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3.  
Sec. 10-41. - Sexually oriented business employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of sexually oriented businesses shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as a sexually oriented business s employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the licensing officer of his intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and shall receive approval of such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the licensing officer requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the licensing officer for a hearing. The decision of the licensing officer after hearing may be appealed to the city council who may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment, or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this article, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of his license. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-42. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any sexually oriented business shall make application to the city manager, or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied to the city manager at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-43. - Application contents. 
Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of the corporate stock outstanding. 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license for a sexually oriented business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including the date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant. 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any. 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right. 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business regulated under this article. 
(21)  Each application for a sexually oriented businesses license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual. 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner. 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation. 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-44. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant for a license required by this article, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the information described in section 10-43. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-45. - Investigation of applicant. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of an applicant for a license required by this article. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the license if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of a crime constituting a felony, or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. 
(6)  The applicant has not had a sexually oriented business license or other similar license denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)  The applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such sexually oriented business is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities openly occur. 
(10)  On the date the business for which a license is required in this article commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  The proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted under this article. 
(12)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or the United States. 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-46. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, state or city. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50, 81. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-47. - Renewal of license. 
Licenses for sexually oriented businesses may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the sexually oriented business licenses shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-48. - Licenses nontransferable. 
No sexually oriented business license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. A sexually oriented business license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-49. - Change of location or name of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  No sexually oriented business shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city, and approval has been obtained from the city manager and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the city's codes, have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on a sexually oriented business under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where a sexually oriented business is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-50. - Refusal of license; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a license may appeal such denial to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-51. - Appeal procedure. 
A licensee under this article shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council, and the name and address of the applicant. The city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-52. - Council action. 
When an appeal by a licensee under this article is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of a hearing as may be required bylaw. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-53. - City council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal by a licensee under this article before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-54. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-55. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-56. - Report of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date a hearing for an appeal under this article is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city manager and chief of police. The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-57. - Hearing officer's decision. 
The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points, in either of such cases the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-58. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any sexually oriented business operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this article, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such sexually oriented business and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a sexually oriented business contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted under this article. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-59. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each premises licensed under this article shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-60. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a premises licensed under this article or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-61. - Nuisances affecting health. 
(a)  It is found and declared that there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are not in compliance with the applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in this city; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the people of this city; and that a public necessity exists for the closing of such dwellings, buildings or structures. It is found and declared that where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the city and a public necessity exists for the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. Whenever the chief of police or his designee finds that there exists in the city dwellings, buildings or structures where conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, power is conferred upon the city to exercise its police power to close the aforesaid dwellings, buildings or structures in the manner provided in this article and under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8-41-2-17. 
(b)  All the provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8-41-2-17 including method and procedure may be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by the chief of police or his designee, health officer or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that the property is in violation of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8-41-2-17. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 38-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Power of city to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures; health hazards on private property; properties affected, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7.  
Sec. 10-62. - Summary procedure to abate nuisances affecting health. 
In addition to the procedures and remedies in this article, the chief of police or designated officer may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9.  
Sec. 10-63. - Procedure to abate nuisances affecting health. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure or property which is located within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with applicable codes in force in the city, and such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The chief of police is appointed to exercise the powers prescribed by this article and applicable ordinances. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the chief of police or his designee or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the chief of police shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure or property. 
(d)  If the chief of police investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the chief of police may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before the municipal court as pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of the complaint in the proper court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(e)  After such notice and hearing, if the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order to abate the nuisance. 
(f)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to abate the nuisance, the chief of police may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be vacated and closed or demolished. The chief of police shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(g)  If the chief of police has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The chief of police, city council and city employees are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-2-9. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9.  
Sec. 10-64. - Lien for abatement of nuisances affecting health. 
(a)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. The lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g). 
(b)  The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the chief of police shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically title 48, chapter 4 (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.); however, the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the city whose ordinance is being enforced. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(c)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering lien authorized by this article unless such costs are waived by resolution of the city council. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(d)  The city council may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(e)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court (O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29). 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9.  
Sec. 10-65. - Additional authority of police chief. 
The chief of police is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7-41-2-10, and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-12-41-2-17, including the following powers in addition to others granted in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7-41-2-10 and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-12-41-2-17: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the unincorporated area of the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; however, such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016) 
State Law reference— Powers of public officers, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11.  
Sec. 10-66. - Service of complaint regarding nuisances affecting health. 
(a)  Complaints issued by the chief of police pursuant to this article and under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7—41-2-11, and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-13—41-2-17, shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the city. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the chief of police designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the city whose ordinance is being enforced; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of title 48, chapter 4, article 5 (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-75 et seq.); or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the city, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in appropriate tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the chief of police in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the chief of police shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the. manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016) 
State Law reference— Service of complaints, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12.  
Sec. 10-67. - Right of appeal regarding action to abate nuisances affecting health. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13, any person affected by an order issued by the chief of police may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; however, such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be had by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; however, it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this article. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016) 
State Law reference— Injunction against order, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13.  
Sec. 10-68. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A premises licensed under this article or any part of a premises licensed under this article may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-69. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license previously granted in this article. If the chief of police seeks to suspend or revoke a license, the chief of police shall give written notification to the licensee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the licensee at least five days prior to the notice of the hearing. The licensee shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a license in the event of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee has violated any provision of this article; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the state or the city regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; and 
(6)  A licensee fails to pay any fee, license fee, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other licensing ordinance of the city. 
(c)  If the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any license under this article, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the chief of police; however, the licensee shall be authorized to continue its business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. No licensee or any other applicant may apply for a license during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing conducted by the chief of police, the chief shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension, revocation and the duration of either. 
(d)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the chief of police, the licensee may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the mayor and city council for the city by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date of the decision of the chief of police. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the mayor and council for the city within 45 days after the date of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After hearing by the mayor and city council, the city council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including the upholding of the action of the chief of police or the imposition of such action as the mayor and city council may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. Appeals from the decision of the mayor and city council shall be to the superior court of the county filed within 30 days of the final action of the mayor and city council. If the licensee does not file an appeal from any decision of the chief of police, as provided herein, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-70. - Severability. 
It is declared to be the intention of this article that its sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases are severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is declared to be unconstitutional or invalid, it shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 10-71. - Exception to definition of sexual device shop. 
(a)  Any store which meets the following criteria shall not be considered a sexual device shop: 
(1)  Sexual devices are displayed in less than five percent of store floor space; 
(2)  Sexual devices comprise less than five percent of store sales; 
(3)  Sexual devices comprise less than five percent of store inventory; 
(4)  Sexual devices shall not be visible from outside the store; 
(5)  Sexual devices sold in the store shall be located in the rear of the store away from any outside windows; 
(6)  Sexual devices sold in the store shall be packaged in opaque packaging such that the sexual device can only be viewed if the packaging is opened; 
(7)  Sexual devices shall not be displayed outside of the above-described opaque packaging; 
(8)  Sexual devices sold in the store shall not be designed to look like sexual organs; and 
(9)  A sign shall be posted at the entryway of the store which shall be visible to all customers entering the store and which shall state in English in at least 150 point type and in capital letters "PARENTAL ADVISORY—ADULT HUMOR AND CONTENT." 
(b)  Upon request by city staff members the store management shall provide such records to the city staff as are reasonably requested to demonstrate compliance with the provision of this section, such as floor space diagrams, inventory counts and sales numbers. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2017; Ord. of 10-9-2017)  
Secs. 10-72—10-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - POOL AND BILLIARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— State regulation of billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq.; authority of city to regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billiard room and pool hall mean any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards or pool and for which a charge is made for use of the equipment. 
Billiards means any of several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and shall include all forms of the game commonly known as carom billiards, pocket billiards and English billiards. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-31) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-102. - License required. 
Each person desiring to operate a billiard room or pool hall within the city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in section 86-72. The fee for the license shall be set by the city council on an individual basis after the application is made. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-32) 
Charter reference— Specific power to promote welfare of citizens, § 1.13(44).  
Sec. 10-103. - Gambling prohibited. 
The owner, operator or manager of any billiard or pool room open for public use shall not allow gambling of any kind to occur upon such premises. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-34) 
State Law reference— Gambling prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-21.  
Sec. 10-104. - Minors. 
No person having charge of or control of any pool room or billiard room open to the public shall admit into such room any minor, whether or not for the purpose of playing billiards or pool. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-35)  
Sec. 10-105. - View of premises; doors. 
(a)  The owner, operator or manager of any billiard or pool room in the city shall not permit to be used on such premises any screens, shades, partitions or other devices of like character which shall have the effect of obstructing the view through the windows or doors of the place where the billiard or pool tables are kept. 
(b)  The doors of all billiard or pool rooms licensed under this article shall be kept unlocked whenever the tables are in use, or when any person other than the proprietor or his agent is present in such place. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-36)  
Secs. 10-106—10-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— State regulation of carnivals, circuses and itinerant entertainers, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-15. 
 
Sec. 10-141. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Carnival means amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduct of games of skill, goods-dispensing facilities, and sideshows. 
Public exhibition means and includes circuses, menageries, sideshows, and other similar itinerant amusement enterprises which are open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-21; Ord. No. 05-04-26, § 1, 4-26-2005) 
Charter reference— Specific power to regular performances, § 1.13(17). 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-142. - Prohibited use. 
No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct or operate a circus, carnival, or public exhibition, as such terms are defined herein, without having first obtained a license from the business office. 
(Ord. No. 05-04-26, § 2, 4-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-143. - Conditions precedent to issuance of license. 
No license under this section shall be issued until the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The operator and sponsor of the circus, carnival, or public exhibition have each assumed full responsibility for maintaining order and for keeping the site clean and free of trash, papers, and other debris, and have place trash containers in adequate number and in convenient locations for the use of the public; 
(2)  All rides have been inspected for mechanical, structural, electrical, and other hazards by the appropriate officers and employees of the state, and adequate safeguards have been place to protect both operators and the general public from inadvertently coming into contact with moving parts, belts, motor gears, electrical switches, and other possible or potential hazards. A copy of said inspection and state license(s) must be attached to the application and submitted to the business officer; and 
(3)  The applicant has placed on file with the city clerk a certificate or certificates of insurance indicating that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damages arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in connection with such carnival or exhibition. Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 for each person, and $300,000.00 for each accident. 
(Ord. No. 05-04-26, § 3, 4-26-2005)  
Sec. 10-144. - Inspections. 
The chief of police and the fire chief shall see that proper inspections and patrols are made of the premises used for the activities licensed herein. 
(Ord. No. 05-04-26, § 2, 4-26-2005)  
Secs. 10-145—10-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - COIN-OPERATED DEVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— State regulation of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement center proprietor means any establishment where three or more coin-operated amusement machines are maintained which occupy less than 25 percent of the available floor space. 
Arcade room means any establishment where more than three coin-operated machines are maintained which occupy more than 25 percent of the available floor space. 
Arcade room proprietor means any proprietor of an arcade room. 
Available floor space means all that space necessary for the placement, operation and use of the machines licensed under this article and shall not be solely limited to the space occupied by the machines themselves. Such placement shall be such that the safety of the public will be a primary consideration, subject to inspection and approval by the fire marshal. 
Coin-operated amusement machine means any machine or device operated by means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object, for the purpose of receiving the temporary services of such machine for recreation or a game of skill and for the playing of which a fee is charged. The term does not include vending machines in which are not incorporated recreation features, nor does the term include any coin-operated mechanical musical devices or kiddie rides. 
Distributor means any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who sets up for operating by another, any machine regulated by this article, whether such leasing or renting be for a fixed charge or rental, or on the basis of a division of the income derived from such device, or otherwise. 
Proprietor means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or club who, as the owner or lessee, has under his or its control any establishment, place or premises in or at which a coin-operated amusement machine is placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play by the general public, with three or fewer machines. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-41) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-182. - Penalties. 
Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of a license issued under this article, or for punishment under the provisions for penalties for violations outlined in this Code. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-50)  
Sec. 10-183. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of a distributor, proprietor, arcade room proprietor or amusement center proprietor of coin-operated amusement machines without first having obtained a proper license therefor. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-42) 
Charter reference— Specific power to promote welfare of citizens, § 1.13(44).  
Sec. 10-184. - Application for license. 
(a)  An application for a license under this article shall be filed in writing with the city clerk, on a form to be provided by the city, and shall specify: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses. 
(2)  The address of the premises where the licensed machine or machines are to be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such place if any type of proprietor. 
(3)  The number of machines to be maintained on the premises if any type of proprietor. 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the machine or machines, if other than the proprietor. This information shall not be released to the general public without the consent of the licensee. 
(5)  Whether or not the person or persons having management of or supervision over the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance relating to narcotics or any crime of moral turpitude, the nature of such offense, and the punishment assessed therefor. 
(6)  The requestor currently holds a valid license issued by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 
(b)  On initial application, the applicant must file a petition, accompanied by a $75.00 fee, for conditional use under the particular zoning classification in which the business is or is to be located. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-43)  
Sec. 10-185. - Fee. 
The proper license fee, as established by chapter 86, article III, shall accompany an application for a license under this article. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-44)  
Sec. 10-186. - License display; transferability. 
A license required by this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the licensee. Such license shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, and in the case of a proprietor, amusement center proprietor or arcade room proprietor shall apply only to the premises for which such license is issued. In addition, each machine shall have placed on it by the licensee a sticker showing the license number of its distributor and/or proprietor. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-45)  
Sec. 10-187. - Character qualifications. 
No license required by this article shall be issued to or renewed for any person who has or employs a person who has, within five years of issuance or renewal, been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony involving any federal or state offense or any federal or state misdemeanor involving drug-related offenses or offenses involving moral turpitude; and the licensee will submit the identity of all owners and employees to the city on a continuing basis as changes occur. This information is to be forwarded to the police department for the purpose of allowing a complete check in order that these character qualifications be fulfilled, prior to the issuance or renewal of any license or permit issued under this article. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-46)  
Sec. 10-188. - Increasing number of devices. 
In case a proprietor licensed under the provisions of this article desires, after the expiration of any portion of any license year, to increase the number of machines to be used or played, or exhibited for use or play in his establishment, so that he then has three or more machines, he shall surrender his license to the city manager, subject to a hearing. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-47)  
Sec. 10-189. - Revocation of license. 
If it comes to the attention of the city council or the city manager that a licensee has violated any provision of this article, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  The city manager shall issue a notice of objection which shall include the address of the location and the specific reasons why the machine or machines in question are alleged to violate any provision of this article. The city manager will then notify the proprietor, amusement center proprietor or arcade room proprietor that a notice of objection has been filed and will set a date for a hearing before the city council on this matter. Extensions and necessary investigations will be granted and conducted at the discretion of the city council. 
(2)  At the time of the hearing, any resident, the distributor, the proprietor, amusement center proprietor or arcade room proprietor and the city manager may be heard. After this hearing, the city council shall issue a notice of decision which will call for the dismissal of the objection, removal of the machines or such other remedy as they deem appropriate under the circumstances that are consistent with the purpose of this article. 
(3)  The decision of the city council shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for their decision and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(4)  The decision of the city council shall be final but may be appealed to the appropriate court within 30 days. 
(5)  The decision of the city council shall be binding upon the proprietor, amusement center proprietor, arcade room proprietor and/or distributor of the machine under consideration. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-48)  
Sec. 10-190. - Operating regulations. 
All businesses licensed under this article shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All such machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person or persons who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. However, no machine shall be placed within five feet of any public entrance or exit and no proprietor, except arcade room proprietors or amusement center proprietors, may keep or maintain a machine between any public entrance or exit and any cash register. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)  Inspection. The chief of police shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such machine or machines are operated or set up for operation and to inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(3)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor, arcade room proprietor or amusement center proprietor to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. Such attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. The attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(4)  Refunds and adjustments. Refunds and adjustments to all customers shall be the responsibility of the proprietor, arcade room proprietor or amusement center proprietor of the machine in question. 
(5)  Loitering. As used in this section, the term "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter within the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated by this article or for any person, firm or corporation licensed to operate an arcade room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated by this article in such a manner as to: 
a.  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
b.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or 
d.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place. 
(6)  Attire. All proprietors, arcade room proprietors and amusement center proprietors shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their premises. 
(7)  Pool tables. No proprietor, except amusement center proprietors, shall maintain pool tables or bumper pool tables on the premises. 
(Code 1989, § 9-5-49)  
Chapter 11 - SPECIAL EVENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted November 12, amended chapter 11 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 11, §§ 11-1—11-18, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation. 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Title authority. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Woodstock Special Events Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-2. - Purpose. 
The city council recognizes the impact that special events have on the availability of city services and the city council further recognizes the dangerous nature of fireworks to the health safety and welfare of the citizens of Woodstock, Georgia, and therefore adopts this procedure to license and regulate activities of this nature. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in his section, except where the context clearly requires otherwise. 
City means the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
Consumer fireworks means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. [Cross Reference: O.C.G.A § 25-10-1] 
As used in this chapter, the terms "consumer fireworks" or "fireworks" shall not include: 
(a)  Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term "consumer fireworks" or "fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting and hunting purposes; and 
(b)  Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are non-explosive and non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less or multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party peppers, string peppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
Consumer fireworks retail facility shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124; provided, however, that such term shall not include a tent, canopy, or membrane structure. 
Consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124. 
Distributor means any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership which sells consumer fireworks. 
Electric plant shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A § 46-3A-1. [Cross reference: O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1-4.1] 
Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. [Cross reference: O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1] 
NFPA 1124 means the National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 Edition. 
Nonprofit organization or group means any entity exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, any entity incorporated under Chapter 3 of Title 14 of the Georgia Nonprofit Corporation Code, or a sponsored organization of a public or private elementary or secondary school in this this state, with a physical address in Cherokee County, Georgia. [Cross reference: O.C.G.A § 25-10-1] 
Parades, marches, and processions means a group or number of people or vehicles, or the combination thereof, consisting of five or more vehicles or ten or more persons or a combination of three or more vehicles and five or more persons, proceeding or moving in a body or in concert along the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
Proximate audience means an audience closer to pyrotechnic devices than permitted by the National Fire Protection Association Standard 1123, Code for Fireworks Display, as adopted by the Safety Fire Commissioner. [Cross reference: O.C.G.A § 25-10-1] 
Pyrotechnics means fireworks. [Cross reference: O.C.G.A § 25-10-1] 
Road race means any race on public rights-of-way that require the closing of such rights-of-way or otherwise impedes the flow of normal traffic. 
Special event, as used in this article, means: 
(a)  Any activity which occurs upon private or public property that will affect the ordinary use of parks, public streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, or otherwise impacts the delivery of public safety services. 
(b)  Any activity which causes an increase of more than 100 percent in average daily trips on any public street within the city. 
(c)  Special events include, but are not limited to, fairs, tours, grand opening celebrations, races, parades, art festivals, concerts, holiday celebrations, bicycle runs and block parties. Private social gatherings which will make no use of city streets other than for lawful parking are not included. Garages sales, lawn sales, rummage sales, flea market sales, or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property are not included. 
(d)  For carnivals, please see chapter 10, sections 10-141—10-145 of this Code. 
Special event permit means the permit required by section 11-4 of this chapter. 
Store shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124; provided, however, that such term shall only include such buildings with at least 4,000 square feet of retail display space and wherefrom: 
(a)  No more than 25 percent of such retail display space is used for consumer fireworks and items or products as provided for under paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A § 25-10-1; and 
(b)  Other items or products which are not consumer fireworks or items or products as provided for under paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 are sold; and provided, further, that such term means a person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership with more than one mercantile location, where all such mercantile locations are collectively known by the public by the same name and central management. 
Waste-water treatment plant shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 43-51-2. 
Water treatment plant shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 43-51-2. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1); Ord. of 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 4003, 7-11-2016)  
Sec. 11-4. - Permit required. 
(1)  Any special event which is designed or intended to attract the participation or attendance of 50 or more individuals at any given point in time or at which any fireworks shall be used, exploded or displayed shall require a permit. 
(2)  Non-profit organizations are not exempt from obtaining a special event permit but shall be exempt from paying all applicable fees. 
(3)  No person shall advertise, engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any special event, unless a special event permit shall first have been obtained from the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-5. - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Lawful picketing. Lawful picketing shall be conducted off the street or roadway and not in a manner as to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Any lawful picketing which crosses, traverses, or is otherwise conducted in or upon any street, roadway, rights-of-way or sidewalk shall not be exempted from the permit requirement. 
(3)  Activities of, or sponsored by, a governmental agency that do not require the closing of any street, roadway, rights-of-way or sidewalk. 
(4)  Any bona fide athletic event or contest which is scheduled and sponsored by any bona fide elementary, secondary, or high school situated within the city or by the Woodstock Parks and Recreation Department so long as during such special event no fireworks shall be used, exploded, or displayed and that does not require the closing of any street, roadway, rights-of-way or sidewalk. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-6. - Permit application. 
The city manager or his designee shall be in charge of administering this chapter and coordinating the application process. The development services/licensing division shall immediately upon receipt, forward applications received to the city manager, or his designee for processing. 
Any person seeking the issuance of a special events permit shall file an application with the Community Development Department - Development Services/Licensing Division, located at the Woodstock Annex, 12453 Highway 92, Woodstock, Georgia. Applications are also available on the city's website. A special events committee comprised of the following employees shall review and approve all special event applications: 
a.  Police Chief, or designee. 
b.  Fire Chief, or designee. 
c.  Public Works Director, or designee. 
d.  Parks and Recreation Director, or designee. 
e.  Community Development Director, or designee. 
f.  Downtown Development Authority Director, or designee (if applicable). 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a permit (that does not involve closing of a street, roadway, rights-of-way or sidewalks) shall be filed not more than 180 days and not less than 30 days before the date and time which the proposed special event is to take place. However, for just cause, the city manager may waive the minimum 30-day filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if, after consideration of the date, time, place and nature of the special event, the number of participants and the necessity for city services which will be required in connection with the special event, the city manager reasonably deems it appropriate to waive the filing period. 
a.  Special events that require or request closing of public streets will require city council approval, subject to the city's road closure policy - CPM #600-0003. Such permit applications must be submitted no less than 90 days in advance. 
b.  If the proposed special event is associated with freedom of speech (and requires no closure of a street, roadway, rights-of-way or sidewalk) the minimum filing period is seven days in which case the application shall be walked through the review process by the applicant. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a permit shall set forth the following information and such other information as may be reasonably required: 
a.  The name, place of residence, mailing address and telephone number of the person applying for the permit. 
b.  If the event is to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization must be provided. 
c.  The name, place of residence, mailing address and telephone number of the individual person responsible for conducting the event. 
d.  The dates and times scheduled for the event. 
e.  The exact location/street address of the event. (Attach copy of rental/lease agreement if property is owned by someone other than the applicant.) 
f.  A detailed plan/layout of the event (to include placement of tents, chairs, tables, stages, port-a-johns, dumpsters, etc.) If event involves the closing of a street, roadway, rights-of-way or sidewalk - a detailed layout of the route to be taken (including starting and ending point), roads involved, dates, times and length of times roads will need to be closed, whether or not a full road closure is needed or if a rolling closure can be done, and the purpose of closing the road must be submitted with application. 
g.  The nature and types of activities that will occur, as well as stating how trash disposal and access to toilets will be handled. If event is scheduled to last two hours or longer, the entity filing the special event permit application is required to provide a sufficient number of port-a-johns for event attendees to be determined by the city. Said entity is also responsible for the disposal of trash generated by their event. The determination of whether port-a-johns and trash dumpsters are required and the number of port-a-johns and size of dumpster's rests solely with the city, with the reservation and costs of such provisions being the sole responsibility of the special event permit applicant. 
h.  The approximate number of spectators and participants present or participating in the event. 
i.  The purpose of the event. 
j.  If the event is a parade, the following additional information shall be required. 
1.  The exact location of any marshaling or staging areas for the parade. 
2.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to arrive at the staging areas, and the times at which all such units will be dispersed therefrom. 
3.  The exact route to be traveled, including the starting point and termination point. 
4.  The approximate number of persons, animals and vehicles which will participate in the parade, including a description of the types of animals and vehicles to be used in the parade. 
5.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the street, roadway, or sidewalks to be used. 
6.  A designation of any public facilities or equipment proposed to be utilized. 
k.  Attachment of all authorizations required by any other governmental agency possessing jurisdiction over the event—Iincluding but not limited to: 
1.  Temporary food service permit (Cherokee County Environmental Health) (if required). 
2.  Tent permit (Woodstock Community Development/Building Official). 
3.  Sign permit (Woodstock Community Development/Building Official). 
4.  Alcohol license (State of Georgia; City of Woodstock). 
5.  Fireworks license (State of Georgia) and permit (Cherokee County Probate Court). 
6.  Any other permit or license or authorization as may be required. 
l.  The application shall be signed by the applicant under oath. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-7. - Application fee; permit fee; cost analysis. 
(1)  Permit fee. 
(a)  Cost analysis. The city manager or his designee shall send copies of special event applications to the special events committee. Each committee member is required to evaluate and itemize the costs associated with this event for their department. The city manager or his designee shall compile the departmental figures and give in writing to the applicant the final cost of the permit fee (to include any city facilities/city personnel/park rental fees) as soon as practicable but not later than ten business days after the completed application has been received. 
(b)  Permit fee. The permit fee and all applicable rental fees shall be paid in full prior to issuance of a permit. 
(c)  Refund. If the event does not take place due to inclement weather, fire, or other public safety emergency, and the event cannot be rescheduled within three months from the original date, a refund for the permit fee will be given to the applicant. There will be no refund of the permit fee if the applicant fails to notify the city of an event cancellation no less than ten days prior to the date of the event. The cancellation notice must be in writing to the city manager. If the event involves a road closure, the same notification method used for the road closure must be used for notification of cancellation of event. 
(d)  All applicable fees shall be made payable to and through the city. 
(e)  All associated departmental fees can be found in the Woodstock Fee Schedule under administration—Special duty pay. Facility and park rental fees can be found under parks and recreation. 
(2)  Fee exemptions. 
(a)  All non-profit or religious organizations shall be exempt from the payment of fees if the special event does not involve fireworks, a parade, the use of city facilities or the use of city personnel. A copy of the 501c3 form must be provided. 
(b)  Activities of, or sponsored by a governmental agency shall be exempt from the payment of fees if the special event does not involve fireworks, a parade, the use of city facilities or the use of city personnel. 
(c)  Any bona fide athletic event or contest which is scheduled and sponsored by any bona fide elementary, secondary, high school or college (situated within the city) or by the Woodstock Parks and Recreation Department shall be exempt from the payment of fees if the special event does not involve fireworks, a parade, the use of city facilities or the use of city personnel. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-8. - Fireworks displays. 
No person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation shall expose, use, or ignite or cause to be ignited any fireworks unless a license shall first have been obtained from the State of Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner and a permit has been obtained from the Cherokee County Probate Court. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership desiring to conduct a public exhibition or display of fireworks not before a proximate audience or before a proximate audience shall first obtain a permit as required by state law as now or hereafter amended. [Cross Reference: O.C.G.A § 25-10-3.2 and 25-10-4] 
(b)  A copy of the following documents must be submitted with the special event permit application to the city fire chief, or designee: 
(1)  State license as issued by the State of Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner. 
(2)  A copy of the permit issued by the Cherokee County Probate Court. 
(3)  A certificate of liability insurance. 
(4)  The firework company's contact name, address, and phone number. 
(5)  A detailed listing of the type and quantity of fireworks to be used. 
(6)  A detailed written statement outlining all appropriate safety procedures which will be used at the fireworks display in order to protect the safety of the public and all surrounding property, and the number of city personnel necessary for the event. 
(7)  A detailed written statement describing what facilities and containers will be used to store fireworks. 
(8)  If applicable, the applicant's federal license number for transporting fireworks across state lines. 
(9)  A detailed list of the names, addresses, occupations, and backgrounds of all individuals who will be responsible for the actual display, use, ignition, or explosion of any fireworks. The background statement should include a complete history of the experience of the individuals involved with respect to their use of fireworks, including a detailed list and explanation of each and every accident resulting from the use of fireworks which the individuals have been responsible for or involved in. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful to use fireworks, consumer fireworks, or any items defined in paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 indoors or within the right of way of a public road, street, highway, or railroad of this state. [Cross Reference: O.C.G.A § 25-10-2] 
(11)  It shall be lawful for any person 18 years of age or older to use or ignite or cause to be ignited or to possess, manufacture, transport, or store consumer fireworks. 
(12)  It shall be lawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks anywhere in this state except: 
a.  As provided for under state law. 
b.  In any location where such person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership is not lawfully present or is not otherwise lawfully permitted to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks; 
c.  Within 100 yards of an electric plant; water treatment plant; waste-water treatment plant; a facility engaged in the retail sale of gasoline or other flammable or combustible liquids or gases where the volume stored is in excess of 500 gallons for the purpose of retail sale; or a facility engaged in the production, refining, processing, or blending of any flammable or combustible liquids or gases for retail purposes; any public or private electric substation; or a jail or prison; 
d.  Within 100 yards of the boundaries of any public use air facility under Title 6 of Georgia Law or any public use landing area or platform marked and designed for the landing use by helicopters; 
e.  Within any park, historic site, recreational area, or other property which is owned by or operated by, for, or under the custody and control of the city, except pursuant to a special use permit that has been granted by the city; 
f.  Within any park, historic site, recreational area, or other property which is owned by or operated by, for, or under the custody and control of the state, except pursuant to any rules and regulations of the agency or department having control of such property which may allow for such use or ignition of consumer fireworks; 
g.  Within 100 yards of a hospital, nursing home, or other health care facility regulated under Chapter 7 of Title 13 of Georgia Law; provided, however, that an owner or operator of such facility may use or ignite or cause to be ignited consumer fireworks on the property of such facility or may grant written permission to any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited consumer fireworks on the property of such facility [Cross Reference: O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2]; or 
h.  While under the influence of alcohol or any drug or any combination of alcohol and any drug to the extent that it is less safe or unlawful for such person to ignite consumer fireworks as provided for in state law. [Cross Reference: O.C.G.A § 25-10-2.1]. 
(c)  Any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership may use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks as provided for under state law if such person, firm, corporation, association or partnership is issued a special use permit pursuant to the laws of the city for the use or ignition of consumer fireworks in a location within the city as provided for by state law provided such special use permit is required for such use or ignition. Such special use permit shall designate the time or times and location that such person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership may use or ignite or cause to be ignited such consumer fireworks. A fee assessed by the city for the issuance of such special use permit pursuant to this paragraph shall not exceed $100.00. No governing authority or official of the city or other political subdivision shall be responsible for any decisions made pursuant to this Code section. 
(d)  Whenever the governor issues a declaration of drought, the governor may, for the boundaries of the area covered by such declaration, enact further regulations and restrictions concerning the use of consumer fireworks than provided for under this chapter; provided, however, that no such further regulations or restrictions on the use of consumer fireworks shall be effective pursuant to this subparagraph on January 1, July 3, July 4, or December 31 of any year; provided, further, that such further regulations or restrictions shall only apply to the exact boundaries of the area covered by such declaration and shall only apply with regard to the ignition of consumer fireworks; and provided, further, that upon expiration or conclusion of such declaration, such further regulations or restrictions shall be rescinded by law. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1); Ord. of 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 4003, 7-11-2016) 
State Law reference— The use of fireworks is governed by State Law, O.C.G.A. Title 25, Chapter 10 Regulation of Fireworks.  
Sec. 11-9. - Parades, marches and processions. 
Parades, marches and processions shall be considered special events as defined in this article and shall require issuance of a permit subject to the fees and conditions contained in this article and as specified in the subsections below. 
(1)  Prohibited without permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to be a part of or to engage in any parade, march, or procession or to march, parade or proceed along any street or sidewalk in the city as a part of or a party to such parade, march, or procession without having first obtained a written permit from the city manager or his designee for the holding of such parade, march or procession. 
(2)  Application for permit as prescribed in section 11-6. 
(3)  Police vehicle to precede parades, marches and processions. All parades, marches and processions through the streets of the city shall be preceded by a police vehicle and conducted in such manner as to impede and interfere with the flow of traffic to the least possible extent. 
(4)  If the special event is a parade and if the parade will traverse a state or federal highway the persons or organization must also have a permit from the Georgia Department of Transportation; there must be 90 days' advance notice for state permits. Application for permits must be submitted to the chief of police before going to state headquarters. 
(5)  This section does not apply to funeral processions which are exempt from the special events ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-10. - Police protection. 
After obtaining the above information, the chief of police shall determine whether and to what extent additional police protection will be required for the event for purposes of traffic, crowd control and security. In making this determination the chief of police shall consider those factors set out in subsection 11-6(2) and 11-8. If additional police protection for the event is deemed necessary by the chief of police, he shall so inform the applicant for the permit. The applicant then shall have the obligation to secure police protection acceptable to the chief of police at the sole expense of the applicant and shall pay the expenses of such protection as required. The chief of police shall consider what additional manpower, equipment, and supplies are needed, as well as any other items or expenses which will be necessary. An estimate of these costs will be provided to the applicant prior to the issuance of a permit. Private security may be used by the applicant with approval of the chief of police or his designee. The chief of police may designate someone to act on his behalf regarding any portion of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-11. - Fire protection and emergency medical services. 
(1)  After receiving notification of the intended event, the fire chief shall make a determination as to the need for on-site fire watch or emergency medical personnel. The fire chief shall consider such factors as the location, number of anticipated participants, spectators, and the type of event, including the application of appropriate codes and ordinances. If fire watch and/or emergency medical personnel for the event are deemed necessary by the fire chief, he shall so inform the applicant. The applicant shall have the obligation to secure fire watch and/or medical personnel reasonably acceptable to the fire chief at the sole expense of the applicant and shall pay the expenses of such protection as required. The fire chief shall consider what additional manpower, equipment and supplies are needed, as well as any other items or expenses which will be necessary. An estimate of these costs will be provided to the applicant prior to the issuance of a permit. Private fire/EMS services may be used by the applicant with approval of the fire chief or his designee. The fire chief may designate someone to act on his behalf regarding any portion of this section. 
(2)  The conduct of the event shall not introduce extraordinary hazard to fire protection and/or to the life or safety of the spectators or participants in the immediate or adjacent areas. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-12. - Parks and recreation and or public works department staff. 
After obtaining the above information, the parks and recreation director and public works director shall determine whether and to what extent additional parks and recreation and public works department staff will be required for the event for purposes of traffic control, park and or street cleaning and maintenance. In making this determination the parks and recreation director and public works director shall so inform the applicant for the permit. The applicant then shall have the obligation to secure event staff acceptable to the parks and recreation director at the sole expense of the applicant and shall pay the expenses of such maintenance as required. The parks and recreation director and the public works director shall consider what additional manpower, equipment, and supplies are needed, as well as any other items or expenses which will be necessary. An estimate of these costs will be provided to the applicant prior to the issuance of a permit. The parks and recreation director and/or the public works director may designate someone to act on his behalf regarding any portion of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-13. - Standards for permit issuance. 
The city manager, or his designee, shall issue a permit as provided herein upon receipt of verification from the applicable city department directors that the following standards for issuance of the permit have been substantially satisfied or found not applicable to the requested permit: 
(1)  The conduct of the event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrians or vehicular traffic in or contiguous to the route or location of the event. 
(2)  The conduct of the event will not require the diversion of so great a number of public safety personnel or equipment of the city to properly secure the event area and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent the current level of public safety services from being furnished to other parts of the city. 
(3)  The event shall not take place until inspections by concerned departments, i.e., fire, parks and recreation, public works, community development, DDA (if applicable) and police have been conducted and a determination has been made that all codes and ordinances have been met and satisfied. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and/or vehicles at the event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection or ambulance service to areas contiguous to the event area and other areas of the city. 
(5)  The conduct of the assembly is not reasonably likely to cause injury or intended to cause injury to persons or property or to provide disorderly conduct as defined by state statutes, provided that under no circumstances may the building official deny a permit solely on the basis of the proposed content of speech or ideas of the group involved. 
(6)  Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available in or adjacent to the event area and the applicant has agreed to clean the right-of-way or public property of rubbish and debris, returning it to its pre-event condition, within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event with the understanding that failure to do so will result in the city conducting the clean-up and charging the applicant with any and all costs associated with the clean-up. 
(7)  The conduct of the assembly will not result in noise at a level inappropriate for the area(s) surrounding the event. 
(8)  There are sufficient parking places near the event to accommodate the approximate number of automobiles reasonably expected to be driven to the assembly, such number to be estimated by the chief of police. 
(9)  The applicant has secured parks and recreation, public works, police, fire and emergency medical services/protection, if any, required under this section and has prepaid the expenses therefore. 
(10)  If the event is a parade, such parade is not to be held for the primary purpose of advertising any product, goods or event which is primarily for private profit, provided, however, that the prohibition against advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used to conduct the event. 
(11)  If an event sponsored by an institution or corporate entity is to take place in any publicly owned or controlled property, public liability and property damage insurance with the city named as an additionally insured party shall be obtained in an amount of no less than $1,000,000.00 unless otherwise approved by the city risk manager. 
(12)  If the event is a parade and if the parade will traverse a state or federal highway the persons or organization must also have a permit from the Georgia Department of Transportation; there must be 90 days' advance notice for state permits. Application for permits must be submitted to the chief of police before going to state headquarters. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-14. - Standards for denial of permit. 
Reasons for denial of a special event permit, as determined by the city include (but not limited to): 
(1)  The event will disrupt traffic within the city beyond practical resolution. 
(2)  The event will interfere with access to fire stations and/or fire hydrants. 
(3)  The location of the special event will cause undue hardship to adjacent businesses or residents. 
(4)  The event will require the diversion of so many public employees that allowing the event would unreasonably deny service to the remainder of the city. 
(5)  The application contains incomplete or false information. 
(6)  The applicant fails to comply with all terms of this article including failure to remit all fees and deposits or failure to provide proof of insurance/certificate of insurance, proof of authorization from applicable outside entities such as licenses or permits required by federal, state or county officials for alcohol licenses, food service, fireworks, bonds, and a save harmless agreement to the city. 
(7)  Olde Rope Mill Park is limited to two special events per month. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-15. - Notice of rejection. 
Should the application be denied, the city manager or his designee shall notify the applicant by personal delivery or certified mail within seven business days of the denial. A copy of this notification shall include the reasons for the denial of the permit and shall advise of the appeal procedure. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-16. - Appeals. 
Any applicant aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit or revocation of permit under section 11-14 hereof to the city manager. The appeal shall be submitted by the applicant within five business days after receipt of the notice of denial by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager. The city manager shall meet to hear the appeal within five business days of receipt of notice of such appeal unless circumstances warrant delaying the appeal hearing for a reasonable time thereafter and shall issue a decision on the appeal within 24-hours after said hearing, which requirement may be extended if the city manager requires additional information or needs to seek legal advice, but shall be rendered as soon as practicable thereafter. Any appeal from the decision of the city manager shall be forwarded to Woodstock Municipal Court and shall be filed within 30 days of the date on which the decision is rendered to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-17. - Notice of issuance or denial. 
Immediately upon issuance of a permit or denial of a permit, the city manager or his designee shall forward sufficient documentation to the following (or their designee): 
(1)  The mayor and council. 
(2)  The city manager. 
(3)  Special events committee. 
(4)  Department directors. 
(5)  Risk manager. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-18. - Duties of permittee. 
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The event chairperson shall maintain custody of the permit and upon demand shall produce it to the city authorities. Under no circumstances may a permit be transferred from the applicant to any other person or organization. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-19. - Revocation of permit. 
The city manager, or his designated representative, shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued hereunder instantly upon violation of any one or more of the Code, ordinances or conditions or standards of issuance as set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-20. - Indemnification. 
The applicant and any other persons, organizations, or corporations on whose behalf the application is made by filing a permit application shall represent, stipulate, contract, and agree that they jointly and severally indemnify and hold the city harmless against liability. This includes court costs and attorney's fees, including appeal, or any and all claims for damage to property or injury to or death of persons arising out of or resulting from issuance of the permit or the conduct of the event or any of its participants or the revocation of the permit for reasons herein stated. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-21. - Save harmless agreement. 
The applicant is required to provide a save harmless agreement in which the applicant agrees to defend, pay and save harmless the city, its officers and employees, from any and all claims or lawsuits for personal injury or property damage arising from or in any way connected to the special event; excepting any claims arising solely out of the negligent acts of the city, its officers and employees. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-22. - Construal of provisions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to exempt the applicant or any other person from the requirements of the Georgia Code or any other applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Sec. 11-23. - Penalties for offenses; misrepresentation. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as a misdemeanor as provided by the Code of the City of Woodstock. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
If, at the discretion of the city manager or his designee, the city has to provide additional personnel due to the applicant misrepresenting facts on the application; or failure to provide agreed upon private security/staffing; or for any other just and lawful reason and for protection of public safety, it shall be at the sole expense of the applicant. 
(Ord. of 11-12-2012(1))  
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 12, 2016 (Exh. A) repealed the former ch. 14, §§ 14-1—14-6, 14-41—14-47, 14-81—14-112, 14-141—14-150, 14-181 and enacted a new ch. 14 as set out herein. The former ch. 14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1989, §§ 11-3-1—11-3-3, 11-3-21—11-3-27, 11-4-5—11-4-7, 11-4-25, 11-4-26; Ord. No. 04-03-23, adopted Mar. 23, 2004; Ord. No. 2009-001, § 1, adopted Mar. 9, 2009; and Ord. No. 3352A-2015, adopted Apr. 13, 2015. 
Note— The city and the Cherokee County commissioners have agreed to jointly observe the Cherokee County municipal animal control ordinance. Under the agreement, Cherokee County enforces the animal control regulations regarding the removal and impoundment of animals. The city has agreed to jointly enforce the requirements stated herein. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 46; unleashed dogs, animals prohibited, § 62-9. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Bird and wildlife sanctuary. 
(a)  The entire area within the corporate limits of the city is designated as a bird and wildlife sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any wild bird or to rob any wild bird's nest on property owned or leased by the city; however, if nuisance birds such as starlings are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality so as to constitute a nuisance or a menace to the health or property in the opinion of the director of the animal control shelter, the city manager or the chief of police, those birds may be destroyed as humanely as possible, under appropriate supervision, in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by the city manager or chief of police of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, molest or kill any other wild game on property owned or leased by the city except by order, in their official capacity, of the city's police officers, animal control officers of Cherokee County, or the deputies of the Cherokee County sheriff's office. 
(Ord. of. 12-12-2016, Exh. A)  
Sec. 14-2. - Fowl, livestock, swine restrictions within city limits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for livestock, swine or poultry to be kept for any purpose on a lot in a subdivision or a lot less than six acres in the city limits. 
(b)  All properties with fowl or livestock that are less than six acres but more than two acres as of March 23, 2004 are grandfathered in. 
(Ord. of. 12-12-2016, Exh. A) 
Charter reference— Specific power to regulate animals, § 1-12(34). 
State Law reference— Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Enclosures for fowl, § 14-3; and livestock, § 14-17.  
Sec. 14-3. - Enclosures for fowl. 
Where the keeping of fowl is allowed pursuant to applicable zoning and/or acreage, any housing or enclosure used shall be well drained, free from accumulations of excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. 
(Ord. of. 12-12-2016, Exh. A) 
Cross reference— Livestock, § 14-17.  
Sec. 14-4. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL GENERALLY[2] 
1.  Articles II and III of Chapter 10 of the Code of Ordinances, Cherokee County, Georgia (hereinafter referred to as the "County Code") as they now exist and as they may be subsequently amended are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as though they were fully copied in this article. 
2.  Articles II and III as so incorporated may be collectively referenced to herein as the "animal control ordinance." 
3.  All references in the animal control ordinance to "Cherokee County" or "the county" shall be deemed to include the city. 
4.  All uses of the word "county" as an adjective in the animal control ordinance shall be deemed to include the city. For example, "county law enforcement officers" shall be deemed to include city law enforcement officers and a "county business license" shall be deemed to include a city business license. 
5.  All references in the animal control ordinance to violations of a county ordinance shall be deemed to be violations of a city ordinance. 
6.  The Cherokee County marshal's office is authorized to enforce the animal control ordinance within the city limits of the city. Pursuant to the intergovernmental agreement between the city and Cherokee County effective February 7, 2018, citizens in the city shall be subject to the fees charged by the Cherokee County marshal's office. All fees charged by the Cherokee County marshal's office in connection with enforcement of the animal control ordinance shall be retained by Cherokee County to defray the costs of the Cherokee County marshal's office related to animal control. 
(Ord. No. 5035-2018, § 1, 3-26-2018) 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5035-2018, § 1, adopted Mar. 26, 2018, repealed Art. II, §§ 14-5—14-35, which pertained to similar subject matter, and Art. III, §§ 14-64—14-73, which pertained to dangerous dog control, both of which derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 12, 2016, Exh. A. 
 
Secs. 14-5—14-63. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5035-2018, § 1, adopted Mar. 26, 2018, repealed Art. III, §§ 14-64—14-73, which pertained to dangerous dog control and derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 12, 2016, Exh. A. See Art. II, subsection 1 for a link to current provisions formerly found in Art. III. 
 
Secs. 14-64—14-73. - Reserved.  
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; use of sprinkler system in multifamily structures, attached buildings and small commercial buildings, § 42-112; sprinkler system exceptions to the building code, § 42-114; health and sanitation, ch. 46; land development code, ch. 50; planning, ch. 74; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; building inspector/code enforcement officer's subpoena and arrest powers, § 86-89; utilities, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Structure defined. 
A structure shall be defined as any building, the width of which cannot be confined within the travel lane of vehicular traffic, but shall not include mobile homes. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-25) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-2. - Permit required. 
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to move any house, structure or other building over roads in the city shall apply to and obtain a written permit from the zoning administrator. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-21)  
Sec. 18-3. - Application. 
(a)  The zoning administrator shall furnish an applicant for a permit to move any house, structure or other building over roads in the city an application form which shall be designed to elicit, among other information, the following: 
(1)  The name of the person, firm or corporation performing the moving. 
(2)  The origin and destination of the operation. 
(3)  The name and consent of the owner of the property from which the structure was removed and of the property to which the structure is moved and a detailed outline of the route to be followed and facilities to be used, including off-street parking. 
(4)  An estimate of the time involved, including the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. when the operation shall be conducted. 
(b)  Application for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one lot to another shall be accompanied by a fee of $75.00, and no application shall be received unless the necessary fee is paid simultaneously therewith. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-22)  
Sec. 18-4. - Structure standards. 
No application shall be approved which proposes to move a structure upon property in the city, which structure does not meet the technical code standards set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-23)  
Sec. 18-5. - Permit processing. 
(a)  When an application for a permit to move any house, structure or other building over roads in the city has been received, the zoning administrator shall confer with the city police and water and sewer department to determine whether or not the proposed moving operation may be carried out without danger to adjacent property, existing utilities and to the traveling public. After such determination, the zoning administrator may tentatively approve the application and present it to the city council for final approval, after which he may issue the permit upon such conditions as may be necessary to ensure the safety of the operation. 
(b)  If the zoning administrator determines from his investigation that the operation cannot be undertaken with safety or results in technical code or zoning violations, he shall reject the application, furnishing to the applicant the reasons why the application was declined. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by such rejection of an application may come before the city council at the next regular meeting to review the actions of the zoning administrator. 
(d)  Any application approved may provide conditions, which conditions may include, but not be limited to, the route of travel, the time of travel, the destination or number of employees and/or authorized police personnel for the safe completion of the move, the type and necessary equipment so as to prevent breakdown during such removal; and other conditions, rules or requirements to ensure a safe and speedy removal of any building and structure upon city streets. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-24; Ord. No. 01-11-23, 11-23-2001)  
Sec. 18-6. - Responsibility. 
Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any person, firm or corporation engaged in the operation of moving a house or other structure from his responsibility therefor or from the requirement imposed upon him by law to take all due precaution during the moving operation. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-26; Ord. No. 01-11-23, 11-23-2001)  
Sec. 18-7. - Police escort. 
(a)  Upon approval of any application and issuance of a permit for the removal of a house or structure, the applicant, at least 24 hours before commencing with the moving of a house or structure, shall notify the police department of the time, date and route of such move. Such applicant shall further request of the police department the assignment of an officer to escort such move, which officer shall be paid for such duties by the city. Within 24 hours after such move, the officer shall file a report to the zoning administrator showing the time the move was completed, any deviation in route and any incidents where property was damaged or personal injury occurred. 
(b)  The officer shall include, along with the report required in subsection (a) of this section, a request for payment of duties performed and such request shall be approved by the zoning administrator and transmitted to the city clerk for payment. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-27)  
Sec. 18-8. - Insurance. 
Before issuing a permit to move a house, structure or other building over roads in the city, the zoning administrator shall require satisfactory evidence that the applicant has liability insurance coverage with a reputable company during such proposed moving operation in the following amounts: 
(1)  For bodily injury to each person, a minimum of $25,000.00; 
(2)  For bodily injuries from each occurrence, $50,000.00; and 
(3)  Damage to property, $10,000.00. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-28)  
Sec. 18-9. - Model home permits. 
A limited number of model homes may be permitted prior to completion of subdivision improvements and final plat approval. All current permitting procedures will apply, along with the following requirements to obtain a model home permit: 
1.  Requirements: 
a.  Land disturbance permit shall have been issued prior to issuance of a model home permit. 
b.  Access shall be provided from subdivision entrance to model home lots through a street that has been base tested and approved by the director of public works or his designee, and the binder coat applied. 
c.  Water supply meeting current fire suppression standards shall be installed and tested. 
2.  Restrictions: 
a.  Maximum of three model home permits per phase, not to exceed ten percent of the total lots in the phase, may be issued with the approval of the building official or his designee. 
b.  Model Homes shall be placed on adjacent lots. 
c.  No connections to unapproved utilities shall be permitted. 
d.  Construction of model homes shall be limited to foundation, rough stages through drywall. No final inspection shall be performed or certificate of occupancy issued until final plat is recorded and all utilities are connected. 
e.  No model home shall be furnished or occupied in any way prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 6-16-2014, § 1(Exh. A))  
Secs. 18-10—18-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CODES AND REGULATIONS ADOPTED[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-41. - Building inspector; duties. 
The city building inspector shall: 
(1)  Enforce all ordinances or codes relating to buildings and construction and inspect all buildings or structures being erected or altered as frequently as may be necessary to ensure compliance with city ordinances or codes; 
(2)  Make or cause to be made, at any reasonable hour, entries into buildings or premises where the work of altering, repairing or constructing is going on, for the purpose of making inspections; 
(3)  Issue written stop work orders on construction, alteration or repair of buildings in the city when such work is being done in violation of any provision of any ordinance or code relating thereto, or in violation of the zoning ordinance; 
(4)  Act as ex officio plumbing and electrical inspector and perform all such duties as may be connected with that office; and 
(5)  Exercise such other powers and duties as may be delegated to him from time to time by the city manager or city council. 
(6)  Perform code enforcement. 
(Code 1989, § 8-2-2; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 18-42. - Permits. 
(a)  Any person or corporation intending to build or have built a house or other structure having a roof or to build an addition to a house or structure within the city shall make application to the building inspector at least five days before beginning work, for a permit to erect the building or structure. The application shall state the owner of the proposed building or structure, the size, material and location and also whether the work is done under contract or by the day's work and if by contract the name of the contractor. It shall be the duty of the applicant for a building permit to furnish the city such information, data and specifications as the city might require to enable it to ascertain whether such building, construction, erection or alteration violates any code adopted in this article or other law, or is a potential fire hazard. 
(b)  The building inspector shall inspect the site of the proposed building or structure with reference to its encroachment on the streets and alleys, its danger to adjacent buildings or structures and other conditions and circumstances necessary, and shall report to the city council his approval or disapproval of the permit. If he disapproves, he shall give in writing the reasons therefor. In the event of the disapproval of the building inspector, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the city council and, upon the approval of that body, the building inspector shall issue the permit. 
(c)  No person or corporation, contractor or builder shall begin the erection of any building or structure within the city without a permit therefor. Any violation of the terms of this section in refusing or neglecting to obtain a permit shall result in the person, upon conviction thereof, being punished as provided in section 1-7. Each day's work without a permit shall be a separate offense. 
(d)  Any person or corporation, contractor or builder who, in violation of this section, encroaches upon the streets and alleys or other public property of the city, shall, in addition to the penalties for violation of this section, be compelled at his own expense to remove the obstructions and to repair the streets or alleys or other public property as directed by the building inspector or the city council. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, contractor, builder or workman engaged in the building or repairing of any structure within the city, to close the streets of the city to the passage of persons or vehicles or in any way to endanger the life or limb of passersby. 
(f)  Permits to expire one year after issue date or six months with no activity. Per Section 105.5 of the Building Code, the building official is authorized to grant in writing one or more extensions of time for not more than 180 days each. 
(Code 1989, § 8-2-3; Ord. of 10-8-2012(2))  
Secs. 18-43—18-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TECHNICAL CODES 
 
Sec. 18-61. - Adopted. 
(a)  The following codes, as made mandatory by the state, known as the Georgia State Minimum Standards Codes, as they now exist or as adopted by the state, are adopted by reference as though they were fully copied in this section. Editions of these codes may be found on the City of Woodstock, Georgia's website under the building department. 
(1)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code. (International Building Code, I.B.C., with Georgia Amendments.) 
(2)  Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code. (International Residential Code, I.R.C., with Georgia Amendments.) 
(3)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code. (International Fuel Gas Code, I.F.G.C., with Georgia Amendments.) 
(4)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code. (International Mechanical Code, I.M.C., with Georgia Amendments.) 
(5)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code. (International Plumbing Code, I.P.C., with Georgia Amendments.) 
(6)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code. (National Electric Code, N.E.C., with Georgia Amendments.) 
(7)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code. (International Energy Conservation Code, I.E.C.C., with Georgia Amendments.) 
(8)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Prevention Code. (International Fire Prevention Code, I.F.C., with Georgia Amendments.) 
(b)  Locally adopted codes and amendments. 
(1)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Property Maintenance Code. (International Property Maintenance Code, I.P.M.C., with Georgia Amendments.) 
(2)  Chapter 1 of the International Building Code, I.B.C., shall serve as the administrative provisions regulating the building official and the operation of the building safety division. 
(c)  Adoption of Fire Prevention Codes. 
(1)  The International Fire Code, as now or hereafter amended, as published by Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., and the Life Safety Code, as now or hereafter amended, as promulgated and recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, being NFPA 101, are hereby adopted as the fire prevention codes for the city, are incorporated into this Code as fully as though set out at length in this section. A current copy of the fire prevention code and the life safety code shall be maintained on file in the office of the fire marshal where they are available for public inspection. 
(2)  The city adopts and enforces the State Minimum Life Safety Standards, as now or hereafter amended, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12, and appoints the fire chief or his designee as the fire marshal for the city. 
(Code 1989, § 8-2-28; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004; Ord. No. 1512, 4-11-2011; Ord. of 1-27-2014) 
Cross reference— Adoption of fire prevention codes, sec. 42-71. 
State Law reference— Statewide application of minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; definitions of standard codes for adoption, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20.  
Sec. 18-62. - Administration of electrical code. 
(a)  Nothing contained within this article shall prevent any home owner from installing or maintaining electrical wiring within his own property boundaries; provided the electrical work is done by himself and is used exclusively by him or his family. This privilege does not convey the right to violate any of the provisions of this article, neither is it to be construed as exempting any property owner from obtaining a permit and having the work inspected nor from paying the required fees therefor. 
(b)  Before any electrical wiring, devices or equipment are installed, repaired or altered in any building or structure within the city, the person making the installation, repair or alteration shall obtain a permit therefor from the building inspector. 
(c)  Before any permit for electrical work shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall pay the permit fees as shall be determined by the city council from time to time. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person controlling any electrical wiring in or of houses or buildings within the city to allow any electrical current to be turned on or consumed in any building without having first had an inspection made of such electrical wiring and a certificate of approval thereof being issued. 
(Code 1989, § 8-2-23) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 18-63. - Administration of swimming pool code. 
Any person constructing a swimming pool within the jurisdiction of the city shall, in addition to the fence described in that code, provide a self-closing and self-locking gate. 
(Code 1989, § 8-2-27(b))  
Sec. 18-64. - Existing building change of occupancy—Certificate of occupancy. 
If the occupancy classification or zoning of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, plumbing, electrical, gas and mechanical systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building department and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings or a general inspection or both, may be required. When upon examination and inspection it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(Ord. of 10-8-12(2))  
Sec. 18-65. - Plans and drawings. 
When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. All plans submitted, except those as indicated in O.C.G.A. 43-4-14B listed below, shall be prepared by an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state and shall affix his official seal to said drawings. 
Exceptions under O.C.G.A. Law Title 43, Section 43-4-14: The following structures do not require the seal of a registered architect. 
(1)  One- and two-family residences and domestic outbuildings regardless of cost. 
(2)  Any building classified as an agricultural occupancy upon any farm for the use of any farmer. Any state owned farmer's market. 
(3)  Buildings and structures where such building or structure does not exceed 5,000 square feet in total gross area, except new or existing assembly occupancies, educational occupancies, health care occupancies, correctional or detention facilities, hotels, dormitories or lodging facilities, multifamily housing or apartment complexes, and care facilities. 
(4)  Pre-engineered metal buildings that are one story in height, except new or existing assembly occupancies, educational occupancies, health care occupancies, correctional or detention facilities, hotels, dormitories or lodging facilities, multifamily housing or apartment complexes, care facilities, and facilities classified as high hazard; provided, however, that the services of a duly registered architect shall be required for the design of any business or mercantile occupancies that exceed 5,000 square feet in area that are incidental to the operation in such building. 
(5)  Nonstructural interior construction within existing or planned structures which were designed by a registered architect, where drawings and specifications are prepared by a registered interior designer who by sealing and signing such interior construction documents submits to the responsible building official certification that the plans and specifications as submitted are in compliance with the applicable current building codes and regulations in effect. 
(Ord. of 10-8-2012(2))  
Secs. 18-66—18-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Aug. 25, 2014, § 1, repealed the former Div. 3, §§ 18-81—18-93, and enacted a new Div. 3 as set out herein. The former Div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1989, §§ 8-1-4; Ord. No. 91-12-19, adopted Dec. 19, 1991; Ord. No. 00-02-22, adopted Feb. 22, 2000; and Ord. No. 04-04-13, adopted Apr. 13, 2004. 
Cross reference— Committees, § 2-211 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-81. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this division, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical system, gas system, mechanical system or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, structure, electrical system, gas system, mechanical system or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this division is committed or continued. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state law. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1) 
State Law reference— Conflict of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; Ethics and Efficiency in Government Act, O.C.G.A. § 28-11-1 et seq.; code of ethics and conflict of interest, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1; open and public meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.; repair, closing and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation, O.C.G.A. § 36-61-11; abatement of nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq.  
Sec. 18-82. - Appointment. 
There is established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of seven members and two alternates. The board shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 18-83. - Membership and terms. 
(a)  The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall consist of seven members. Such board members should be composed of individuals who are residents of the City of Woodstock or employees of a business that is registered within the City of Woodstock. With knowledge and experience in the technical codes, and preferably include one registered architect, one structural engineer, one fire protection engineer, one state licensed general contractor, one state licensed electrician or electrical engineer, one state licensed mechanical contractor or mechanical engineer and one state licensed plumbing contractor or plumbing engineer. In the event that one of the professionals mentioned above are not included on the active board, an individual shall be chosen based upon his or her qualifications by the mayor and council. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed for a term of four years, but shall continue to serve until reappointed or a replacement is named by the mayor and council. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and council. Continued absence (two consecutive absences) of any member from regular meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the mayor and council, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 18-84. - Conflict of interest. 
If a board member has any interest in any matter which may result in a gain or loss to that board member, his immediate family by blood or by marriage, or to any individual, partnership or corporation with whom that member has had any regular business or contractual relationships within the previous 12 months, such member shall not participate in the consideration, discussion, questioning and voting on that particular matter before the board, nor shall the member take any action which may influence the vote of any other member. If the chairman has a conflict of interest, the vice-chairman shall preside over the meeting during consideration of that particular matter. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 18-85. - Compensation. 
The compensation of the construction board of adjustment and appeals shall be set at $50.00 per meeting, to be paid only to those members who attend such meeting. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 18-86. - Quorum and voting. 
A simple majority of the construction board of adjustment and appeals shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this division, the affirmative vote of the majority present, but not less than four affirmative votes, shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official or fire marshal, not less than four affirmative votes, but not less than a majority of the board, shall be required. 
Any decision to be made involving the state minimum fire safety standards, must include the input and guidance from a fire protection engineer. In the event that a fire protection engineer is not a standing member of the board, a fire protection engineer or industrial safety professional can be brought on the board to provide guidance and input to the board. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 18-87. - Secretary of the board. 
The building official shall act as secretary of the construction board of adjustment and appeals and shall make a detailed record of all of its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 18-88. - Powers. 
The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official or fire marshal and consider variances of the technical codes. Nothing in this section shall authorize the construction board of adjustments and appeals to vary any requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Nothing in this section shall authorize the construction board of appeals to vary any of the requirements to any of the occupancy classifications or structures, as shown as exempted as set forth in O.C.G.A. 25-2-12 (a) (2). 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 18-89. - Appeals. 
The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official or Fire Marshal to the construction board of adjustments and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official or fire marshal rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building. 
(2)  The provisions of this division do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  An equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of this division or any of the regulations under this division have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 18-90. - Variances. 
The construction board of adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this division to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this division or the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  Special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this division to other buildings, structures or service system. 
(4)  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)  The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this division and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 18-91. - Conditions of the variance. 
In granting a variance as described in section 18-90, the construction board of adjustment and appeals may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed, or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this division. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this division. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 18-92. - Notice of appeal. 
Notice of an appeal of a decision of the building official or Fire Marshal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building official or the fire marshall. Appeals shall be a form acceptable to the building official or fire marshal of the city 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 18-93. - Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. 
In the case of a building, structure or service system which is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for appeals of a decision of the building official or fire marshal to a shorter period. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Sec. 18-94. - Procedures of the board. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this division. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after a notice of appeal of a decision of the building official or fire marshal has been received. 
(b)  Decisions. The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order or disallowance of the building official or fire marshal or varies the application of any provision of this division, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the applicant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1)  
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 10, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 22, Arts. II—V, §§ 22-31—22-219, and enacted a new Ch. 22, Arts. II—V, as set out herein. The former Ch. 22 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1989, §§ 9-5-1—9-5-9, 9-7-01—9-7-13; Ord. No. 02-02-26, adopted Feb. 26, 2002; Ord. of May 23, 2006; Ord. No. 2010-002, Exh. A, adopted Feb. 8, 2010; and Ord. of Feb. 27, 2012. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 66; taxation, ch. 86; occupational license taxes, § 86-71 et seq.; hotel/motel tax, § 86-171 et seq.; telecommunications, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - JUNK DEALERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State regulations governing junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq.; control of junkyards, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-240 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business premises and premises mean the area of a junkyard as described in a junk dealer's license or application for license, as provided for in this article. 
Business registration means the process by which a business or a practitioner of a profession or occupation gives evidence of compliance with the requirements of chapter 86, Taxation. 
Junk means old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and motor vehicles, no longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but the term "junk" shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as byproducts, waste or scraps from the operation of his own business, or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing process. 
Junk dealer means a person who operates a junkyard within the city. 
Junkyard means a yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing junk, upon which occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling or offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are to be used for charity. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-240.  
Sec. 22-32. - Business registration and license required. 
Each junk dealer who does business within the city shall be required to obtain the necessary business registration in the manner specified in chapter 86, article III, pertaining to occupational license taxes, as well as to obtain a junk dealer's license in the manner specified in division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013) 
Charter reference— Specific power to regulate or prohibit junk dealers, § 1.13(16). 
State Law reference— Junk dealers must also register with the county probate court, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-2.  
Secs. 22-33—22-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 22-51. - Contents. 
In addition to the application information required by section 86-72, the application shall contain: 
(1)  Trade names used during the previous five years by the applicant and each person signing the application, along with the locations of prior establishments; 
(2)  Names and addresses of employers of each person signing the application during the previous years; 
(3)  The name, residence address and telephone number of each person employed or intended to be employed in the business as of the time the application is filed; 
(4)  A sketch of the actual premises to be used in connection with the business, giving distances in feet and showing adjoining roads, property lines, buildings and uses; and 
(5)  A description of the materials with which any buildings to be used in connection with the licensed business are or are to be made; a sketch giving distances, showing the location of such buildings on the business premises; and a diagram or plan giving distances and heights, showing floors, exits, entrances, windows, ventilators and walls. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-52. - Review of application. 
(a)  No action on any application for a license to operate a junkyard shall be taken by the city council until the planning commission has reviewed such application and forwarded its recommendation thereon to the city clerk. 
(b)  Upon approval of the application by the city council, the city clerk may issue the license after payment of a fee to be set from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Secs. 22-53—22-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OPERATING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 22-71. - Generally. 
The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The junkyard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(2)  No space not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed business. 
(3)  No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(4)  No weeds shall be permitted to attain a height of more than four inches. 
(5)  No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises; nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is junk and is in use in the licensed business. 
(6)  No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, walkway or curb, or become scattered or blown off the business premises. 
(7)  Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten feet in height and shall be arranged so as to permit easy access to all such junk for firefighting purposes. 
(8)  No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the licensed business shall be kept on the premises; nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard. 
(9)  Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on the premises. 
(10)  No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in any incinerator not meeting the requirements of the building code adopted in chapter 18, article II, division 2 of this Code; and no junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in the open except in accordance with the provisions of section 42-72 - Open burning. 
(11)  No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with the licensed business on any Sunday, Christmas, Thanksgiving or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(12)  The area on the premises where junk is kept (other than indoors) shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid, vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of ten feet measured from ground level. The fence or wall shall not contain any poster or advertising of any kind excepting one sign of the licensee. 
(13)  Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business. 
(14)  No junkyard shall be allowed to become a nuisance; nor shall any junkyard be operated in such manner as to become injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the community or of any residents close by. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-72. - Records; inspection. 
(a)  Each acquisition of junk shall be recorded in a permanent type register kept on the business premises, giving the name and residence address of the person from whom the acquisition was made, a description of the junk acquired, and the date of the transaction. Such data shall be held available for inspection by any police officer. 
(b)  The licensee shall permit inspection of the business premises by any police officer at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-73. - Minors. 
No junk dealer shall have any business dealings as a junk dealer with a minor, nor shall a junk dealer's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a junk dealer employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-74. - Stolen goods. 
Every junk dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things of value which may have been lost or stolen shall, upon demand, produce such article or thing to any member of the police department for examination. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-75. - Vehicles. 
Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his business shall bear thereon in legible characters the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Secs. 22-76—22-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PAWN BROKERS AND DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-02, Exh. A, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, amended Art. III to read as set out herein. Former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1989, §§ 9-4-1—9-4-7. 
 
Sec. 22-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business registration means the process by which a business or a practitioner of a profession or occupation gives evidence of compliance with the requirements of chapter 86, Taxation. 
Dealer means: 
(1)  Any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or 
(2)  A person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems. 
Gems means any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
Numismatic coins means coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
Pawnbroker means any person engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or engaged in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
Precious metals means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
Pledged goods means tangible, personal property other than choses in action, securities or printed evidences of indebtedness, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his business. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-102. - License required. 
Each pawnbroker or dealer doing business within the city shall be required to obtain a business registration certificate, to pay the occupational tax, and to obtain a regulatory license from the city clerk in the manner specified in section 86-72; except that such regulatory licenses shall be issued only upon approval by the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013) 
Charter reference— Specific power to regulate pawnshops, § 1.13(16). 
State Law reference— Supervision of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136.  
Sec. 22-103. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  No action on any application for a pawnbroker's license or dealer's license shall be taken by the city council until the chief of police has reviewed such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. 
(b)  No pawnbroker's or dealer's license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving stolen goods or of burglary or robbery. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-104. - Records to be kept; information to be shown; inspection authorized. 
(a)  All pawnbrokers and dealers shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged or sold to them. Such description shall include: 
(1)  A clear and accurate photograph, identification and description of the purchased goods or precious metals or gems, including the name of the manufacturer of the article, if available; 
(2)  Any identifying marks or numbers; and 
(3)  The weight, quantity or volume and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. 
(b)  In such books there shall be entered also: 
(1)  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller; 
(2)  The date and time when the transaction was accomplished; 
(3)  A legible thumbprint of the depositor; 
(4)  A legible photocopy or scan of a valid government-issued personal identification card of the seller of the goods or precious metals or gems, which contains the seller's name, address and photograph; 
(5)  The price paid for the goods purchased; 
(6)  The number of the check issued for the purchase price, if payment is made by check; and 
(7)  A sworn affidavit signed by the seller stating that the person signing is the rightful owner of the goods or precious metals or gems or has been given the legal authority by the rightful owner to sell the goods or precious metals or gems. 
(c)  These entries shall be made at the time the transaction is finalized. 
(d)  The permanent record book required by this section shall be in legible English. Entries shall appear in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be maintained for each purchase of goods, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems for at least two years. The book and purchased goods, precious metals or gems shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(e)  Dealers exclusively engaged in buying or exchanging for merchandise scrap dental gold and silver from licensed dentists by registered or certified mail or statutory overnight delivery may record the post office record of the mailed parcel in lieu of the seller's age and driver's license number as required in subsection (b)(4) and in lieu of the seller's signature as required in subsection (b)(7). 
(f)  Any person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker or dealer, who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section, or who shall make false entries concerning the transaction named, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the books and of the property pledged with or sold to them shall be in violation of this article and shall be punished as provided by the general penalty in section 1-7 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013) 
State Law reference— Additional requirements for records are found in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132 et seq.  
Sec. 22-105. - Reporting. 
(a)  Dealers will make daily reports to the Woodstock Police Department in the manner prescribed by the police chief or his designee. For as long as the city has a contract with a third party (the "Third Party") to provide electronic reporting to the city, all dealers shall comply with all requirements to report electronically through the "Third Party" contractor. 
(b)  The dealer shall obtain from each person selling any article, the fingerprint (using an electronic digital fingerprint scanner) of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right had shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person selling the article. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature must be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person sells any article. 
(c)  A digital image shall be made, with a digital camera, at the time of the acquisition of any article and of the articles serial number, which number shall be clearly visible and readable in the images if imprinted on the article. If the article was never imprinted with any type of serial number, then the image shall show the entire article. All such digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(d)  All persons who enter a dealer's place of business and attempt to sell an article must provide proper photo identification. Identification which is acceptable will be in the form of a United States Drivers License, a state I.D. card, or a government identification card (military I.D.). In the event one of the mentioned identifications cannot be produced, then the transaction is void. 
(e)  Paper printouts of each transaction's documentation required by this section, which shall include any documentation or information provided by the person selling the article to the dealer, shall be made by the dealer and stored on premises for inspection by the police chief or his designee. 
(f)  Daily reports shall also include any other information or documentation provided by the person selling the article to the dealer, as well as any documentation of the transaction in the dealer's possession. 
(g)  To the extent that the dealer utilizes security cameras, video surveillance tapes shall be maintain for a minimum of 30 days and made available to the Woodstock Police Department as requested. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-106. - Minors. 
No pawnbroker or dealer shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker or dealer with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license or dealer's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker or dealer employ a minor to assist him in his business. For purposes of this section, a minor is any individual 17 years of age or under. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-107. - Stolen goods. 
Every pawnbroker or dealer in precious metals or gems shall report to the police every article pledged with him, or which is sought to be pledged with him, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-108. - Holding period. 
Any goods or gems or precious metals purchased by a pawnbroker or dealer shall not be sold, exchanged, removed from the business location located within the City of Woodstock or such other business location located within the State of Georgia controlled and operated by the pawnbroker or dealer, or otherwise altered from its original form until at least 30 calendar days have elapsed from the time of purchase or acquisition. In the event that any goods or gems or precious metals purchased by a pawnbroker or dealer are maintained by a pawnbroker or dealer at a business location, other than the business location located in the City of Woodstock pursuant to this section, such pawnbroker or dealer shall provide the police department with the physical address, not a P.O. Box, of the alternate location prior to sending the goods, gems or precious metals to the alternate location. In addition, the pawnbroker or dealer shall make any such goods, gems or precious metals purchased from the business location located in the City of Woodstock within the preceding 30 calendar day period available for inspection by the police within 24 hours of request by the police department to inspect such goods, gems or precious metals at a business location either within the City of Woodstock, at the City of Woodstock Police Headquarters, or at a location agreed upon by the City of Woodstock Chief of Police. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-109. - Location. 
(a)  No business location of a pawnbroker or dealer establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located. 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another pawnbroker or dealer regulated or defined under this article is located. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest city tax assessment records. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-110. - Enforcement of article. 
This article shall be enforced by the Woodstock Chief of Police or his designee. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Sec. 22-111. - Violation; penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to fail to comply with any provision of this article. Any violation of any provision of this article shall subject the pawnbroker or person, as applicable, to citation returnable to the Municipal Court for the City of Woodstock and the violator shall be subject to fines and/or imprisonment as with a city ordinance violation. 
(Ord. of 6-10-2013)  
Secs. 22-112—22-136. - Reserved. 
State Law reference— Effect of local laws, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-135; municipal supervision of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136; pawnbrokers generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.  
ARTICLE IV. - MASSAGE THERAPY AND RELATED ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 10, 2018, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 22-137—22-154, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 4012, Exh. A, adopted July 11, 2016. 
 
Sec. 22-137. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate the places of business of massage therapy and bodywork therapy as provided under Georgia law. It is a further purpose to regulate the operation of massage, spa, and bodywork establishments as an exercise of the city's police power in order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. To the extent that relevant Georgia law is modified or amended, so shall this article be immediately modified or amended to incorporate any such changes. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-138. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bodywork therapist means one who engages in the practice of a bodywork therapy discipline(s). 
Bodywork therapy means a general term that refers to a group of body-based approaches to treatment that emphasize manipulation and realignment of the body's structure in order to improve its function as well as the client's mental outlook. The Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1 et seq., exempts from regulation certain therapeutic industries, which for the purposes of this Code are known as bodywork therapy. All industries exempt from regulation of the Georgia Massage Therapy Practice Act, as listed in O.C.G.A § 43-24A-19, now and as may be amended in the future, shall be required to apply for and receive a license as required by this article. 
Bodywork therapy establishment means any business, conducted in whatever form, where one or more bodywork therapists perform bodywork therapy on a site or premises, or portion thereof, for compensation. Bodywork therapy establishments shall not include any establishment exempted by this article. 
Employee means any person over 18 years of age, other than a massage therapist or bodywork therapist who renders any service in connection with the operation of a business licensed under this article and receives compensation from the operator of the business or from a patron. For the purposes of this article, "employee" also includes all independent contractors. 
Massage therapist means a person holding an active state massage therapy license, issued by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy, who administers massage or massage therapy for compensation. Pending status is not active status and shall not be included under this definition. Bodywork therapists without an active state massage therapy license are not included in this definition. 
Massage therapy means the application of a system of structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore health and well-being. The term includes complementary methods, including without limitation the external application of water, superficial heat, superficial cold, lubricants, salt scrubs, or other topical preparations and the use of commercially available electromechanical devices which do not require the use of transcutaneous electrodes and which mimic or enhance the actions possible by the hands; the term also includes determining whether massage therapy is appropriate or contraindicated, or whether referral to another health care provider is appropriate. Massage therapy shall not include the use of ultrasound, fluidotherapy, laser, and other methods of deep thermal modalities. 
Massage therapy establishment means any establishment having the primary source of income or compensation derived from the practice of massage and which has a fixed place of business where any person engages in or carries on any of the activities involved in massage. The term shall be inclusive of and interchangeable with massage parlor and massage business. This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments licensed as such separately by the state. 
Massage therapy sole proprietor means a massage therapist who practices in a common suite or building independently, or the only employee in the business. 
Spa establishment means any business or commercial establishment operated to derive income from the provision of at least two of the following personal services: cosmetology, esthetician, body wraps, hydro mineral wraps, body polish, body wash, baths and hydro tub soak, gym facilities, fitness training, or other similar personal services purported to assist patrons with improving their physical condition or appearance and which may require the patron to disrobe. This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments licensed as such separately by the state. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-139. - License required; scope of regulations. 
(a)  A license issued in accordance with this article is required prior to practicing massage therapy or bodywork therapy or operating a massage therapy establishment or bodywork therapy establishment, spa, or related practice or business. "License" issued in compliance with this article shall include: 
(1)  Individual. It is unlawful for any natural person to administer massage therapy or bodywork therapy without having obtained a license in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Massage and bodywork therapy establishments. It is unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to operate an establishment providing massage therapy or bodywork therapy without having obtained a license therefor; or for any person, natural or corporate, to allow a massage therapist or bodywork therapist to practice without having obtained a license in accordance with the requirements of this article. The following additional requirements must also be met: 
(i)  Distance requirement. Massage therapy establishments and bodywork therapy establishments collectively, shall not be located closer than one mile from each other, as measured in a straight line, from the nearest point of the premises where said establishment is conducted to the nearest property line of any lot or legal parcel upon which a massage therapy or bodywork therapy establishment is proposed to be located. 
If two or more establishments are located within one mile of each other, the massage therapy establishment first established and continuously and lawfully operating at such location shall be deemed the use conforming to the locational requirement of this paragraph, and the later established use(s) shall be deemed nonconforming to the locational requirement. No nonconforming establishment shall be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered in size or area. 
If a nonconforming establishment becomes vacant and remain unoccupied for a continuous period of 60 days or more, the director of community development shall determine and notify the owner of the establishment and owner of the property in writing that the nonconforming use has been discontinued and the nonconforming use may not be renewed or reestablished except in compliance with this article. 
(ii)  Conditional use permit. All massage and bodywork therapy establishments licensed under this article must receive a conditional use permit (CUP) from the mayor and city council prior to operating. Applicants for a CUP must first demonstrate compliance with this article prior to the acceptance of a CUP application by the city. 
(3)  Spa establishment. 
(i)  A spa establishment may include massage therapy along with other services provided as long as less than 20 percent gross floor area of the spa establishment is dedicated to massage therapy or no more than one-third of the employees on the premises are dedicated to the provision of massage therapy. 
(ii)  All other professions operating at the spa establishment that require a state and/or city license, must be duly licensed. 
(iii)  Spa establishments must demonstrate that other than massage therapy, at least two other bonafide services are provided to the general public, indicating the names, credentials, and services provided. A floor plan with a general layout of business operations is required. 
(iv)  Spa establishments require administrative review and approval by the mayor and city council, prior to the issuance of any licenses by the city. Mayor and city council will determine if the proposed business meets the definition of a spa establishment as well as other provisions of this article. 
(4)  Sole proprietors. Other than within massage therapy and spa establishments, licensed massage therapists may operate as sole proprietors or employees under the following provisions: 
(i)  On the premises of a physician or chiropractor and under the supervision of the same; 
(ii)  Under a customary home occupation permit, providing services off-premises (on-call, by appointment, etc.); 
(iii)  Leasing or subleasing a single room from a business not otherwise licensed under this article. 
(iv)  As sole proprietors, the licensed massage therapist can have no employees, including contractors and subcontractors. 
(b)  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the license or work permit only and shall be subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city and state law. 
(c)  The requirements of this article shall have no application to or effect upon the following persons acting within the scope of their professions: 
(1)  Medical doctors and osteopaths, chiropractors, physical and occupational therapists, podiatrists, acupuncturists, registered or licensed practical nurses. 
(2)  Cosmetologists duly licensed to practice in this state pursuant to state law, except that this exemption shall apply solely to massaging the head, neck, face, scalp, hair, hands or feet of the patron. 
(3)  Employees of duly licensed nursing and convalescent homes and hospitals; 
(4)  Athletic directors or trainers who are affiliated with an accredited educational institution or a bona fide sports team and whose work is limited to athletic team members. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-140. - Requirements and application. 
(a)  Requirements. 
(1)  Licenses. Only a person with a valid massage therapy license issued by the State of Georgia is eligible to practice massage therapy in the city. No person shall practice or offer to practice massage therapy or bodywork therapy in the city without first receiving a license from the city in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Conditions of issuance. No license shall be issued to any massage therapy business within the city under this division unless every person who performs or offers to perform massage on its premises is a licensed massage therapist, and it shall be unlawful to operate as a massage therapy establishment unless all such persons are and remain licensed massage therapists. The city license of a massage therapy establishment that fails to meet this requirement is subject to revocation. 
(3)  City license. No person shall operate a massage therapy business without a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended occupational tax license from the city, pursuant to this article. 
(4)  Conviction of a crime. No license under this division shall be issued or renewed to any person who himself or who has a co-owner, partner or manager who has been convicted or shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere for any felony within ten years, or two misdemeanors within five years, other than traffic violations, immediately prior to the filing of the application. The term "conviction" includes an adjudication of guilty or plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond in part or in whole when charged with a crime. Licenses granted to persons who fail to meet this requirement at any time shall be subject to revocation. 
(5)  Age of licensee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be issued a license to operate a massage therapy establishment. 
(6)  Corporate residency; agent. All applications for licenses under this division by a corporation or other business entity shall name in the application one or more residents in the city or Cherokee County as the agent and representative of the corporation to receive all communications, notices, services of process, or other papers or documents on behalf of the corporation in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation, or other action with respect to any license issued pursuant to this division. The application shall give the mailing address of the person, and the mailing to any such person at such address of any notice required to be given under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the corporation. If any such person shall cease to be a resident of the city or Cherokee County, another person shall immediately be appointed, in writing, in his place, and written notice shall be given the director of community development, stating the name and address of the new agent. 
(7)  Annual regulatory license fee and occupational tax certificate required. An annual regulatory license fee and occupational tax certificate shall be required for each person, firm, corporation or other entity operating a massage establishment. The annual regulatory license fee shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
(b)  Application for license. 
(1)  Any person desiring to practice massage therapy or bodywork therapy, or engage in the business of a massage, spa, or bodywork establishment shall, before engaging in that business, file an application for a license addressed to the director of community development or designee. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee which will be set forth in the fee schedule by the city council. The application shall be in writing, requiring detailed information as itemized below. 
(2)  Applicants shall also provide proof of their application for business registration and the payment of the occupation tax and any other necessary fees such as for a building permit. 
(3)  Each application under this division shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following information: 
(a)  The full legal name, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names, currently or heretofore used by the applicant. 
(b)  The current and all previous business and residence addresses within the three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(c)  Government issued identification verifying the age of 18 years or older. 
(d)  Height, weight and color of eyes and hair. 
(e)  Two current photographs at least two inches by two inches in size. 
(f)  A detailed list of the services to be provided. 
(g)  The business, occupation or employment for three years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(h)  Any massage or similar business license history of the applicant, including whether such person, in any previous operation in any jurisdiction, has had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and any business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation. 
(i)  A list of any and all criminal convictions of the applicant other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the dates of conviction, description of the offense and the court where the conviction was received. 
(j)  Applicant must disclose other massage therapy establishments owned and/or operated by the applicant using his or her massage therapy state license, including corporate names, DBA, and addresses. 
(k)  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and investigate the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license. 
(l)  If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall, in addition to the foregoing information, submit a complete list of the stockholders of the corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations, and provide the name and address for its registered agent in the county. 
(m)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must reside in the state and must submit written, reliable proof thereof. 
(n)  A copy of the applicable state license for each massage therapist and other professions licensed by the state, now and as amended, shall be attached to the application. All other employees not licensed by the state shall be listed with job title and description of duties performed. The massage therapy license issued by the state must be active and in good standing and resubmitted to the city upon expiration for verification. 
(o)  A set of fingerprints taken by the city police department or other approved agency shall be attached to the application. Payment of all fees charged by the police department in connection with this requirement shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(c)  Application—Additional requirements. For bodywork therapy and related professions not otherwise exempted by this article or licensed by the state, the following additional application requirements shall apply: 
(l)  Sworn affidavits of at least three bona fide residents of the city that the applicant is personally known to them and they believe the person to be of good moral character; 
(2)  A certificate dated within 30 days of application from a physician licensed in the state, certifying that the applicant is in sound mental and physical health, and free of all contagious or communicable diseases; and 
(3)  The applicant must provide a copy of the insurance policy covering property damage and bodily injury liability. 
(4)  Provide evidence of training or certifications in the bodywork therapy modality or profession. 
(d)  Fees. All license applications shall be accompanied by a fee as elsewhere established by the city council to defray the costs associated with issuance of the licenses. All fees associated with the background check required by subsection (a)(9) of this section shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be in addition to the application fee. 
(e)  Renewal. Renewals must be done annually no later than January 1 with a renewal fee to be set forth in the fee schedule as set by resolution of the city council. State issued licenses shall be submitted with renewal and upon expiration of the state license, as necessary during a 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-141. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Each applicant and all employees under this article, prior to making an application for a license to engage in the business, trade or profession of massage therapy, or bodywork therapy, must have the following qualifications and must furnish the following information when applying: 
(1)  The applicant, all owners, and all employees must be at least 18 years of age and in case the applicant is a corporation, it must be created in or domesticated by the laws of the state. 
(2)  The applicant must furnish a copy of identification such as a state driver's license/government-issued I.D. Should the applicant be a corporation, it shall furnish a copy of identification such as a driver's license/state-issued I.D. for all its agents or employees actually engaged and working under the license. 
(3)  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
(4)  If engaging or purported to be a massage therapist or massage therapy establishment, the applicant and all owners of the corporation, or establishment must be a licensed massage therapist as provided by state law. If not licensed by the state, but purporting to be engaged in bodywork therapy or another related profession, said applicant and establishment shall not advertise or hold itself out to be a "massage," "massage therapy" or "spa" establishment. Massage therapists shall post their state license in a conspicuous place in the licensed establishment at all times while the license remains valid. Said license shall remain valid at all times and upon expiration, the renewed license shall be submitted to the city immediately. 
(5)  The applicant, all corporate organizers and co-owners, and employee must be legal residents of the United States. 
(6)  If the applicant owns or operates more than one massage therapy establishment, as disclosed in section 22-140, the applicant must provide a list of the state licensed massage therapist(s) dedicated to providing services at the proposed massage therapy establishment. In addition to the applicant, at least one additional state licensed massage therapist shall be dedicated to providing massage therapy services at the establishment. 
(7)  No applicant, employee, independent contractor, agent and partner, general or limited, or co-owners, associated with the operation of the licensed establishment shall have convicted or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or to any charge of a lascivious nature. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-142. - Issuance. 
(a)  If the application required by this article is submitted in proper form and is approved by the police department, community development director, and building official, then the development services office is authorized to issue a license to the applicant upon the payment of any fees due. 
(b)  The city manager reserves the right to deny issuance of a license based on any information, which would be grounds for revocation or suspension under section 22-145, received during the application process. Any applicant so denied shall have the right to appeal such decision to the mayor and council. 
(c)  A separate business registration must be applied for and obtained upon issuance of a license. 
(d)  Compliance with all relevant zoning requirements shall be met in accordance with the city land development ordinance prior to issuance. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-143. - Work permits required. 
(a)  A work permit shall be required for any and all: 
(1)  On-premises owners, managers or supervisors who are in charge of managing the massage therapy or bodywork therapy establishments as required by subsection (b) below and who do not otherwise hold a license issued hereunder; and 
(b)  No licensee shall employ any person required to have any state mandated licenses or work permit pursuant to this section until such person has procured such license or permit. Licensees and all managers and/or supervisors of any massage therapy or bodywork therapy establishment are required by this section to inspect and verify that each employee, required to have a valid state license or city work permit, has in his/her possession the required license or permit at all times, and failure to do so shall be a violation of this article. 
(c)  Any person required to obtain a work permit shall apply to the city manager or designee for such permit. A separate work permit per individual is required for employment at each establishment within the city, complete with the information as required under section 22-140(a). Each work permit will expire on December 31 of the year that it is issued by the city and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. Persons applying for the permit shall make themselves available for investigation as may be required by the city. The nonrefundable fee for a work permit shall be set by the city council and shall remain in effect until modified or amended by the city council. The amount of the fee shall be stated in the fee schedule. 
(d)  The city manager or designee may suspend or revoke an employee's work permit, following notice and hearing pursuant to this article, and demand its return where the employee violates the provisions of this chapter, any state law or applicable local ordinance. 
(e)  An applicant for a work permit shall not have been convicted or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or to any charge of a lascivious nature. 
(f)  A new search may be conducted on any person issued a work permit if the city manager or designee receives information which warrants such a new search. If the new search reveals evidence that warrants revocation of the permit, the permit may be revoked following notice and a hearing. 
(g)  When the city manager intends to deny or revoke any work permit, the city manager or designee shall issue to the applicant or permit holder a letter setting forth the reasons for denial or revocation, and the letter shall notify the applicant of his or her right to hearing before the city council, which hearing shall be held in accordance with section 22-145. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-144. - Reserved.  
Sec. 22-145. - Grounds for suspension or revocation; notice; hearings; refund. 
(a)  A license granted under this article shall be subject to revocation or suspension. Whenever, in the opinion of the city manager, there is cause to revoke or suspend the license, a written notice of intention to revoke or suspend the license shall be furnished to the holder thereof. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the licensee may present his case before the mayor and council. Within ten days from the suspension or revocation, the licensee may appeal directly to the city manager. The appeal shall be in writing, setting forth the circumstances for the appeal. Upon receipt of the appeal, the city manager shall docket a hearing on the agenda of the mayor and city council to occur at a regular meeting within 45 days from the receipt of the appeal by the city manager. After the hearing, the mayor and city council may revoke or suspend the license if, in their discretion, revocation or suspension is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the city. The license may be revoked or suspended upon one or more of the following grounds (but is not limited to such grounds): 
(1)  The practice of massage therapy and/or bodywork therapy was found to be occurring by unlicensed persons on any premises in the city. 
(2)  A licensed massage therapist and/or licensed bodywork therapist is allowing the practice of massage therapy or bodywork therapy on the premises by any person without a state or city massage therapy or bodywork therapy license. 
(3)  The licensee or designated manager was not present on the premises during operating hours. 
(4)  Patrons are present on a premises where a license application for massage therapy and/or bodywork therapy, or an application for a business license was filed with the city, but not yet issued. 
(5)  The licensee or any employee of the licensee is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit in obtaining a state license to practice massage therapy; or the previously active and duly issued state license has expired or been revoked by the state. 
(6)  The licensee or any employee of the licensee is engaged in the practice of massage therapy under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name. 
(7)  The licensee or any employee of the licensee is intoxicated. 
(8)  The licensee or any employee of the licensee is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive advertising or practices. 
(9)  The licensee or any employee has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or to any charge of a lascivious nature. 
(10)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the licensee has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein. 
(11)  The premises are in violation of the city's building or life safety codes. 
(12)  Noncompliance with sections 22-147, 22-149, and any section of this article. 
(13)  Any violation of state or local laws or ordinances. 
(b)  The city manager is delegated the authority to suspend any license under this article for due cause in any emergency situation; and such suspension may be made effective immediately and remain in force until the next session of the municipal court. 
(c)  When a license is so revoked, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of fees paid. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-146. - Patronage of massage establishments by minors. 
(a)  Restricted. Persons under the age of 18 must have written consent from their parent or guardian prior to receiving treatment from applicants licensed under this article. 
(b)  Duty of applicant. It shall be the duty of the applicant to determine the age of the persons patronizing the establishment and to keep on file the original written consent form as required in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Violation. A violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-147. - Human trafficking notice. 
Massage therapy establishments and bodywork therapy establishments must post the Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI) https://gbi.georgia.gov/ Human Trafficking Notice, now and as amended, as a public awareness sign in a non-customer area (such as a break room) within the establishment. The sign must be at least five inches by ten inches in size. See also O.C.G.A. § 16-5-47. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-148. - Signed copy of article to be filed with license application. 
All applicants and property owners must each sign and notarize two copies of this article, affirming their understanding and commitment to comply with the provisions contained herein. One copy will be kept on file with the application, the other retained by the applicant and owner. An interpreter and interpreted version of this article will be provided in their native tongue, to applicants who, in the opinion of the director of community development or designee, do not appear to understand the English version. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-149. - Operating requirements; unlawful acts and restrictions. 
(a)  License displayed. Every person obtaining a license or permit under this article shall display such license or permit in a prominent place in view of patrons entering the premises. 
(b)  Hours of operation. No applicant or establishment licensed under this article shall conduct business or provide services except within and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. local time. However, if the establishment is located within a shopping center, the establishment may comply with the normal business hours during which the shopping center is open. 
(c)  Record of treatments to be kept. It shall be the duty of any person granted an establishment license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at an establishment, the type of treatment administered, and the name of the person of the establishment administering the treatment with a history of at least three years. The records consisting of name, address and time of treatment shall be subject to inspection at any time by any code enforcement officer or city police officer. 
(d)  Cleanliness. The premises shall be kept clean, neat and sanitary and shall comply with all sanitary and health requirements of the state, the county and the city. 
(e)  Prices. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective customers. 
(f)  Alcohol. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or provided to customers on the premises. 
(g)  Locking doors. It shall be unlawful for any massage therapy or bodywork therapy (those establishments not located within a professional's office, i.e., chiropractor, doctor etc.) to be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth or other area within a massage establishment, which is fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
(h)  Unlawful touching. It shall be unlawful for any person in any establishment as defined under this article, to place his hands upon, to touch with any part of his body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage the genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. 
(i)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing any establishment as defined under this article, to knowingly cause, allow or permit in or about such establishment any agent, employee or other person under his supervision or control to perform any acts prohibited under this section, including the unlicensed practice of massage therapy and bodywork therapy. 
(j)  Prohibited clothing. No employees of any establishment as defined under this article shall wear swimsuits, lingerie or similar garments or garments which expose areas described in subsection (h) of this section. 
(k)  Reception area. All massage and bodywork therapy establishments (those establishments not located within a professional's office, i.e., chiropractor, doctor, etc.) must provide a reception area with adequate seating and immediate accessible entry and exit into and from the back office and area where the treatment rooms are located. 
(l)  Limited access. During normal business hours as listed in this article, no one other than a patient, a patient's legal guardian(s) and employees of the massage establishment will be allowed beyond the reception area. 
(m)  Owner/manager presence required. All establishments as defined under this article shall have an owner, manager or supervisor on the premises at all hours the establishment offers massage therapy or bodywork therapy. Such owner, manager or supervisor, in addition to the licensee, shall be responsible to make sure all persons performing massage therapy or bodywork therapy at any time has an appropriate state license and city license, or city work permit, and their failure to do so shall be a violation of this Code. 
(n)  Beds prohibited. Ordinary beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any establishment as defined under this article. 
(o)  Lighting requirements. Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, and, additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth. 
(p)  Residing prohibited. It is unlawful for an operator or owner to use or permit the use of an establishment licensed under this article as a principal domicile, or to allow any employee to stay at the massage therapy establishment or bodywork therapy establishment after the hours of operation for the purpose of residing or sleeping. No food of any kind shall be prepared for sale or be sold in the establishment. 
(q)  Table showers prohibited. The provision of table showers or any shower or bathing facilities is expressly prohibited unless granted by conditional use permit (CUP). 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-150. - Inspections authorized. 
The code enforcement officer or his authorized representatives shall and the police may, from time to time, make inspections during business hours of each premises licensed under this article for the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this article to fail to allow the code enforcement officer or police officer access to the premises or to hinder the officer in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-151. - Reserved.  
Sec. 22-152. - Reapplication after denial or revocation. 
(a)  Any licensee denied or revoked by the mayor and city council shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license for 12 months immediately following the revocation or denial. 
(b)  Any establishment location denied or revoked by mayor and city council shall be prohibited from receiving any license under this article for 12 months immediately following the revocation or denial. 
(c)  A license revoked by the mayor and city council is void. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-153. - Change of location of business, transfer. 
(a)  No licensee under this article shall change the location of the business without applying for and receiving a new license for such location from the business license office. No license shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Sec. 22-154. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished pursuant to section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5518-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2018)  
Secs. 22-155—22-169. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PET SHOPS 
 
Sec. 22-170. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
Animal control facility means an animal control center or animal shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county or municipality, whose mission and practice is, in whole, or in significant part, the rescue, care, and placement of stray, abandoned, or surrendered animals in permanent homes or with rescue organizations, and which does not breed animals. 
Animal rescue organization means any not for profit organization which has tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue, care, and placement of stray, abandoned, or surrendered animals in permanent homes, and which does not breed animals. 
Cat means a member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus. 
Dog means a member of the specifics of domestic dog, Canis familiaris. 
Offers for sale means to sell, offer for adoption, advertise for the sale of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat. 
Pet shop means a retail establishment where animals sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public at retail. Such definition shall not include a private residence not generally open to the public, an animal control facility or animal rescue organization as defined. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2017)  
Sec. 22-171. - Restrictions on the sale of dogs and cats. 
A pet shop may not sell, exchange, barter, offer for sale, auction, or otherwise deliver or transfer a cat or a dog. Nothing in this section shall prevent a pet shop from providing space and appropriate care for cats and dogs owned by an animal control facility or an animal rescue organization and maintained at the pet shop for the purpose of adopting those animals to the public. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2017)  
Sec. 22-172. - Disclosures. 
A pet shop that provides space for the adoption of cats or dogs shall post, in a conspicuous location on the cage or enclosure of each such animal, a sign stating the name of the animal control facility or animal rescue organization which owns the dog or cat offered for adoption. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2017)  
Sec. 22-173. - Penalties. 
(a)  Each failure to post a sign for an individual dog or cat as required by this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Each dog or cat sold, exchanged, bartered, offered for sale, auctioned, delivered, or transferred in violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense of up to $500.00 per violation. 
(c)  Each day's failure to comply with this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2017)  
Sec. 22-174. - Enforcement. 
City Code enforcement and city police department shall be primarily responsible for the enforcement by means of court citations and are authorized to delegate enforcement authority to their designated employees. 
(Ord. of 6-12-2017)  
Secs. 22-175—22-214. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DRUG DISPENSATION CONTROL ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 22-215. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section. 
Ambulatory surgery centers means health care facilities where surgical procedures not requiring an overnight hospital stay are performed. 
Assisted living facility means a facility that provides supervision or assistance with activities of daily living; coordination of services by outside health care providers; and monitoring of resident activities to help to ensure their health, safety, and well-being. 
Dispense means to issue one or more doses of any drug for subsequent administration to, or use by, a patient. 
Hospital means an institution for health care providing patient treatment by doctors, physician assistants and nurses, which doctors, physician assistants and nurses are licensed by the State of Georgia, and further that the institution provides for inpatient care overnight with bed facilities or longer-term patient stays in rooms designed for the provision of medical services. 
Medical establishment means, for the purposes of this article, any person, sole proprietor, corporation, or entity proposing to offer the following services: general and family medicine, medical specialists, chiropractic services, physical therapy, physical rehabilitation, urgent care, medical clinics, or any other similar healthcare services offered to the general public, including clinics which treat patients for pain. 
Outpatient facilities means facilities which are staffed by physicians licensed by the State of Georgia which are owned or operated by a hospital. 
Pharmacy, in-house or pharmacies means any commercial enterprise or enterprises with individuals licensed by the State of Georgia to practice pharmacy employed thereby, which engage in the practice of pharmacy and which derive 25 percent or less of its gross revenues from the sale of Schedule II, III or IV Drugs. 
Practice of pharmacy means the interpretation, evaluation, or dispensing of prescription drug orders; participation in drug and device selection, drug administration, drug regimen reviews, and drug or drug related research; provisions of patient counseling and the provision of those acts or services necessary to provide pharmacy care, and the responsibility for compounding and labeling of drugs and devices, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 26-4-4. 
Professional samples means complimentary doses of a drug, medication vouchers, or medical devices provided by the manufacturer for use in patient care. 
Schedule II, III or IV Drugs means drugs defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-26 through 16-13-29. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1674, § I, 8-22-2011)  
Sec. 22-216. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The following businesses or entities and practices are exempt or partially exempt from the provisions of this article VI: 
(1)  Hospitals, 
(2)  Ambulatory surgery centers, but ambulatory surgery centers are exempt from the provisions of this article VI only with respect to those patients who have undergone surgery in such center within the last year of being prescribed drugs, 
(3)  Assisted living facilities, but only as to those living therein, 
(4)  Outpatient facilities operated or owned by a hospital, and 
(5)  Pharmacy, in-house pharmacy and pharmacies. 
(b)  The dispensation of professional samples shall also be exempt from the provisions of this article VI. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1674, § I, 8-22-2011)  
Sec. 22-217. - Prohibition of dispensing. 
No medical establishment, person or entity shall dispense Schedule II, III or IV Drugs in the City of Woodstock for payment or compensation of any nature whatsoever unless such medical establishment, person or entity is specifically exempted from the effect of this article VI as set forth in section 22-216 above or except with respect to the dispensation of professional samples as set forth in section 22-216 above. This provision does not prohibit medical establishments from prescribing Schedule II, III or IV drugs for patients to pick up at pharmacies. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1674, § I, 8-22-2011)  
Sec. 22-218. - Inspection allowed. 
The city shall from time to time make an inspection of each medical establishment for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this article are fully complied with. It shall be unlawful for any medical establishment to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or hinder such officer in any manner, provided, however, such inspection officer shall not have the right to access any patient's personal information in violation of the requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, as the same may have been amended or modified. The inspection officer or officers shall be appointed by the city manager or the chief of police, as either may see fit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1674, § I, 8-22-2011)  
Sec. 22-219. - Violation. 
Any person in violation of this article shall be subject to the provisions of section 1-7 of the Code of Woodstock, Georgia. Any person in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to arrest provided that arrest is permissible under O.C.G.A. § 17-4-20. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1674, § I, 8-22-2011) 
Note: O.C.G.A. § 17-4-20 provides that "an arrest for a crime may be made by a law enforcement officer either under a warrant or without a warrant if the offense is committed in such officer's presence or within such officer's immediate knowledge; if the offender is endeavoring to escape; if the officer has probable cause to believe that an act of family violence...has been committed; if the officer has probable cause to believe that an offense involving physical abuse has been committed against a vulnerable adult...or for other cause if there is likely to be [a] failure of justice for want of a judicial officer to issue a warrant." This Code section applies to municipal ordinances. See e.g., Schroder v. State , 261 Ga.App. 879, 881 (2003) ("Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 17-4-20 a warrantless arrest is legal if any crime is committed in an officer's presence or within his immediate knowledge. This Code section also applies to violations of municipal ordinances.") ( emphasis supplied ).  
ARTICLE VII. - FIREWORKS SALES 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate certain aspects of "fireworks" and "consumer fireworks" as an exercise of the city's police power, to the extent allowed by State Law, in order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of this city. 
To the extent that relevant Georgia law (Chapter 10 of Title 25, O.C.G.A.] is modified or amended, so shall this article be immediately modified or amended. 
 
Sec. 22-220. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  Consumer fireworks means any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. 
(2)  Consumer fireworks retail sales facility shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124; provided, however, that such term shall not include a tent, canopy, or membrane structure. 
(3)  Consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124. 
(4)  Distributor means any person, corporation, association, or partnership which sells consumer fireworks. 
(5)  Electric plant shall have the same meaning as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 46-3A-1. [Cross reference: O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1-4.1] 
(6)  Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, bombs, sparklers, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. 
(7)  NFPA 1124 means the National Fire Protection Association Standard 1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 Edition. 
(8)  Nonprofit group means any entity exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, any entity incorporated under Chapter 3 of Title 14, the Georgia Nonprofit Corporation Code, or a sponsored organization of a public or private elementary or secondary school in this state, with a physical address in Cherokee County. 
(9)  Pyrotechnics means fireworks. [Cross reference: O.C.G.A § 25-10-1] 
(10)  Safety fire commissioner has the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124(b). As used in this chapter, the term "consumer fireworks" or "fireworks" shall not include: 
a.  Model rockets and model rocket engines designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models, toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content averages 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture per paper cap or toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; nor shall the term "consumer fireworks" or "fireworks" include ammunition consumed by weapons used for sporting or hunting purposes; and 
b.  Wire or wood sparklers of 100 grams or less of mixture per item, other sparkling items which are nonexplosive and nonaerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 500 grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; smoke devices; or trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party peppers, string peppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grain or less of explosive mixture. 
(11)  Store shall have the same meaning as provided for by NFPA 1124; provided, however, that such term shall only include such buildings with at least 4,000 square feet of retail display space and wherefrom: 
a.  No more than 25 percent of such retail display space is used for consumer fireworks and items or products as provided for under paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A § 25-10-1; and 
b.  Other items or products which are not consumer fireworks or items or products as provided for under paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 are sold; and provided, further, that such term means a person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership with more than one mercantile location, where all such mercantile locations are collectively known by the public by the same name and central management. [Cross Reference: O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 (2016)] 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 4003, 7-11-2016)  
Sec. 22-221. - Temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand license required. 
(1)  Any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership who contemplates selling consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand within the city limits pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2 shall be required to obtain a license from the licensing department in the manner specified in this article. All applications shall be made to the fire chief pursuant to this article. 
(2)  All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to offer for sale at retail or wholesale, to use or ignite or cause to be ignited, or to possess, manufacture, transport, or store any consumer fireworks or fireworks except as otherwise provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2. 
(4)  The license fee for a distributor selling consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall be $500.00 per location, payable to the city. Upon finding that a distributor has met the requirements of subsection (a) of O.C.G.A § 25-10-5.1, has a license pursuant to subsection (b) or (d) of O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1 has no more than the allowable temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands pursuant to subparagraph (b)(6)(B) of O.C.G.A. § 25-10-2, that the sales of consumer fireworks from such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall accrue to the benefit of a nonprofit group, and upon payment of such license fee, such license shall be issued by the fire department; such license shall identify the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand applicable to such license and shall expire on the next January 31 after the issuance of such license. 
(5)  A determination by the fire department of whether a distributor has met requirements for the issuance of a license pursuant to this subjection shall be made within 30 days of the submission of an application for any such license. Such application shall be in writing and upon such form as may be provided by the fire department. If a determination has not been made within the time provided for by this paragraph, or for an appeal of a determination by the fire department, a distributor may seek review from the judge of the probate court. Such judge may provide for the issuance or nonissuance of a license and for the payment of license fees in such manner as is consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(6)  For at least one of the temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands provided for under subparagraph (b)(6)(B) of O.C.G.A § 25-10-2, a nonprofit group benefiting from the sale of consumer fireworks from such temporary consumer fireworks retail stand shall directly participate in operating such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. It shall be unlawful for a nonprofit group or any agent or bona fide representative of a nonprofit group to knowingly lend the name of the nonprofit group or allow the identity of the nonprofit group to be used for the license under this article if such nonprofit group is not directly participating in operating, or benefiting from the operation of, such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand. 
(7)  The city will expend such fees collected pursuant to this article for fire safety awareness training. 
(8)  A distributor licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1 shall submit a list of the names and addresses, including the counties, of each temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand at which such distributor has consumer fireworks offered for sale to the safety fire commissioner. Such list shall be submitted not less than 30 days prior to first having a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand at which such distributor has consumer fireworks offered for sale and not less than 30 days prior to having such distributor's consumer fireworks offered for sale at a location not previously included on such list. The safety fire commissioner will make such list publicly available for inspection. In making determinations as provided for under this subsection the fire department shall reference the list provided for by this paragraph. 
(9)  A revocation of suspension of a license provided for under subsection (b) or (d) of O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1 shall operate as a revocation or suspension of a distributor's license under this article for the term of such revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 4003, 7-11-2016)  
Sec. 22-222. - Location of temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands and compliance. 
(1)  The applicant under this article stand must meet the zoning requirements as set forth in chapter 50 pertaining to the Land Development Code and chapter VII of the Land Development Code. 
(2)  It shall be lawful to sell consumer fireworks from a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand only if such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand is: 
a.  In compliance with the requirements for such a temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand in the selling of consumer fireworks as provided for in NFPA 1124; and 
b.  Within 1,000 feet of a fire hydrant of a county, municipality, or other political subdivision or a fire department connection of a building affiliated with such consumer fireworks retail sales stand, unless the chief administrative offer of the fire department of the fire department provides in writing that such temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stand may operate in excess of 1,000 feet from such fire hydrant or fire department connection; and 
c.  Selling consumer fireworks of a distributor licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-10-5.1. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to sell consumer fireworks from any motor vehicle, from a trailer towed by a motor vehicle. 
(4)  A distributor licensed by the fire department may operate no more than two temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands; provided, however, that such distributor has been operating and open to the public for at least 30 days prior to July 4 or December 31 in the year of an application for an initial license that is filed within 30 days of July 4 or December 31. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 4003, 7-11-2016)  
Secs. 22-223—22-229. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDICABS AND NONMOTORIZED VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
 
Sec. 22-230. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business registration means the process by which a business or a practitioner of a profession or occupation gives evidence of compliance with the requirements of chapter 86, taxation. 
City means the City of Woodstock. 
Driver means any person who drives or operates a pedicab on the streets of the city for a regulated pedicab company. 
Driver's permit means the written authority granted by the city for an individual to drive or operate a pedicab within the city. 
Horse-drawn carriage means any hack or carriage which is operated by being drawn by a horse, mule or other beast of burden for the transportation for hire of passengers. 
Occupation tax certificate means the right and privilege granted by the city for the operation of a business incorporating the use of one or more pedicabs within the corporate limits of the city. 
Pedicab means any nonmotorized or motor-assisted vehicle with three or more wheels operated by one person for the purpose of, or capable of, transporting passengers in seats or a platform made a part of the pedicab. This definition shall not include a bicycle built for two where the operators are seated one behind the other, nor shall it include a bicycle with trainer or beginner wheels affixed thereto, nor shall it include a wheelchair or other vehicle for the purpose of transporting a handicapped person, nor shall it include a tricycle built for a child or an adult with a seat for only one operator and no passenger. 
Pedicab business or company means a business involving the use of one or more pedicabs on the streets of the city and the holder of an occupation tax certificate to operate a pedicab business under the provisions of this article whether a person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
Street shall mean and include any city-owned street, alley, lane, avenue, court or public place in the city. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-231. - Business registration and license required. 
(a)  Each pedicab business which operates within the city shall be required to obtain the necessary business registration in the manner specified in chapter 86, article III, pertaining to occupational license taxes, as well as to obtain a license in the manner specified in this article. 
(b)  The application for the pedicab license described in subparagraph (a) shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall provide proof that the pedicab company owns the pedicabs which it intends to operate pursuant to the license, a copy of the employment agreement between pedicab company and its drivers, and any additional information as may be necessary to define completely the business operation of the pedicab company. Renewal of the pedicab license shall be required on January 1 of each year. 
(c)  If the application for the pedicab license required by this article is submitted in proper form and is approved by the city manager or his designee, then the license will be issued upon the payment of any fees due, which are to be set by the council from time to time and are stated in the fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-232. - Insurance. 
(a)  Indemnity for benefit of city. Any pedicab business operating under this article shall hold the city, its officers, agents, servants and employees harmless against any and all liability, loss, damages or expense which may accrue to the city by reason of negligence, default or misconduct of the pedicab company in connection with the rights granted to each pedicab company hereunder. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make the city, its officers, agents, servants or employees liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any pedicab company, its servants, agents, drivers or other employees during the service and operation by the pedicab company of a pedicab business or either in respect to injury to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. The physical health and fitness of a driver to operate a pedicab is solely the responsibility of the pedicab business. 
(b)  Insurance for benefit of passengers. Any pedicab company desiring to obtain an occupation tax certificate to do business in the city shall give and maintain a policy of indemnity from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of Georgia for each pedicab. The minimum coverage shall be $100,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, $300,000.00 for injury to more than one person when sustained in the same accident, and $25,000.00 for property damage resulting from one accident. The indemnity insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property caused by the negligence of a pedicab company, its servants or agents. 
(c)  Blanket policy. Any pedicab company or person operating a pedicab in the city shall give a separate policy of indemnity insurance for each separate pedicab for hire, except where such pedicab company or person actually owns or holds legal title to more than one pedicab, in which event such pedicab company or person may give one policy of indemnity insurance covering all the pedicabs actually owned. This latter provision, however, shall not apply to any group of persons separately owning pedicabs who may be jointly operating or doing business under a regulated pedicab name. 
(d)  Comprehensive general liability insurance. Each pedicab company shall maintain from a licensed insurance company comprehensive general liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for its operation of pedicab(s) within the city. 
(e)  Notice when voided. Before any policy of insurance required by this article is voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice thereof shall be given, in writing, to the city's business license manager at least ten days before the same shall take effect. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-233. - Pedicab driver's permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall operate a pedicab for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or operates a pedicab company shall permit a pedicab to be driven, and no pedicab operating under a pedicab company regulated by the city shall be driven at any time for hire unless the driver of the pedicab shall first have obtained and shall have then in force a pedicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Application. Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall submit an application in writing to the city, on a form provided by the city that shall include but not to be limited to the age of the applicant, his address, and whether he has been convicted of a violation of any of the laws of the state or of this Code or other ordinances of the city, and if so, when and of what offense, and the sentence of the court. 
(c)  Driver's fitness; training. Each application for a driver's permit shall be accompanied by an affidavit on a form provided by the city from the applicant indicating that the applicant is physically capable of operating the pedicab. In the case of renewal of a driver's permit, the affidavit shall be updated every two years. The applicant shall also attest by affidavit, on a form provided by the city, that the applicant has received adequate training to operate the pedicab, and the applicant shall provide documentation of the training received. 
(d)  Qualifications of applicant. An applicant for a driver's permit under this article must not be less than 16 years of age, with no physical infirmities which might make the applicant an unsafe pedicab driver. No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs within one year prior to the date of the application for such permit, or who has been convicted of the offense three or more times within five years prior to the date of the application for the permit. 
(e)  Driver's permit fee. Before any permit is granted under this article, a driver's permit fee shall be paid by the applicant as adopted by city council with resolution from time to time. 
(f)  Current state driver's license required. Any person applying for a pedicab driver's permit under this article must show that he has a current motor vehicle operator's license issued or approved by the State of Georgia and that the license is not under suspension or revocation. 
(g)  Examination of applicant; issuance or denial of permit. It shall be the duty of the chief of police, or his designee, to examine the applicant, his references, police and traffic record, and other vouchers and thereafter to either grant or refuse the permit. In the event of a refusal to grant a permit, the applicant shall have the right to enter an appeal as provided in subsection (o) of this section. 
(h)  Permit to be displayed in pedicab. The permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be placed on display in the pedicab to be operated by the holder of the permit, where the permit will be in clear view of passengers at all times when the pedicab is for hire. 
(i)  Alteration of permits prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate or destroy a pedicab driver's permit or cause or allow the same. 
(j)  Permit not transferable. Any pedicab driver's permit issued under this article is not transferable and is to be used solely by the person to whom it is issued. 
(k)  Duration of permit; renewals. Any pedicab permit shall be in effect for the calendar year. Permits may be renewed, upon application and payment of the required fee, for each calendar year thereafter subject to the requirements of this section, unless the permit for the preceding period has been revoked or is under suspension. 
(l)  Suspension of the driver's permit. The chief of police or the city manager or his designee shall have the authority to suspend a driver's permit for the following reasons: 
1.  Making any false statement in the application for the permit, or 
2.  Operating a pedicab in violation of any provision of this article or state law. 
The driver shall have the right to drive the pedicab until a final hearing on the suspension is held unless otherwise prohibited by state law. The suspension shall be lifted upon dismissal or dropping of the charges described, upon satisfactory correction of any false statement in the application, upon correction of the violation of any provision of this article, upon ruling in favor of the driver in any hearing before the city council, or at the expiration of 60 days from the date of suspension. From the decision of the chief of police or the city manager or his designee to suspend a permit, the holder of such permit shall have the right to appeal to the city council, as approved in subsection (o) of this section. 
(m)  Revocation of driver's permit. In the event that any driver holding a permit under this article at any time ceases to meet the qualifications described in this section or fails to correct satisfactorily any false statement made in the application for the permit, or fails to operate his pedicab in accordance with the provisions of the article, the city manager shall be empowered to revoke permanently the permit. 
(n)  Driving after suspension or revocation. It is unlawful for any person to operate a pedicab for hire for the transport of passengers during any period in which his permit to do so is suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this article or if his Georgia driver's license has been suspended or revoked. 
(o)  Appeals. An appeal to the city council from a ruling of the city manager, his designee, or the chief of police shall be made within ten days of notice to the applicant regarding the ruling. The appellant shall be informed within ten days of the ruling in writing of the reasons for the decision. The appellant shall have the right to present evidence, examine the evidence of the appellee, and to cross-examine any witnesses. Appellant shall have the right to be represented by counsel. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-234. - Identification and marking generally. 
Every pedicab shall have a sign plainly painted on each side of the vehicle, in letters not less than two inches high, containing the full name of the pedicab company operating the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-235. - Numbers generally. 
There shall be painted on each side and on the rear of each pedicab a number at least two inches high, the number to be separate and distinct from that on any other public vehicle or taxicab in the city. The number shall be agreed upon by the pedicab company and the city manager or his designee and shall not be altered or changed without the consent of the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-236. - Registration of number and names of owner and operator. 
The number assigned to a pedicab in accordance with this article together with the names of the owner and driver of the pedicab shall be registered with the city. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-237. - Safe mechanical condition of pedicab required. 
Every pedicab operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety equipment remaining intact and operative at all times when the pedicab is in service. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-238. - Cleanliness of pedicab required. 
Each vehicle operating under this article shall be kept painted and in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-239. - Vehicle inspections required. 
Each pedicab shall be inspected by a mechanic at a reputable bike shop who is experienced and qualified in the field of pedicab or bicycle inspection for compliance of the provisions of this article and shall pass said inspection before the vehicle may be used as a pedicab in the city. The mechanic shall sign off on a checklist provided by the city, as adopted by the city council with resolution from time to time. A new inspection must take place with each renewal of a pedicab license to ensure continued compliance with the provisions of this article. Each pedicab involved in an accident shall be inspected again before it may be returned to service transporting passengers for hire. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-240. - Authority for removal of pedicabs from the streets. 
The chief of police or his designee shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the city any pedicab which is in violation of this article, and to prohibit operation of the pedicab until all deficiencies have been corrected. An order of the chief of police or his designee to remove a pedicab from the streets may be appealed to the city council as set forth in subsection (o) of section 22-233. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-241. - Rates of fare-rate card required. 
No owner or driver of a pedicab shall charge a greater sum for the use of the pedicab than the published and advertised rates which shall be displayed in each pedicab. Rates shall be displayed in such place as to be conspicuous and to be in clear view of all passengers. If different than the regular advertised rates, rates for special events and occasions such as weddings shall also be displayed and published in conjunction with the regular advertised rates. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-242. - Restriction on number of passengers. 
No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a pedicab as passengers than the rated seating capacity of the pedicab. For purposes of this section, a child under the age of five shall not be counted as a passenger. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-243. - Pedicab driver movement prohibited under certain conditions. 
No driver shall collect fares, make change, or take on or discharge passengers while his pedicab is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-244. - Property left in pedicab by passenger. 
Any pedicab driver discovering in any pedicab under his control personal property left in the pedicab shall report the loss to the pedicab company for whom he or she works and deliver all the property to the office of the pedicab company within 12 hours after the discovery of the property. The driver's report shall include brief particulars to assist the pedicab company in identifying the owner of the property. The pedicab company shall retain the property on behalf of the owner for at least 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-245. - Safety equipment required. 
Each pedicab shall be equipped with reflectors and electrically powered lights, including turn signals. Electrically powered lights shall be in use when operating during the hours of darkness and when raining. The lights and reflectors shall be mounted so that they are visible from a distance of 500 feet in any direction. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-246. - Pedicab operations. 
(a)  Fixed place of business required. Each pedicab business, as a condition for holding a license under the provisions of this chapter, shall establish and maintain a fixed headquarters on private property for the operation of the company's business. The headquarters shall conform to ordinances of the city and shall provide adequate off-street parking space for all pedicabs not in service on the streets. The company headquarters shall not be moved except by the approved transfer of the company's license to another location. 
(b)  Area of operation. Pedicabs shall only operate on streets with a posted speed limit of 25 mph or less. City council may elect to adopt a map by resolution from time to time which shows the routes accessible to pedicabs. In addition, pedicabs are permitted anywhere within the city with the written consent of the city manager. Pedicabs are not permitted on any sidewalk or trail. 
(c)  Loading and unloading. No pedicab shall stop or stand in the travel lanes of any street. For the purpose of loading or unloading passengers, a pedicab may remain standing upon a street if the pedicab is in any legal parking stall, designated loading zone, or any other location that does not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Otherwise, a pedicab driver must comply with on-street parking regulations regarding loading zones and fire zones. The city manager may set forth specific additional locations where pedicabs are allowed to park or stand. While a pedicab is in operation for the solicitation or transportation of passengers, no pedicab driver shall leave a pedicab unattended for a period of more than 15 minutes at a time unless the pedicab is parked in one of those specific locations identified by the city manager as locations where a pedicab may park or stand. 
(d)  Direct route. The most direct route practicable shall be used by the driver of a pedicab to carry passengers safely and expeditiously to their requested destination, unless otherwise requested by the passenger. 
(e)  Operational log. Pedicab companies shall maintain an operational log for each pedicab owned and operated under that company's pedicab license. The operational log shall list the dates and times of the operation of each pedicab and the name of any pedicab driver operating the pedicab during those dates and times. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-247. - Traffic violations. 
(a)  Every person operating a pedicab upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, except when turning left, when avoiding hazards to safe cycling, when the lane is too narrow to share safely with a motor vehicle, when traveling at the same speed as traffic, or while exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction; provided, however, that every driver shall exercise reasonable care and shall give due consideration to the other applicable rules of the road. 
(b)  Pedicabs shall be prohibited from stopping in traffic or delaying any on-street traffic for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or for any other purposes. 
(c)  Every driver shall be subject to the provisions of this article and shall operate his or her pedicab in accordance with the traffic laws of the State of Georgia and the city. 
(d)  Pedicabs shall be operated with caution and due care for safety at all times, and drivers shall take extra precautions in areas of congestion or heavy traffic. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-248. - Compliance required. 
Failure to comply with this article or any of the laws, ordinances, and regulations of the city can result in suspension or revocation of a pedicab driver's permit and shall be punishable as an offense as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-249. - Horse-drawn carriage. 
The operation of a horse-drawn carriage is expressly prohibited within the corporate limits of the city except for those participating a parade, procession, or for ceremonial purposes, as approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-250. - Exemptions. 
The city and all affiliates thereof, joined by county, state, and federal governments, are expressly exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Sec. 22-251. - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the pedicab license or driver's permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 4962, 2-12-2018)  
Secs. 22-252—22-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SHORT-TERM RENTALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5641-2019, Exh. A, adopted Feb. 25, 2019, set out provisions intended for use as Art. VIII, §§ 22-250—22-258. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been included as Art. IX, §§ 22-261—22-269 at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 22-261. - Intent; purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of individuals and the community at large; to monitor and provide reasonable means for citizens to mitigate impacts created by occupancy of short-term units; and to implement rationally based, reasonably tailored regulations to protect the integrity of the city's neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 5641-2019, Exh. A, 2-25-2019)  
Sec. 22-262. - Definitions; general provisions. 
Code compliance verification form is a document executed by a short-term unit owner certifying that the short-term unit complies with applicable zoning, building, health and life safety code provisions. No person shall allow occupancy or possession of any short-term rental unit if the premises are in violation of any applicable zoning, building, health or life safety code provisions. 
Short-term rental agent means a natural person designated by the owner of a short-term rental on the short-term rental certificate application. Such person shall be available for and responsive to contact at all times and someone who is customarily present at a location within the city for purposes of transacting business. 
Short-term rental certificate is the certificate issued by the development services division to applicants who have submitted the required documentation and met the requirements set for in this article for the operation of a short-term rental. 
Short-term rental occupants means guests, tourists, lessees, vacationers or any other person who, in exchange for compensation, occupy a dwelling unit for lodging for a period of time not to exceed 30 consecutive days. 
Short-term rental unit means an accommodation for transient guests where, in exchange for compensation, a residential dwelling unit, either the primary structure or any approved accessory dwelling is provided for lodging for a period of time not to exceed 30 consecutive days. Such use may or may not include an on-site manager. For the purposes of this definition, a residential dwelling shall include all single family and multi-family housing types with no more than five bedrooms offered for rent and shall exclude group living or other lodging uses, as defined in chapter 2 of the land development ordinance and regulated separately throughout this Code. A motor vehicle as defined in O.C.G.A. Title 40 may not be used as a short-term rental. 
(Ord. No. 5641-2019, Exh. A, 2-25-2019)  
Sec. 22-263. - Short-term rental certificate. 
No person shall rent, lease or otherwise exchange for compensation all or any portion of a dwelling unit as short-term rental, as defined in section 22-262, without first obtaining a short-term rental certificate pursuant to the regulations contained in this article and then obtaining a home occupation license from the development services division. No certificate issued under this chapter may be transferred or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued, or at any location other than the one for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 5641-2019, Exh. A, 2-25-2019)  
Sec. 22-264. - Application for short-term rental certificate. 
(a)  Applicants for a short-term rental certificate shall submit, on an annual basis, an addendum to the home occupation license provided by the city for a short-term rental certificate to the development services division. The application shall be furnished under oath on a form specified by the city manager. Such application should include: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone and email address of the owner(s) of record that hold more than 20 percent ownership of the dwelling unit for which a certificate is sought. If such owner is not a natural person, the application shall identify all partners, officers and/or directors that hold more than 20 percent ownership of the dwelling unit or which a certificate is sought, including personal contact information; 
(2)  The address of the unit to be used as a short-term rental; 
(3)  The name, address, telephone number and email address of the short-term rental agent, which shall constitute his or her 24-hour contact information; 
(4)  The owner's sworn acknowledgement that he or she has received a copy of this section, has reviewed it and understands its requirements; 
(5)  The number and location of parking spaces allotted to the premises as determined by residential parking requirements in section 7.511 of the city's land development ordinance; required parking spaces must be located on the same property as the short-term rental, parking not owned by the short-term rental shall not be used to meet this requirement; 
(6)  The owner's agreement to use his or her best efforts to assure that use of the premises by short-term rental occupants will not disrupt the neighborhood, and will not interfere with the rights of neighboring property owners to the quiet enjoyment of their properties; and 
(7)  Any other information that this chapter requires the owner to provide to the city as part of an application for a short-term rental certificate. The city manager or his or her designee shall have the authority to obtain additional information from the applicant as necessary to achieve the objectives of this chapter. 
(8)  If applicable, a written statement from the home owner's association where the short-term rental is located state that the HOA does not prohibit short-term rentals in accordance with its bylaws. 
(b)  Attached to and concurrent with submission of the application described in this section, the owner shall provide: 
(1)  A written exemplar agreement, which shall consist of the form of document to be executed between the owner and occupant(s) and which shall contain the following provisions: 
a.  The occupant(s)' agreement to abide by all of the requirements of this chapter, any other city ordinances, state and federal law and acknowledgement that his or her rights under the agreement may not be transferred or assigned to anyone else; 
b.  The occupant(s)' acknowledgement that it shall be unlawful to allow or make any noise or sound that exceeds the limits set forth in the city's noise ordinance; and 
c.  The occupant(s)' acknowledgement and agreement that violation of the agreement or this chapter may result in immediate termination of the agreement and eviction from the short-term rental unit by the owner or agent, as well as the potential liability for payments of fines levied by the city. 
(2)  Proof of the owner's current ownership of the short-term rental unit; 
(3)  Proof of insurance satisfactory in accordance with administrative guidelines published by the city; and 
(4)  A written certification from the short-term agent that he or she agrees to perform the duties specified in section 22-265. 
(c)  Certificate holder shall publish a short-term rental certificate number in every print, digital, or internet advertisement and any property listing in which the short-term rental is advertised. 
(Ord. No. 5641-2019, Exh. A, 2-25-2019)  
Sec. 22-265. - Short-term rental agent. 
(a)  The owner of a short-term rental shall designate a short-term rental agent on its application for a short-term rental certificate. A property owner may serve as the short-term rental agent. Alternatively, the owner may designate a representative as his or her agent who is over age 18. 
(b)  The duties of the short-term rental agent are to: 
(1)  Be reasonably available to handle any problems arising from use of the short-term rental unit; 
(2)  Appear on the premises of any short-term rental unit within two hours following notification from the city of issues related to the use or occupancy of the premises. This includes, but is not limited to, notification that occupants of the short-term rental unit have created unreasonable noise or disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct or committed violations of this Code or other applicable law pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct, overcrowding, consumption of alcohol or use of illegal drugs. Failure of the agent to timely appear to two or more complaints regarding violations may be grounds for penalties as set forth in this chapter. This is not intended to impose a duty to act as a peace officer or otherwise require the agent to place himself or herself in a perilous situation; 
(3)  Receive and accept service of any notice of violation related to the use or occupancy of the premises; and 
(4)  Monitor the short-term rental unit for compliance with this chapter. 
(c)  In the event the short-term rental agent is replaced by another agent, the owner will apply for a new short-term rental certificate with the correct short-term rental agent designated within 30 days of such change. 
(Ord. No. 5641-2019, Exh. A, 2-25-2019)  
Sec. 22-266. - Grant or denial of application. 
Review of an application shall be conducted within two days and shall be granted unless the applicant fails to meet the conditions and requirements of this chapter, or otherwise fails to demonstrate the ability to comply with local, state or federal law. Any false statements or information provided in the application are grounds for revocation, suspension and/or imposition of penalties, including denial of future applications. 
(Ord. No. 5641-2019, Exh. A, 2-25-2019)  
Sec. 22-267. - Short-term rental units. 
(a)  A legible copy of the short-term rental unit certificate shall be posted within the unit and include all of the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number and email address of the short-term rental agent: 
(2)  The occupational tax certificate number; 
(3)  The maximum occupancy of the unit; 
(4)  The maximum number of vehicles that may be parked at the unit as determined at the issuance of the certificate; and 
(b)  Short-term rental units must be properly maintained and regularly inspected by the owner to ensure continued compliance with applicable zoning, building, health and life safety code provisions. 
(Ord. No. 5641-2019, Exh. A, 2-25-2019)  
Sec. 22-268. - Short-term regulation procedure. 
(a)  To ensure the continued application of the intent and purpose of this chapter, the development services division shall notify the owner of a short-term rental unit of all instances in which nuisance behavior of the rental guest or the conduct of his or her short-term rental unit agent results in a citation for a code violation or other legal infraction. 
(b)  The development services division shall maintain for each short-term rental location file a record of all code violation charges, founded accusations and convictions occurring at or relating to a short-term rental unit. When a property owner has accumulated three code violations for a particular property within a period of 12 consecutive months, the city shall revoke any pending certificates and reject all applications for the subject premises for a period of 12 consecutive months. 
(c)  If a short-term rental unit owner has been cited and found to be in violation of any zoning, building, health or life safety code provision, the owner must demonstrate compliance with the applicable code prior to being eligible to receive a short-term rental certificate. 
(d)  Citations for code violations and any other violation of the city code shall be issued to the short-term rental owner or its designated agent if the violation is a violation caused by the short-term rental owner and to the tenant if the violation is a violation caused by the tenant, unless otherwise specified in this article, and shall be heard by the municipal court of Woodstock, Georgia. Violations of this chapter, including but not limited to operating a short-term rental unit without obtaining a short-term rental certificate and a home occupational tax license are subject to the following fines, which may not be waived or reduced and which may be combined with any other legal remedy available to the city: 
(1)  First violation: $500.00. 
(2)  Second violation within the preceding 12 months: $750.00. 
(3)  Third violation within the preceding 12 months: $1,000.00. 
(e)  A certificate granted under this article shall be subject to denial, revocation or suspension. Whenever, in the opinion of the city manager, there is cause to revoke or suspend the certificate, a written notice of intention to revoke or suspend the certificate shall be furnished to the holder thereof. A hearing will be scheduled wherein the certificate holder may present his case before the mayor and council. Within ten days from the suspension or revocation, the certificate holder may appeal directly to the city manager. The appeal shall be in writing, setting forth the circumstances for the appeal. Upon receipt of the appeal, the city manager shall docket a hearing on the agenda of the mayor and city council to occur at a regular meeting within 45 days from the receipt of the appeal by the city manager. After the hearing, the mayor and city council may deny, revoke or suspend the certificate if, in their discretion, denial, revocation or suspension is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall limit the city from enforcement of its Code, state or federal law by any other legal remedy available to the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or supplant the power of any city inspector, police officer, or other duly empowered officer under the city's ordinances, rules and regulations and the authority granted under state law, as amended, to take necessary action, consistent with the law, to protect the public from property which constitutes a public nuisance or to abate a nuisance by any other lawful means of proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 5641-2019, Exh. A, 2-25-2019)  
Sec. 22-269. - Taxes. 
Short-term rental unit owners are subject to state sales tax, city taxes, including but not limited to the hotel/motel tax, and are liable for payment thereof as established by state law and the city code. The city may seek to enforce payment of all applicable taxes to the extent provided by law, including injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 5641-2019, Exh. A, 2-25-2019)  
Chapter 26 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Establishment and operation of municipal court, art. IV. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Municipal courts established, maintained and operated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Time and place for holding court. 
The municipal court shall be held at such times and places as the judge may designate, with the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-1) 
Charter reference— Convening court, § 4.12.  
Sec. 26-2. - Contents of copies of charges. 
All copies of charges requiring persons to appear in the municipal court shall be properly dated the day they are issued, and shall be signed by the officer making the case, and shall notify the person summoned of the day and hour for his appearance and the charges against the accused. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-2)  
Sec. 26-3. - Service of summons. 
(a)  Any person charged with violating any city ordinance shall receive notice by service of a summons. Such summons may be issued by the clerk of court, the building inspector, the fire marshal or designee or any city police officer. 
(b)  The summons shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, and the day, hour and place of trial. The summons shall require the accused to appear before the municipal court judge to answer the accusation made. 
(c)  Service of the summons shall be made by a police officer of the city either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his residence or by certified mail to the last known address. However, where a summons is issued for a violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons may be directed to an unknown person as owner of a vehicle designated in the summons and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such vehicle. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-3; Ord. of 7-28-2014, § 1(Att.); Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Charter reference— Rules of court, § 4.15.  
Sec. 26-4. - Subpoenas. 
The clerk of court shall issue subpoenas for the appearance of all witnesses necessary for the prosecution or for the defense in any case pending before the municipal court. All subpoenas shall be served in the same manner as a summons. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-4) 
Charter reference— Rules of court, § 4.15.  
Sec. 26-5. - Contempt for failure to appear. 
(a)  Any person summoned as provided in this chapter who shall fail, neglect or refuse to appear, or to make a satisfactory showing for such failure, neglect or refusal to appear and answer the charge specified, may be punished pursuant to section 1-7. The case may be continued to such time as the municipal court may direct, and the court shall issue an order requiring the chief of police, or other member of the police force, to arrest the offender and bring him before the court to answer the contempt, and it shall be the duty of such police chief to keep the offender in custody until he is brought before the court, unless he gives bond for his appearance as provided by law. 
(b)  If any person summoned or subpoenaed as a witness shall fail, neglect or refuse to attend the trial; or render an excuse, sufficient in the judgement of the judge, the defaulting witness shall be liable to such punishment for contempt. If the case shall be continued on account of the absence of the witness, the court may issue attachment against the witness, requiring him to show cause on the day appointed for trial why he should not be further dealt with for contempt. The chief of police shall, by virtue of the attachment, arrest such witness, or cause him to be arrested by some other officer or police officer, and shall confine him, so as to have him before the judge at such time as may be appointed for further hearing of the original complaint. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-5) 
Charter reference— Jurisdiction of court, § 4.13.  
Sec. 26-6. - Punishment for contempt. 
Any person who, during a session of the municipal court, shall be guilty of a contempt of court, or who refuses to abide by any sentence or order of the court, shall be punished pursuant to section 1-7. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-6) 
State Law reference— Sentence and fines imposed, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.  
Sec. 26-7. - Docket; required. 
A record of all cases heard in the municipal court for violation of this chapter or other municipal ordinances shall be kept by the court clerk. Such record shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final disposition of the case, and the date of final disposition. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-7)  
Sec. 26-8. - Court costs. 
The costs in all cases tried before the municipal court shall be set at the discretion of the judge or by resolution of the city council. The costs may be charged and collected from the defendant upon conviction or forfeiture at the discretion of the judge. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-8) 
State Law reference— Payments made from fines and bonds to peace officers' annuity and benefit fund and such other fund as required by the state code, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60.  
Sec. 26-9. - Appearance bonds. 
(a)  When a police officer has arrested any person for violation of any provision of this Code or any municipal ordinance and a trial cannot be had immediately, the officer shall transport the offender to the city hall where the court clerk, or a designee, may take a cash bond not exceeding the maximum fine for the offense, or a bond not exceeding the maximum fine for the offense, or a bond by an acceptable bonding company, for the appearance of such person. 
(b)  If any arrested person shall fail to give the bond and security required of him, the officer may confine him in the county jail until a trial can be held, provided that the municipal court judge, in his discretion, may release such person on his own recognizance without security. 
(c)  The police department shall have on file a list of recommended cash bonds for offenders. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-9) 
State Law reference— Acceptance of cash bonds authorized, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-10.  
Sec. 26-10. - Forfeiture. 
(a)  Bond forfeiture occurs at the end of the court day upon the failure of appearance of a principal of any bond or recognizance given for the appearance of that person. 
(b)  The judge shall, at the end of the court day, upon the failure of the principal to appear, forfeit the bond and order an execution hearing not sooner than 120 days but not later than 150 days after such failure to appear. Notice of the execution hearing shall be served within ten days of such failure to appear by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the surety at the address listed on the bond or by personal service to the surety within ten days of such failure to appear at its home office or to its designated registered agent. Service shall be considered complete upon the mailing of such certified notice. 
(c)  An appearance bond shall not be forfeited unless the clerk of the court gave the surety at least 72 hours' written notice, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, before the time of the required appearance of the principal. Notice shall not be necessary if the time for appearance is within 72 hours from the time of arrest, provided the time for appearance is stated on the bond, or where the principal is given actual notice in open court. 
(d)  If at the execution hearing it is determined that judgment should be entered, the judge shall so order and a writ of fieri facias shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the court where such judgment is entered. 
State Law reference— Acceptance of cash bonds for ordinance violation, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-10; when forfeiture occurs, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70; execution hearing on failure of principal to appear, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-71. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-10)  
Sec. 26-11. - Collection of fines; execution. 
When directed by the judge, the clerk of court shall issue executions for fines imposed by the court, including costs. The executions may be levied upon any real or personal property of the person so fined. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-11)  
Sec. 26-12. - Minimum fines and costs (progressive fine system). 
(a)  The minimum fine to be imposed upon any person convicted of an offense in the municipal court shall be $50.00, provided that person has not been convicted of a previous offense either within or without the city, within two years of the date of the offense. If a person has been convicted of one previous offense within two years of the date of the offense for which the city is imposing a fine, then the minimum fine shall be $100.00. If a person has been convicted of more than one offense in the two-year period prior to the date of the offense for which the city is imposing a fine, then the total number of such offenses shall be added to the offense for which the city is imposing a fine and multiplied by the minimum fine of $50.00 to determine the minimum fine to be imposed upon that person. For example, if a person had three prior convictions within the two-year period and was convicted of an additional offense, the minimum fine will be $200.00, or four times $50.00. 
(b)  The minimum costs to be imposed for conviction of an offense shall be $10.00 for court costs. Five dollars of such costs shall be deposited into the police officer's annuity fund and $5.00 shall be retained by the city for its expenses incurred. 
(c)  The maximum fine which may be imposed for an offense shall be $1,000.00. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit the discretion of the judge of the court to impose fines in excess of the minimum so long as such fines do not exceed the maximum allowed in this section. Further, whenever in the Code of Ordinances of the city a specific fine has been set forth in excess of the minimum fine, the greater fine shall be imposed, but whenever in this Code of Ordinances the mayor and council have set forth a lesser fine than that imposed by this chapter, then this chapter shall prevail and the greater fine set forth in this chapter shall be imposed. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-12; Ord. No. 89-06-26, 6-26-1989; Ord. No. 90-04-23, 4-23-1990; Ord. of 5-9-2006; Ord. of 10-9-2017) 
Charter reference— Jurisdiction of court, § 4.13. 
State Law reference— Maximum punishments authorized for municipal court, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-30-8, 36-32-1, 36-35-6.  
Sec. 26-13. - Regulations and requirements for bail bonding. 
(a)  Professional bondsmen. The following provisions govern and must be adhered to by all bonding companies seeking approval to do business in the city. 
(1)  Each applicant shall submit the following applications to the chief of police's office: 
a.  A completed application for bondsman. This application requests information in regard to the overall operation of a bonding business. 
b.  A completed application for bonding company employees. This application requests personal information from the applicant in order that a background investigation on the applicant can be conducted. Any individual who will have power of attorney extended for the purpose of writing bonds must submit the above described applications. 
(2)  The applicant must also comply with all of the requirements enumerated below: 
a.  Qualifications: 
1.  No person shall be permitted to sign professional bonds or act as an agent or representative of a bonding company if such person: 
i.  Has been convicted of a felony offense; 
ii.  Has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
iii.  Has failed to meet bonding obligations in the city or any other county in the state or elsewhere; or 
iv.  Fails to qualify as a bondsman under applicable state statutes governing who may act in such a capacity. 
2.  No person shall be permitted to write professional bonds which are prohibited as a matter of law. 
3.  Persons employed by an agency having access to criminal history information, or persons related to those having such access, will not be permitted to operate, own an interest in, or act in any capacity as an agent for a professional bonding company. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "persons related" shall include spouses, children, stepchildren, parents, stepparents, grandparents, brothers, sisters, stepbrothers, stepsisters and first cousins. If this provision is violated, the approved bonding company's privileges shall be suspended and/or revoked until such time as the conflict is remedied and such persons are no longer affiliated with the bonding company. 
4.  These provisions in no way prohibit the city or its authorized agents from establishing additional standards with which bonding companies must comply, nor does it in any way limit the city's legal right to regulate the privilege of writing bail bonds. 
b.  Conditions: 
1.  Applicants seeking permission to act as professional bondsmen in the city must qualify as follows: Applicants must sign an agreement with the city providing for an escrow account in any one or more financial institutions designated as city depositories. This escrow shall be ten percent of that company's bonding capacity and shall not be less than $20,000.00. If this escrow is encroached upon for any reason or if the municipal court clerk otherwise determines that additional escrow are required to insure the solvency or reliability of the professional bonding business, the city may amend the escrow through written notice to the professional bonding business as provided in these regulations and this agreement. 
2.  The president of a corporation operating a professional bonding business in the city shall provide the city the names of all partners, officers, stockholders and any other person or corporation having an interest in or involved with the business of the corporation. This information shall be provided prior to the bonding company initiating business. The bonding company shall immediately notify the municipal court clerk of any changes of ownership or direction. Failure of the corporation to comply with these provisions shall result in the immediate suspension of bonding privileges. 
3.  All employees and/or owners of a professional bonding company must be fingerprinted and photographed by the city police department. 
4.  Each employee of a bonding company must file a properly executed power of attorney from that bonding company. 
5.  Professional bonding companies must receive the approval of the chief of police or the municipal court clerk prior to posting a bond or any combination of bonds which total $25,000.00 or more, for any one individual. 
c.  No professional bonding company may sign a bond in which another bonding company or third party receives compensation to arrange the release of an inmate from the custody of the city. 
d.  All bonding companies shall file with the municipal court clerk a monthly report. These reports shall include the following information and shall be filed in the form of an affidavit: 
1.  List by name, in alphabetical order, amount and date of bonds signed during each month. 
2.  List by name, in alphabetical order, case or indictment number and date of all bonds officially written in the city and/or other local governments subject to collection in the city. 
3.  List by name, amount and date of bond, all judgments rendered by the state and/or superior court of the county and/or other counties subject to collection in the county. 
4.  List by name, amount and date of bond all forfeitures pending in the city and/or other local governments subject to collection in the city. 
5.  List personnel in the employment of the submitting bonding company. 
6.  The report shall be filed with the municipal court clerk on or before the tenth calendar day of each month. 
(b)  State statutes governing professional bondsmen. Bondsmen shall comply with all applicable state statutes which control bonding procedures within the state. 
(c)  Individual bondsmen. The sheriff of the county may allow an individual property owner to sign a bail bond under the following conditions: 
(1)  The individual must own real property in the county. 
(2)  The individual must prove ownership of such real property by either: 
a.  A current tax receipt; or 
b.  A copy of a warranty deed. Neither deeds to secure debt nor warranty deeds which fail to transfer full interest in a described piece of property will be accepted. 
(3)  The individual must sign an affidavit that he has equity in the property of at least twice the amount of the bail bond, excluding homestead exemption on each bond written. 
(4)  Individual bondsmen may not receive any compensation, gift or collateral for making or signing a defendant's bond. 
(d)  Cash bail. A defendant or other person may deposit with the municipal court clerk the full amount of the bond to insure the defendant's appearance in court as directed by the court. This deposit will be returned to the person and/or surety upon proof by the surety that the defendant's case has been completed in court and that all legal obligations have been met by the surety. A surety may reclaim his deposit prior to the court appearance date for the defendant by surrendering the defendant to the jail designated by the municipal court and obtaining a receipt therefor from the chief jailer or his authorized deputy. The judge or clerk of the municipal court, or his authorized agent, may then return, or cause to be returned, the full amount of the cash bond provided the city does not have any accrued costs. 
(e)  Violations of law, agreements by bondsmen. Any violation of any law, agreement or condition set forth in these rules and regulations by a bondsman will result in a revocation of his right to sign bonds. Furthermore, any report furnished to the municipal court clerk of a violation of the law will result in an investigation by the chief of police's office. Information will be forwarded to the solicitor's or district attorney's office for further investigation and criminal prosecution whenever it appears there has been a violation of law. 
(f)  Approved bonds from other counties. 
(1)  The municipal court may accept an individual property bond from another county that has been approved by the sheriff of that county. This will be an exception to any general rule in view of the fact that the sheriff of the other county shall be responsible to the municipal court and the municipal court is not the originating guarantor on the bond. Upon release, the defendant may be required to report to the jail designated by the municipal court within 72 hours of his release and there be photographed and fingerprinted. 
(2)  The municipal court clerk will not approve bonds returnable to any jurisdiction other than the Blue Ridge Judicial Circuit tendered by a professional bonding company. Any professional bonding company desiring to sign a bond returnable to a jurisdiction other than the Blue Ridge Judicial Circuit must seek approval from the sheriff of the county to which the bond is returnable. 
(3)  The city will not accept approved bonds from another county signed by a professional bonding company which is not approved to do business in the city. 
Any professional bonding company desiring to sign bonds to be returnable to the Blue Ridge Judicial Circuit must comply with local regulations governing professional bondsmen. 
(Code 1989, § 2-4-13; Ord. No. 93-07-12, 7-12-1993; Ord. No. 97-03-25, 3-25-1997) 
Charter reference— General powers, § 1.14; exercise of power, § 1.16; ordinances, § 1.17. 
State Law reference— Professional bondsmen, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-50 et seq.  
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, art. V. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Applicability of state rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations promulgated by the state election board which pertain to municipal elections, together with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Code contained in O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.), shall govern the conduct of municipal, general and special elections in the city. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1989, § 2-2-1)  
Sec. 30-2. - Expenses. 
Such funds as are necessary for the conduct of elections and for the performance of the duties that are specified by this chapter shall be budgeted and appropriated annually, and from time to time. 
(Code 1989, § 2-2-2)  
Sec. 30-3. - Election officials. 
The city council shall by resolution annually appoint a municipal election superintendent, election managers, registrars, absentee ballot clerk and any other officials as are necessary, all of whom shall exercise those qualifications, powers and duties set forth in the Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1989, § 2-2-3) 
State Law reference— Power and duty of superintendent, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-70; appointment of chief manager and assistant, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-90; qualification of registrars, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-214; appointment of absentee ballot clerk, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-380.1.  
Sec. 30-4. - Voter registration deadline. 
The deadline for registration of voters in city elections shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-224. 
(Code 1989, § 2-2-11)  
Sec. 30-5. - Notice of candidacy. 
Notice of candidacy shall be completed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132. 
(Code 1989, § 2-2-21) 
Charter reference— Qualifying, nomination of candidates, § 5.12. 
State Law reference— Filing notice of candidacy, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132.  
Sec. 30-6. - Qualification fees. 
Qualification fees will be established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
(Code 1989, § 2-2-22) 
State Law reference— Fixing and publishing of qualification fees, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131.  
Sec. 30-7. - Campaign financing disclosure. 
All candidates for municipal public office shall keep all such records and file all such reports as are required by the Georgia Campaign and Financial Disclosure Act. 
(Code 1989, § 2-2-23) 
State Law reference— Contributions made to candidates, records and reports required, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-30.  
Sec. 30-8. - Polling place. 
The polling place for city elections shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1989, § 2-2-31) 
Charter reference— Division of city into six wards, § 5.20. 
State Law reference— Polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-260.  
Sec. 30-9. - Write-in votes. 
Write-in votes shall be used in all municipal elections, except that no write-in votes shall be counted in a primary, runoff primary or runoff election. 
(Code 1989, § 2-2-32) 
State Law reference— Limitation of write-in vote, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-133; procedures for marking ballots, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-435; write-in votes permitted, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-358; write-in vote secrecy, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-373.  
Sec. 30-10. - Absentee ballots. 
Absentee ballots shall be used in all municipal elections, and such use shall be governed by the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 21, ch. 2, art. 10 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-380 et seq.). 
(Code 1989, § 2-2-33)  
Sec. 30-11. - Vote required for election. 
Candidates for nomination for any public municipal office in any general or special election shall be nominated or elected by a majority of the votes cast to fill such nomination for public office. 
(Code 1989, § 2-2-34) 
Charter reference— Majority determines election, § 5.10.  
Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27, all cities with a population greater than 1,000 are required to have an emergency management plan. Woodstock participates in the Cherokee County plan and organization. 
Charter reference— Other emergency powers of mayor, § 1.13(43). 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— The Georgia Emergency Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Power of mayor, mayor pro tem or designee to declare existence of emergency. 
The mayor, mayor pro tem or his designee shall have the right to declare the existence of an emergency when, in his opinion, one or more of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  An extreme likelihood of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions. 
(2)  Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of city streets or areas difficult or impossible. 
(3)  Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists. 
(4)  A stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-31) 
Charter reference— Duties of mayor, § 2.17; mayor pro tem, § 2.19; emergency ordinances, § 2.35.  
Sec. 34-2. - Powers of mayor, mayor pro tem or designee after declaration of emergency. 
After declaration of an emergency, the mayor, mayor pro tem or his designee shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
(1)  The power to use city employees to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of city citizens; 
(2)  The power to close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city where an emergency exists; 
(3)  The power to impose emergency curfew regulations; 
(4)  The power to close business establishments within the affected areas; 
(5)  The power to close any and all municipally owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public; and 
(6)  The power to do any and all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property of city citizens, including, but not limited to, waiving permit fees, license fees and other fees. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-32; Ord. No. 94-11-08, 11-8-1994) 
Charter reference— Duties of mayor, § 2.17; mayor pro tem, § 2.19; emergency ordinances, § 2.35.  
Sec. 34-3. - Limitation of emergency powers. 
(a)  No emergency power as set forth in this chapter may be effective for more than 72 hours after declaration of an emergency by the mayor, mayor pro tem or his designee, unless declaration of a second or further emergencies is declared. In this event, the emergency powers as set forth in this chapter may be exercised up to an additional 72 hours per emergency period. 
(b)  No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular, special or called meeting of the city council. 
(c)  The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
(Code 1989, § 2-1-33; Ord. No. 94-11-08, 11-8-1994) 
Charter reference— Duties of mayor, § 2.17; mayor pro tem, § 2.19; emergency ordinances, § 2.35.  
Sec. 34-4. - Declaration of water conservation measures during emergencies. 
The city manager, or his designee, with the authorization of the city council on a case-by-case basis, is empowered to implement special water conservation measures during emergency conditions. Emergency conditions include times of drought; low stream flows; interruptions in the raw water supply due to breaks or contamination; inability of the filter plants to meet demand; excessive losses or demands in the distribution system due to breaks, fires or other causes; contamination in the finished water; or any other purpose for which the curtailed use of water might be reasonably required in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare as determined by the city council. The water conservation measures may include restrictions or prohibitions on nonessential uses such as swimming pool filling; watering of lawns and gardens; washing of motor vehicles; recreational uses; and other uses which the city manager, or his designee, may deem to be nonessential. The type, nature, degree, commencement and duration of restrictions or prohibitions is to be determined by the city manager, or his designee, as directed by the city council. The existence of restrictions or prohibitions imposed under the dictates of this section shall be published weekly in the county organ in the nonlegal section setting forth the specific nature of the restrictions or prohibitions; the reasons why the restrictions or prohibitions became or will become effective; and, at the appropriate time, the date upon which the restrictions or prohibitions are rescinded. The publication shall continue weekly until such time as the emergency is past and the restrictions or prohibitions are rescinded. The restrictions or prohibitions shall become effective no sooner than the first day following the publication date of the first notice. 
(Ord. No. 00-08-11, 8-11-2000)  
Sec. 34-5. - Water ban violations. 
Special powers are hereby given to the city manager, as authorized by the city council, to curtail water usage during emergency conditions, as mandated now or as hereafter amended by the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD). City of Woodstock, Georgia, water customers shall comply with mandatory outdoor watering restrictions. 
This section institutes fines for violators of the mandatory outdoor watering restrictions instituties by the Georgia EPD as enforced by the city: 
First offense ..... Warning 
Second offense ..... $500.00 
Third offense ..... Mandatory 
court appearance and up to $1,000.00 fine. May also include loss of service, which will result in additional service fees for reconnection or reinstallation. 
(Ord. No. 05-06-22, 6-22-2005; Ord. No. 021-2007, § 1, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 2008-0013, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 34-6. - Joint city/county emergency management ordinance. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the President of the United States. 
Emergency means any natural or manmade even requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade of natural origin"... "These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services; police services [public safety]; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken area; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; [nuclear power] plant protection; temporary restoration of public service utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions." (OCGA Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, As Amended December 1992, Chapter 3, Article 1 38-3-3.) 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the governor to head the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
(b)  Local organization for emergency management. In agreement with the governing officials of the cities within the county, there is hereby established the Cherokee County, Georgia Emergency Management Agency. The chairperson of the Cherokee County, Georgia County Commissioners, has given the authority for the emergency management program to the Cherokee County Georgia Sheriff effective August 16, 2005. The Cherokee County Sheriff with the concurrence of the Cherokee County Board of Commissioners and officials of the cities within the county, shall nominate, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of the Cherokee County, Georgia Emergency Management Agency. Upon appointment, the local emergency management director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the Cherokee County, Georgia Sheriff and shall serve at the pleasure of such executive officer or governing body. The director of the Cherokee County, Georgia Emergency management Agency shall also serve as the single point of contact for the NIMS/ICS program. When appointed, the local emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist local officials in organizing county departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the Cherokee County, Georgia Emergency Operations Plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the Georgia Emergency Operations Plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of Cherokee County, Georgia and the cities within the county for approval, and thence to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the Emergency Management Agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the Cherokee County, Georgia emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g. financial, daily activities, etc. 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the Cherokee County, Georgia Emergency Operations Center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the Cherokee County Emergency Operating Staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of the Cherokee County Sheriff. 
(c)  Cherokee County Emergency Management Agency. The Cherokee County, Georgia Emergency Management Agency shall be established around existing county and city departments. The emergency support functions, (ESFs) and department/agency assignments are as follows: (Department/Agency assignment listed below are examples only. It is the responsibility of local governments to make assignments based upon local capabilities.) 
Emergency Support Functions (ESF) 	Department/Agency* 
1. TRANSPORTATION 	(P/S) County Road Dept. 
	(P/S) City Public Works 
2. COMMUNICATIONS 	(P) County 911/Dispatch 
	(S) Emergency Management 
3. PUBLIC WORKS & ENGINEERING 	(P/S) County Road Dept. 
	(P/S) City Public Works 
4. FIREFIGHTING 	(P/S) County Fire Department 
	(P/S) City Fire Department 
5. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 	(P) County Emergency Management Agency 
	(S) Cherokee Sheriff 
6. MASS CARE, HOUSING, & HUMAN SERVICES 	(P) County DFACS 
	(S) Red Cross Chapter 
7. RESOURCE SUPPORT 	(P) County Emergency Management 
	(S) County/City Government 
8. PUBLIC HEALTH & MEDICAL SERVICES 	(P) County Public Health 
	(S) Local Hospital(s) 
9. SEARCH & RESCUE 	(P/S) County Fire Department 
	(P/S) City Fire/Rescue 
10. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 	(P/S) County Fire Department 
	(P/S) City Fire Department 
11. AGRICULTURAL & NATURAL RESOURCES 	(P) County Extension Agent 
	(S) County Emergency Management Agency 
12. ENERGY 	(P) County Emergency Management Agency 
	(S) Local Utilities 
13. PUBLIC SAFETY & SECURITY SERVICES 	(P/S) County Sheriff 
	(P/S) City Police Department 
14. LONG TERM RECOVERY & MITIGATION 	(P) County Emergency Management Agency 
	(S) County Government 
15. EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 	(P/S) County Government (PIO) 
	(P/S) City Government (PIO) 
(* As appropriate to the local organization, these functions can be assigned to existing departments or may be separate. Functions should be assigned consistent with the local emergency operations plan.) 
 
Heads of county departments listed above are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to the emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes and/or SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(d)  Powers during an emergency or disaster. In the event of a manmade or natural disaster or any other emergency which may effect the lives and property of the citizens of Cherokee County, Georgia the Chairperson for the Cherokee County, Georgia Commissioners separately, or jointly with the Mayor of Cherokee County City(ies), or in their absence their legally appointed successors may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes; 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting from man-made or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies; 
(3)  To appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs of services, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and other emergency management workers; 
(4)  To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster; 
(5)  Subject to the order of the governor or the chief executive of the political subdivision, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the subdivision relating to fire-fighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the subdivision; 
(6)  In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or otherwise, sites required for installation or temporary housing units for disaster victims; and to enter into whatever arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payment of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units. 
State Law reference— (OCGA, Georgia Emergency Management Act 1981 as Amended Chapter 3, Article 2, 38-3-27.) 
(e)  Volunteers. All persons, other than officers and employees of Cherokee County, Georgia performing emergency functions pursuant to this resolution/ordinance, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. (Chapter 3, Article 2, 38-3-35.) 
(f)  Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as a misdemeanor. 
(g)  Liberality of construction. This resolution/ordinance shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0017, 7-28-2008)  
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, adopted Feb. 24, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 38, §§ 38-1—38-82, and enacted a new Ch. 38 as set out herein. The former Ch. 38 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of June 20, 2011, § 1; and Mar. 11, 2013. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; dangerous dogs, § 14-141 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 46; land development code, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 62; planning, ch. 74; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to exercise the police power in relation to public nuisances and abatement of such nuisances, to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to promote the economic development of the city. It is also the purpose of this chapter to prevent and prohibit those conditions which reduce the value of private property, interfere with enjoyment of public and private property, create and constitute fire and other safety and health hazards, and generally create a menace to the health and welfare of the public and contribute to the degradation of the character of neighborhoods and depreciation of property values. It is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare to regulate, prevent and prohibit conditions which may constitute disorderly, disturbing, unsafe, unsanitary, fly-producing, rat-harboring and/or disease-causing places, conditions or objects. It is also necessary for the public social and economic welfare to regulate, prevent and prohibit conditions that degrade the city's scenic attractiveness and livability and its economic development. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Secs. 38-2—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES 
 
Sec. 38-31. - Conditions constituting a nuisance. 
For the purposes of this article, the existence or accumulation of any combination of the following conditions or things on lands within the city is hereby declared and defined to be a "nuisance and menace to public health, safety and welfare": 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public; 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like located outside of an enclosed structure; 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
(12)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-32. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Graffiti shall mean any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any public or private building, structures, places or property without prior authorization, in accordance with all ordinances of the city, by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, chalk, dye, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark. 
Graffiti abatement shall mean the abatement procedure that identifies graffiti, issues notices to the landowner to abate the graffiti, and cures or removes such graffiti in absence of a response. 
Gum label shall mean any substance consisting of a material such as, but not limited to, paper, fabric, cloth, plastic, vinyl and/or any other similar material, where the material also contains one or more surfaces containing a substance such as, but not limited to, any material commonly known as an adhesive or glue, which cannot be removed from the surface in an intact condition and with minimal efforts, including, but not limited to, decals, stickers, patches, stamps, or labels. 
Private contractor shall mean any person with whom the City of Woodstock, Georgia shall have contracted to remove graffiti. 
(b)  Findings; nuisance. The city council finds that graffiti is a public nuisance and is destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. Unless the city acts quickly to require the removal of graffiti from public and private property, the graffiti tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti, entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in which to be, all to the detriment of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, and its residents. Further the city finds that rapid or prompt removal (less than 72 hours) serves as a deterrent to future defacement and such defacement is less likely to reappear. The city finds that graffiti and other defacement of public and private property, including walls, rocks, bridges, buildings, fences, gates, signage, other structures, trees, and other real and personal property within the city constitute a nuisance. 
(c)  Graffiti prohibited. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to write, draw, carve, scratch, erect, or place upon any wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate, signage, other structure, tree or real or personal property, either publicly or privately owned, any drawing inscription, figure, or mark of the type which is commonly known or referred to as "graffiti". Any such "graffiti" shall be removed or eradicated within 72 hours of its first appearance. 
(d)  Violation. A violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable by fine, restitution, or other penalty as the city council deems just and reasonable provided, however, no fine shall exceed the amount authorized by the City Charter. 
(e)  Notice to remove. 
(1)  Whenever the city's code enforcement officer or his designee determines that graffiti exists on any private property which is visible to any person utilizing any public road, parkway, alley, sidewalk, or other right-of-way or any public park or property, the code enforcement officer shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall be given three days from the date of notice to remove the graffiti or the same will be subject to abatement by the city. 
(2)  The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to this section shall be a written notice and shall be served upon the owner(s) of the affected property, as such owner(s) names and address appears on the latest Property Tax Assessment Rolls of Cherokee County, Georgia. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall be sent to the property address. The notice may be served in any of the following manners: 
a.  By personal service to owners, occupant or manager of the property; 
b.  By registered or certified mail addressed to the owner; or 
c.  By posting a copy on the property. 
(3)  Removal by city; lien. Upon failure of the owner(s) to comply with the notice to remove, the code enforcement officer shall issue a notice to appear before the judge of the municipal court. The judge of the municipal court shall be permitted to allow the city or a private contractor to remove the graffiti and charge any costs associated with removal to the owner of the property. The judge of the municipal court shall not be limited to removal by the city or private contractor and may allow any fines, restitution or other penalty to become a lien against the property. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-33. - Complaint of nuisance; hearing. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the police department or building department, who shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal court, after a ten-day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding a nuisance does exist shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)  Animal control officers, license and building inspectors shall and may also receive complaints, investigate the same and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-34. - Abatement by the city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate a nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the judge, that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the chief of police or building official directing the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police or building official, in such case, shall keep a record of the expenses and cost of abating the nuisance and the cost shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police or the building official as is necessary in abating nuisances under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-35. - Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-36. - Offense penalty. 
It is declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014) 
State Law reference— Failure to abate nuisance after order to do so is a state crime. O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6.  
Sec. 38-37. - Unfit structures. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure or property within the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with applicable codes in force in the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. [O.C.G.A. 41-2-9(a)(1)] 
(b)  The city building inspector or his designee shall be authorized to exercise the powers hereinafter outlined to effect the purpose of this section, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence; 
(2)  Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination; however, such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(3)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinance; and 
(4)  Delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate. [O.C.G.A. 41-2-9(a)(2)] 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the building inspector by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality or by five residents of the city, charging that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the building inspector shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure or property. The building inspector may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of such county or municipality. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
The building inspector may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(d)  The building inspector may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract or parcel on real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and if the building inspector's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property is: 
(1)  Unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health and safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
(e)  Whenever the building inspector determines that there exists an unfit structure within the city, he shall cause the matter to be placed on the agenda of the city council at the next regular meeting for approval, in ordinance form, of the building inspector proceeding to effectuate the purpose of this section with respect to a particular piece of property which the building inspector has found unfit. Upon the approval of the city council, the building inspector shall serve or cause to be served upon the recorded owner of such structure at the address shown on the city's current ad valorem tax records and upon any other person or entity known to have an interest in such building or structure, a written notice, in the form of a summons and complaint. 
(f)  The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference, identify the owner and parties in interest, state with particularity the factual basis for the action, and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(g)  The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of a complaint in the municipal court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. [O.C.G.A. 41-2-9(a)(3)] 
(h)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order to abate the nuisance. [O.C.G.A. 41-2-9(a)(4)] 
(1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring in into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or [O.C.G.A. 41-2-9(a)(4)(a)] 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling, building or structure , in order to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. [O.C.G.A. 41-2-9(a)(4)(b)] 
(i)  For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 39A (O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq.), qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(j)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building or structure and abate the nuisance, the building inspector may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The building inspector shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building dwelling or structure as placard with the following words: [O.C.G.A. 41-2-9(a)(5)] 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(k)  If the building inspector has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. 
(l)  The building inspector and city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. [O.C.G.A. 41-2-9(a)(6)] 
(m)  That the amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. [O.C.G.A. 41-2-9(a)(7)] 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014) 
Charter reference— Specific powers of city to abate nuisance, § 1.13(23). 
State Law reference— Municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings and structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9.  
Sec. 38-38. - Nuisance abatement lien. 
The lien provided for in subsection 38-37(m) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (c) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The lien shall be enforced and collected pursuant to state law including but not limited to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(b) as follows: 
(a)  Upon final determination of costs, fees and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer responsible for enforcement action in accordance with this article shall transmit to the city tax collector or city revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the city tax collector or city revenue officer, who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes; to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia, provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The municipal tax collector or city revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to the city; 
(b)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this article may be initiated at any time following receipt by the municipal tax collector or city revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under the article; and 
(c)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this article shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with article together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the municipal tax collector or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-39. - State law amendments. 
In the event O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. is amended or altered, then this article shall be automatically amended, revised and altered to comply with any amendment or alterations to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. and such amendment or alterations to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. shall preempt any non-compliant provision of this article, thereby ensuring this article is in full and complete compliance with existing state law. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Secs. 38-40—38-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 38-61. - Code adopted. 
The Georgia State Minimum Standard Property Maintenance Code, (International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, with Georgia 2009 Amendments) (hereinafter referred to as the "GSMSPMC") as it now exists or as adopted by the state, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as though it were fully copied in this section: 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-62. - Amendments to the Georgia State Minimum Standard Property Maintenance Code. 
The following amendments to the GSMSPMC are made as required to complete sections of the code or to meet local needs. The sections of the GSMSPMC referenced below are replaced in their entirety as stated below. Section 111, consisting of 111.1 through 111.8 of the GSMSPMC are hereby deleted in their entirety. Otherwise only those sections and definitions listed herein are amended and only to the extent described herein. 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the adopted procedures and provisions of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code, Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code, Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code, Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code, Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code, Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code, Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code and the Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code. (Collectively together with the GSMSPMC the "Georgia State Minimum Standards Codes"). 
103.1 General. The property maintenance and inspection section of the Building Safety Division is hereby created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Code Official. 
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed shall be determined by the judge of the Municipal Court following a citation. 
104.7 Official records. The Code Official shall keep official records of all business and activities as specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other regulations. 
107.4 Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in Section 106.4 or section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances of the City. 
201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes or other codes adopted by the city, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes. The following terms are further defined: 
Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code; is the International Building Code with Georgia State Amendments. 
Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code; is the National Electrical Code with Georgia State Amendments. 
Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code; is the International Energy Conservation Code with Georgia State Amendments. 
Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code; is the International Fire Code with Georgia State Amendments. 
Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code; is the International Fuel Gas Code with Georgia State Amendments. 
Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code; is the International Mechanical Code with Georgia State Amendments. 
Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code; is the International Residential Code with Georgia State Amendments. 
Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code; is the International Plumbing Code with Georgia State Amendments. 
302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of ten (10) inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
303.2 Enclosures. Change 48" to 60" to conform to section 7.304(19)(g) of Chapter 7 Article 3 of the City of Woodstock Land Development Code. 
Delete Section 304.13.2 Openable Windows. Without Substitution 
Delete Section 304.14 Insect Screens. Without Substitution 
Delete Section 304.17 Guards for Basement Windows. Without Substitution 
Delete Section 305.3 Interior Surfaces. Without Substitution 
Delete Section 305.6 Interior Doors. Without Substitution 
Delete Section 304.2 Protective Treatment. Without Substitution 
306. 1 General. Where required every exterior and interior flight of stairs shall have a handrail. Every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails and Guards shall be installed in accordance with the adopted Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code or Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling code. 
Exception: Handrails and Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted Building or One and Two Family Dwelling codes. 
401.3 Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code or Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code shall be permitted. 
505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code. 
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, shall make available (but not necessarily at the owner or operator's expense) a supply of heat during the period from 1 October to 1 May sufficient to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from 1 October to 1 May to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes. 
701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided. The City Fire Marshall shall have additional authority to enforce Chapter 7 of the GSMSPMC. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-63. - Additional remedy permitted. 
In addition to the procedures and remedies in this article, the code official and designees may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, and such other codes adopted by the city, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and seek to enforce such citations in the municipal court, prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Secs. 38-64—38-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADDITIONAL ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 38-76. - Citation authorization. 
The code official, including any code enforcement officer or building department official (as defined in section 202 of the WPMC), and law enforcement officers are hereby authorized to issue citations to violators of this Code requiring such violators to appear in the Municipal Court of the City of Woodstock. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-77. - Citation procedures. 
Prior to the issuance of a citation(s) to violator(s) of this Code, those persons authorized in section 38-33 must follow the procedures below to obtain code compliance from said violator(s), except in cases of emergency (See Section 109 WPMC). 
(1)  A notice shall be delivered to the violator or property owner as set forth in Section 107 of the WPMC. 
(2)  Notice of violation. If the violator(s) do not comply with the time for compliance established as a part of the first contact, a notice of violation (NOV) shall be served on the owner and interested parties in accordance with the WPMC section 107. The time for compliance as stated in the NOV shall not exceed ten calendar days unless the code official makes a finding that the violation is of such a nature that it is reasonable to allow additional time for compliance, but in any event not to exceed 30 days. 
(3)  Citation issuance. At the expiration of the scheduled time allotted following the issuance of the notice of violation, those persons authorized in section 38-33 are authorized to issue a citation(s) ("summons") to the violator(s), owner and interested parties requiring them to appear in the Municipal Court of the City of Woodstock. The citation shall include a statement that the court appearance is mandatory. The code official does have the discretion to issue additional notices to comply, instead of citation(s), if deemed necessary and appropriate, depending on the circumstances. 
(4)  Repeat violators/violations. Any person who has been notified of the same violation on the same property may be considered a repeat violator and a citation may be issued without meeting the requirements of subsections (1) and (2) above. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-78. - Citation issuance procedures. 
Those persons authorized to issue citations shall follow the established municipal court and police department procedures with regard to the issuance of citations. Before a citation is issued, the person shall coordinate with the municipal court clerk to docket the case and prepare for the hearing. The hearing shall be scheduled within 30 calendar days; additional time may be allowed by the code official if a delay in service or posting is anticipated. 
Service of the citations shall meet the requirements set forth in Section 107 of the WPMC. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-79. - Hearing preparation. 
The code official or any person processing a violation shall document all evidence of violations of this code, beginning with the determination that a violation exists, issuance of letters and notice to comply. Evidence shall include, but not be limited to: photographs, sound and video recordings, notes, correspondence, compliant forms, and witness testimony. The code official shall review all evidence and provide said evidence to the city solicitor prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-80. - Hearing and adjudication. 
The hearing and court procedures shall adhere to those established by the Official Code of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, for the municipal court of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014)  
Sec. 38-81. - Jurisdiction to try and abate. 
The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health, safety or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. Any appeal from any decision of the municipal court shall be to the Superior Court of Cherokee County and shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the decision of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of municipal court to determine existence of nuisance and order its abatement, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5.  
Sec. 38-82. - Abatement lien on property. 
(a)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(b)  The lien described in this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county, and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the code official shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the city tax collector. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the city tax collector to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch 4 (O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.); however, the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply. The tax collector shall remit the amount collected to the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(d)  The tax collector shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by this section unless such costs are waived by resolution of the city governing authority. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the city to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(e)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(f)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement or demolition of a dwelling, building or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. 2797, Exh. A, 2-24-2014) 
State Law reference— Municipal ordinances relating to unfit buildings and structures. O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9: service of complaints or orders on parties in interest and owners of unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12.  
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 8, 2015, § 1(Exh. A), repealed the former Ch. 42, §§ 42-1—42-115, and enacted a new Ch. 42 as set out herein. The former Ch. 42 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete history of the former Ch. 42. 
Charter reference— Authority of city council to establish fire limits; fire regulations, § 1.13(22). 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; fires restricted in parks, § 62-7; personnel, ch. 70; burning of rubbish on streets, § 82-10. 
State Law reference— Powers concerning fire protection, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; firefighter standards and training act, O.C.G.A., § 25-4-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Composition; rank. 
(a)  The fire department shall consist of a chief and such subordinate officers and firefighters as may from time to time be provided by the city council. 
(b)  Following the fire chief in rank shall be the assistant chief, captains, lieutenants, sergeants and the firefighters. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-32. - Fire chief;appointment. 
The fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager, and shall be the department director of the fire department, reporting directly to the city manager. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-33. - Duties of fire chief. 
The fire chief shall be responsible for and have control over the fire department and all fire apparatus belonging to the city, and shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To properly extinguish all accidental or intentionally caused fires; 
(2)  To enforce the fire prevention code, article Ill of this chapter, adopted by the city council; 
(3)  To keep adequate records of all fires, inspections, equipment, fire prevention efforts, and other activities of the department; 
(4)  To establish rules and regulations concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care, and management of the fire department, subject to approval by the city council; and 
(5)  To oversee the investigation as to the cause and origin of all extended or destructive fires occurring within the city limits. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A)) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of department, O.C.G.A. §§ 25-3-1 et seq., 25-4-1 et seq.  
Sec. 42-34. - Disability of fire chief. 
In the event of resignation, removal, death, or disability of the fire chief, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been appointed. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-35. - Firefighters; qualifications; training. 
(a)  Applicants shall have the following qualifications to become a member of the fire department: 
(1)  Be at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Not have been convicted of a felony within ten years prior to employment; and 
(3)  Have good moral character as determined by an investigation under the procedure approved by the Georgia Firefighters Standards and Training Council. 
(b)  Upon employment, firefighters shall: 
(1)  Complete all training required in the Woodstock Fire Department's Standard Operating Procedures and attain state certification as a firefighter within the first 12 months after being appointed a full-time paid member of the department. 
(2)  Train, drill, or study as required by ISO and Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Council and any other appropriate accrediting agency following the first year of employment. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A)) 
State Law reference— Qualifications of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-8.  
Sec. 42-36. - Duties of firefighters. 
All firefighters shall become familiar with and proficient in the handling of all of the apparatus of the fire department, shall be prepared to respond to all alarms of fire, shall observe all rules and regulations of the fire department established by the fire chief, and shall obey all orders of the commanding officer at all fires. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-37. - Fire station inspections. 
Each fire station and its equipment shall be examined regularly. Such inspections shall be rigidly made and shall ensure that all apparatus is maintained in excellent working condition at all times, is ready for immediate service, and that all fire stations and surroundings are in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-38. - Command at fires. 
In case of fire, the officer of the highest rank or designee at the fire shall take command of the fire department and direct the suppression of the fire in the best manner possible. Such commanding officer may cause buildings to be removed, torn down, or destroyed when such acts are necessary for the protection of other property and for the prevention of the spread of the conflagration. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-39. - Use of equipment. 
(a)  No one is to take any city fire truck outside the city limits except as approved by the fire chief or for purposes described in the automatic aid contract with the county fire department or the state mutual aid group, as stated in section 42-42. 
(b)  No persons other than those firefighters on official business shall tamper with firefighting equipment either on public or private property. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-40. - Persons in vicinity of fire; obstructing firefighting apparatus. 
(a)  No persons other than firefighters, city officials, police officers, and the property owner or his agent shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of a fire, unless such persons are given permission to do so by the fire chief. 
(b)  No person shall obstruct in any manner any firefighting apparatus or any of the officers or members of the fire department in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-41. - Riding upon firefighting apparatus. 
No persons other than members of the fire department or personnel covered under this article shall be permitted to ride upon the firefighting apparatus in going to or returning from emergency calls unless approved by the fire chief or designee. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-42. - County and state, automatic aid. 
The city has an automatic aid agreement with the county and a mutual aid agreement with the state. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Secs. 42-43—42-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4. (Back) 
 
Sec. 42-71. - Adoption of fire prevention codes. 
(a)  The City of Woodstock adopts and enforces codes and standards contained in the local ordinances. The adoption of these codes and ordinances is by the consent of the city council in accordance with its charter. These local fire codes may be more restrictive than the codes that are adopted by the state but not less restrictive. 
(b)  The city adopts and enforces the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards, as now or hereafter amended, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12, and appoints the fire chief or his designee as the fire marshal for the city. 
(c)  For amendments enacted by the State Fire Marshal's Office, contact the Office at 404-656-7087. 
A current copy of the fire prevention code and the life safety code shall be maintained on file in the office of the fire marshal where they are available for public inspection. 
(d)  Exemptions from local fire code requirements. Individuals who are seeking relief from a local fire ordinance may request an exemption from said requirements by: 
(1)  When requesting an exemption from a local fire ordinance through the DPC staff it must be submitted in writing in order to get a recommendation prior to presenting the request to the city council. 
(2)  The request for an exemption to the local fire ordinances shall be made to the city council for approval. 
(3)  The following conditions must be considered before an exemption from the requirements of the city's fire ordinances can be considered by the DPC and granted by the council: 
a.  There are exceptional and extraordinary conditions pertaining to the building or a particular piece of property in question due to its size, shape or topography; and, 
b.  The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; and, 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and, 
d.  A literal interpretation of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of any rights that others in the city are allowed; and, 
e.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment of the public good, or impair the purposes and intent of the ordinance; and, 
f.  That the authorizing of the exemption will not unreasonably increase the congestion of public streets, increase the danger of fire, imperil the public safety, or in any other respect impair the health, safety, comfort, morals or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. 
(4)  In granting an exemption, the council may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this ordinance will be served. 
(5)  The council shall not be authorized to grant an exemption to "Rules and Regulations for the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards" (O.C.G.A.) Section 25-2-4. 
(6)  Following the review and consideration of an exemption application by the DPC recommendation shall be made by the DPC to the mayor and council to approve, approve with conditions or deny. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A)) 
State Law reference— Statewide application of minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; definitions of standard codes for adoption, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20; adoption of state fire safety standards, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12.  
Sec. 42-72. - Open burning. 
(a)  Open burning for reasons other than the exceptions listed in this section is prohibited. Exceptions to the burning prohibition shall require a permit from the fire department's fire prevention bureau. A particular exception may be disallowed by the fire marshal to safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city, or because of other extenuating circumstances. No burn permits are required if the guidelines of subsection (b) of this section are met. 
(b)  In accordance with EPD regulations and guidelines: 
(1)  Burning shall not be within 50 feet of a street, building or place where people congregate. 
(2)  A rake and/or shovel and waterhose shall be on hand at the burning site. 
(3)  The fire must be attended at all times until it is extinguished. 
(4)  No burning on overcast and/or windy days. 
(5)  No burning on Sunday. 
(6)  No burning at dusk and/or a night. 
(c)  Small fires using only untreated wood are allowed to keep warm for outside working. Burning manmade materials or painted, stained, or impregnated wood is not allowed. 
(d)  Operating devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blowtorches, welding torches, or other flame-making equipment are allowed. 
(e)  Fires set for fire department training are allowed. 
(f)  Burning for the cooking of food for immediate consumption and recreational activities is allowed. 
(g)  No commercial burning is allowed in the city. The term "commercial burning" means any burning by any party other than a person who resides in a residential dwelling located on the property on which the burning is taking place. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful to have an outdoor fire such as leaves, limbs, etc., upon any of the public streets, sidewalks, or alleys of the city. 
(i)  Violations incur the liability of a criminal offense and, upon conviction, subject the offender to the maximum penalties provided by section 1-7. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A)) 
State Law reference— Limitations on open burning, Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Air Quality Control Regulations, Georgia Administrative Code, ch. 391-3-1.  
Sec. 42-73. - Fire extinguishers. 
Fire extinguishers shall be required in accordance with NFPA 10. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-74. - Fire prevention bureau established; duties. 
(a)  The fire prevention code and all other fire service related ordinances shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city, which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  The assistant chief for fire prevention shall be the city fire marshal who shall be appointed by the chief of the department. 
(c)  The fire prevention bureau shall be responsible for conducting investigations of fires in the city. The fire prevention bureau shall also be responsible for public fire safety education. 
(d)  The chief of the department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors/investigators or fire safety education specialists as shall, from time to time, are necessary. Each member assigned as fire inspector/investigator or fire safety education specialist may be reassigned to the fire suppression force at the discretion of the chief of the department. 
(e)  A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made monthly and transmitted to the chief of the fire department. It shall contain all proceedings under the fire prevention code, the life safety code, fire investigations, and public fire safety education, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein. The chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to the code that, in his judgement, shall be desirable. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-75. - Fees. 
Fees for plan review, inspections, reinspections and certificates of occupancy shall be as established from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-76. - Suppression company fire inspection program. 
(a)  The bureau of fire prevention will be responsible for training the fire suppression personnel in familiarity of the standard fire prevention code. After being familiarized with the code, the suppression companies will coordinate with the fire prevention bureau and conduct scheduled fire prevention inspections throughout the city. 
(b)  The bureau of fire prevention will intend to schedule the fire inspections in a way that all buildings affected by the code will be inspected. 
(c)  Enforcement of the fire prevention code by the prevention and suppression personnel shall be carried out in the following manner: 
(1)  Suppression companies shall perform inspections on all buildings in the city. 
(2)  If violations are found the suppression companies will give each building a specified time period to have all violations corrected. 
(3)  If the time period elapses and the violations have not been corrected, a citation may be issued by the fire marshal to the building owner or occupant and a new time period will be assigned. 
(4)  After the second assigned time period has elapsed and it is determined the violations have still not been corrected, a second citation may be issued and a determination made by the fire marshal and the chief of the department whether or not to close the building until all violations are corrected. 
(5)  All persons issued citations will appear before the municipal judge for determination of penalties. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-77. - Chronological order of inspections of a new building. 
The order of plan reviews for new buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Site plan; 
(2)  Plat review (division of land, where applicable); 
(3)  Building plan review; 
(4)  Review of sprinkler plans and other fire protection systems: 
a.  Plans for sprinkler systems and other fire protection systems, new or modifications of existing systems, shall be submitted to the Bureau of Fire Prevention for approval before construction on said systems commences. This section may be revised at any time deemed necessary by the city. 
The order of inspections for new buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fifty percent inspection as needed for two-hour fire walls and other fire protection systems that will not be visible at the 80 percent inspection. 
(2)  Eighty percent inspection to inspect fire walls, sprinkler piping, insulation and other fire protection system not visible at final inspection. 
(3)  Final fire inspection: results are forwarded to the building official for the issuance of the certificate of occupancy pending the completion of all other required inspections. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-78. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person in a position of authority who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code, or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build, in violation of any detailed statement, specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the chief of the fire department, the city manager, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively be punished, upon conviction, as provided by section 1-7. The imposition of one penalty for any such violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy the violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, each five days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-79. - Blasting. 
Procedures for the issuance of blasting permits within the City of Woodstock shall be held on file with the Fire Department and are available upon request. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Secs. 42-80—42-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 42-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context indicates a different meaning: 
Attached dwelling means any residential structure attached another. 
Bureau of fire prevention means the city fire department, bureau of fire prevention for the city. 
Commercial building means any building over 3,500 square feet, which has been zoned for commercial use by this Code. 
Modified fire sprinkler system is defined as a 13 R sprinkler system applied to commercial buildings. 
Multifamily residential structure means any building with a maximum of three stories in height that has been zoned for multifamily use by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-112. - Use of sprinkler system in multifamily structures, attached dwellings and small commercial buildings. 
(a)  All commercial buildings, attached dwellings and multifamily residential structures in the city shall be constructed with an approved sprinkler system. 
(b)  This section shall apply to attached dwellings, multifamily residential structures, and all commercial buildings over 3,500 square feet that are not required to have an automatic sprinkler system under any other codes. These buildings shall be constructed with an approved sprinkler system. 
(c)  An N.F.P.A. 13D fire sprinkler system is required on all attached dwellings. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to detached freestanding single-family residences with three or fewer stories. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-113. - Commercial buildings that are three stories or less that are not required to be sprinkled by other codes. 
A modified fire sprinkler system (rather than a full 13 sprinkler system} may be allowed in commercial buildings that are not required to be sprinkled by other codes. A modified sprinkler system shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The provisions of NFPA 13R. 
(2)  When a dead-end system is used, the sprinkler system shall be isolated from the domestic water supply by not less than a dual check valve assembly that conforms to Underwriters Laboratory standards. 
(3)  The installer of any sprinkler system shall be a licensed fire protection sprinkler company. 
(4)  The fire department connection shall be located on the front of the building facing the fire department access road or other location as determined by the fire marshal or designee. The connection shall be unobstructed and clearly marked to be seen from the road. A water flow bell shall be located above the fire department connection, where applicable. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-114. - Additions to the National Electric Code. 
All commercial structures will be equipped with an outside electrical disconnect. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Sec. 42-115. - Knox Rapid Entry System. 
Use of the Knox Rapid Entry System is authorized by Section 506 of the International Fire Code. The code specifies that the fire department may require a key box containing access keys be installed at the entrance to structures or areas where access for the purpose of life safety or fire fighting is restricted. The Code authorizes the fire department to determine the type of key box which is approved for use. 
All new commercial construction equipped with a sprinkler system and/or monitored alarm system shall be equipped with a Knox key entry system. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015, § 1(Exh. A))  
Chapter 46 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD SERVICE 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Title. 
This article shall be referred to and known as the "Food Service Ordinance." 
(Code 1989, § 5-5-1; Res. No. 95-04-25, 4-25-1995)  
Sec. 46-32. - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
The rules and regulations for food service, chapter 290-5-14, promulgated by the state department of human resources for public health, are adopted in their entirety as the food service ordinance of the city, a copy being made part of this section and being on file with the city clerk in the city hall. The rules and regulations for food service, chapter 290-5-14, are adopted and incorporated as if set out at length in this section, the provisions of which are effective and controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1989, § 5-5-2; Res. No. 95-04-25, 4-25-1995) 
State Law reference— Georgia Food Act, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-20 et seq.  
Sec. 46-33. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The county health inspector shall be empowered to enforce and cite violations of this article. The county health inspector shall, upon inspecting any good establishment, issue an order directing any violation of this article to be corrected within 15 days. However, where a violation deals with perishable food items, or where a violation may constitute an immediate and direct hazard to public health, the county health inspector may, in his discretion, order that the violation be corrected within 15 days or less. If any violation of this article has not been corrected within the time specified by the county health inspector, then he shall issue a citation to be prosecuted in the municipal court of the city. Any person violating this article shall be fined not less than $100.00 and no more than $500.00. This fine, or any part of it, shall not be suspended or waived. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall be made by citation or accusation only and no person cited for violation of this article shall be arrested. 
(Code 1989, § 5-5-3; Res. No. 95-04-25, 4-25-1995)  
Sec. 46-34. - Conflict with other Code sections. 
Any other provision of the Code of Ordinances of the city which does not adopt state law by reference and which is more restrictive than this article shall control over this article. 
(Code 1989, § 5-5-4; Res. No. 95-04-25, 4-25-1995)  
Sec. 46-35. - Amendments. 
Deletions and additions to, or adoption of the latest edition or supplement to the rules and regulations of the state department of human resources for public health may be adopted by resolution of the council and thereby incorporated in this article; provided that copies of any changes in the standard text shall be made available to the public for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1989, § 5-5-5; Res. No. 95-04-25, 4-25-1995)  
Chapter 50 - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance adopting or amending the comprehensive plan saved from repeal, § 1-11(6); any ordinance adopting or amending any development order saved from repeal, § 1-11(7); any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision saved from repeal, § 1-11(10); any ordinance amending the zoning map or zoning atlas, or rezoning specific property saved from repeal, § 1-11(14); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; planning, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Authority of local governments to adopt plans and zone, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; Zoning Procedures Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Ordinance incorporated by reference. 
The Land Development Ordinance of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, January 24, 1995, or as hereafter amended," adopted by the city council on January 24, 1995, is incorporated into this chapter as fully as though set out at length in this chapter. Copies of the land development ordinance are maintained on file in the office of the planning and zoning administrator where they are available for public inspection. 
(Code 1989, § 8-3-1)  
Chapter 54 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 26; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 58; personnel, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor and council may exercise power of arrest through duly appointed police officers, § 1.13(42). 
State Law reference— Powers concerning police protection, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ III; Georgia Peace Officers Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; compensation of officers restricted, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; liability for torts of police officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; obstructing or hindering law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; subsistence allowance, O.C.G.A. § 35-1-3. 
 
Sec. 54-31. - Composition; rank. 
(a)  The city police department shall consist of the chief of police and department personnel as approved by the city council during the budget process. Reporting relationships and department organization will be designated by the chief of police as required for efficient and effective operation of the department. The chief of police may effect personal changes downward and laterally with approval by the city manager during the fiscal year provided that those changes do not exceed the allocated number of positions and funding approved by the city council durinq the budget approval process. Any requests for additional allocated positions or funding must be approved by the city council prior to implementation 
(b)  A detailed breakdown of the organization of these divisions is found in the police operations manual. Changes in the organizational structure will be brought back to the mayor and council at the next duly called meeting. 
(c)  Positions of police captain or above will be appointed by the chief of police. 
(d)  In the event of resignation, removal, death or disability of the chief of police, the officer next in rank shall perform the duties of the chief until removal of such disability or until a successor has been appointed. 
(Code 1989, § 4-1-1; Ord. No. 89-12-18, 12-18-1989; Ord. No. 01-11-13, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004; Ord. No. 009-2007, 4-6-2007) 
Charter reference— Specific powers, § 1.13.  
Sec. 54-32. - Appointment and powers of police chief. 
(a)  The police chief shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be the department director of the police department, reporting directly to the city manager. The chief of police shall be authorized to give the oath of office to each police officer. 
(b)  The chief of police is responsible for the operation and administration of all departmental activities. 
(c)  The chief of police shall formulate departmental policies, rules, regulations, and orders that govern the delivery of police services and see that these rules and regulations and all special and general orders are understood and enforced. Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with all city ordinances and state and federal laws. 
(Code 1989, § 4-1-2; Ord. No. 01-11-13, 11-13-2001; Ord. No. 05-09-13, 9-13-2005; Ord. No. 009-2007, 4-6-2007) 
Charter reference— Specific powers, § 1.13.  
Sec. 54-33. - Qualifications. 
(a)  The chief of police shall have the authority to determine requisite qualifications for positions within the police department to include sworn and civilian personnel. 
(b)  Any person hired by the city for the position of police officer must meet the qualifications for certification by the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Council and complete state mandated training prior to full-time appointment. 
(c)  Persons hired prior to completing the state mandated training shall have no arrest powers until this training has been completed and shall be compensated under the special regulations provision. 
(d)  Prior to any employment by the police department, as either a sworn or civilian employee, all applicants will undergo testing and background investigations as directed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1989, § 4-1-3; Ord. No. 009-2007, 4-6-2007) 
State Law reference— Georgia Peace Officers Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.  
Sec. 54-34. - Disposition of stolen, abandoned or impounded property. 
(a)  All property which comes into the custody of the police department, known to be stolen, suspected to be stolen, has been impounded, or where the ownership is unknown, shall be held for a period of 90 days unless claimed by the owner. 
(b)  The owner of the property, upon proving ownership and paying all expenses and costs, including reasonable charges for storage, shall have the right to have such property returned to him. 
(c)  If, subsequent to the 90-day period the property is unclaimed, the chief of police shall advertise the sale of the property as required by the city's legal counsel and city clerk. Such advertising shall take place at least 14 days before the date of sale and shall give a description of the property to be sold and specify the time and place of sale. 
(d)  If the property remains unclaimed up to and including the time of sale, it shall be sold as advertised and the proceeds places in a city treasury account as proscribed by law pertaining to disposal of tangible property. 
(e)  Contraband property may be disposed of by order of the municipal judge or court having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1989, § 4-1-4; Ord. No. 009-2007, 4-6-2007)  
Chapter 58 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 58-1—58-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Municipalities are prohibited by law from enacting ordinances covering matters which have been preempted by general law and are prevented from regulating conduct which has been made a violation of any criminal law of the state. See Ga. Const. of 1983, art. III, § VI, ¶ IV; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Charter reference— Specific powers, § 1.13. 
State Law reference— Abandonment of airtight containers, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; disorderly houses, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44; disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39; public intoxication, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; peeping Toms, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-61; gambling, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; criminal trespass, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-21; Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies or municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; obscene publications, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over certain marijuana cases, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6. 
 
Sec. 58-30. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 25, 2017, repealed § 58-30, which pertained to release of balloons, bags, parachutes, lanterns or other similar devices, and derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 14, 2015.  
Sec. 58-31. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(2)  Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Use fighting words directed toward another, who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(4)  Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(5)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so. 
(6)  Make threats to harm themselves or another person or make statements indicating their intent to harm themselves or another person. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-1; Ord. No. 2011-1675, 8-22-2011) 
State Law reference— Authority to punish disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39.  
Sec. 58-32. - Discharging firearms. 
No person shall shoot or fire any firearms including, but not limited to, pistols, rifles, or shotguns within the corporate limits of the city, except as follows: 
(1)  Law enforcement officers including, but not limited to Cherokee County Animal Control officers, City of Woodstock police officers, and deputies of the Cherokee County Sheriff's office, in the execution of their duty; 
(2)  Persons participating in special events held in accordance with a valid city permit. 
(3)  If the person is shooting or firing the firearm on the premises of a licensed shooting gallery or range in compliance with all state regulations under such circumstances that such firearm can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property and also in such manner as to prevent the projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such gallery or range. 
(4)  When any person is acting in self-defense in accordance with Georgia law or in defense of habitation in accordance with Georgia law. 
No firearms shall be pointed toward any person while such firearms are either loaded or unloaded except when acting in self-defense in accordance with Georgia law or in defense of habitation in accordance with Georgia law. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-2; Ord. No. 012-2007, 7-9-2007; Ord. No. 3352-2015, 4-13-2015)  
Sec. 58-33. - Rock throwing. 
No person in the city shall throw any stone, rock or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-3)  
Sec. 58-34. - Bonfires. 
No person shall build a bonfire of any description within the city limits, except at places approved and designated by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-4)  
Sec. 58-35. - Public drinking. 
No person shall consume any malt beverage or wine or other alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way or place in the city, or within any public building, except on premises duly licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or except in accordance with the provisions of section 6-117 in an entertainment district. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-6; Ord. No. 3806, § V, 3-14-2016) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Consumption of alcoholic beverages, open containers, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.  
Sec. 58-36. - Public drunk. 
A person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own, other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language is guilty of a city ordinance violation of public drunk. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-7) 
State Law reference— Authority to punish public intoxication, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41.  
Sec. 58-37. - Unsightly weeds. 
(a)  No owner or resident of any lot, area or place located within the city shall permit any weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthful growths on such property. The term "weeds" means jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion or other unsightly growths of a like kind, exceeding ten inches in height. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of any premises upon which weeds or other prohibited flora is permitted to grow in violation of subsection (a) of this section that such growths must be removed, cut and/or destroyed within five days from the date of such notice. Notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to the owner or occupant at his last known address or by personal service by the code enforcement officer. 
(c)  Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove, cut and/or destroy such weeds or other unsightly growths within the designated time period, the municipal judge is authorized and empowered to impose a fine as provided in section 1-7. Each day weeds and other unsightly growth are allowed to remain shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-8) 
State Law reference— Municipal court jurisdiction to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 31-2-5.  
Sec. 58-38. - Accumulating junk. 
(a)  No owner or resident of any property in the city, other than a person who is a licensed junk dealer, shall permit junk to accumulate on such property, including any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked motor vehicles, or parts thereof. A junked motor vehicle is one that is inoperable. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall notify, in writing, the owner or occupant of any premises upon which junk is permitted to accumulate in violation of the provisions of this section that such material must be removed within 30 days from the date of such notice. 
(c)  Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove such junk within the designated time period, the chief of police, following conviction under this section the municipal court, is authorized and empowered to arrange for the removal of such material by the city or by a private individual or firm through contract with the city. The municipal judge may impose a fine as provided in section 1-7 for each day the junk remains in violation of this section. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-9; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004) 
State Law reference— Nuisance abatement law, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq.  
Sec. 58-39. - Loud and unnecessary noises; prohibition. 
(a)  No person shall willfully make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of and the general well-being and privacy of its citizens or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable personal of normal sensitiveness residing within the city limits. 
(b)  Consumer fireworks (exempt from maximum noise levels) 
(1)  It shall be lawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or partnership to use or ignite or cause to be ignited any consumer fireworks on: 
a.  Any day beginning at the time of 10:00 a.m. and up to and including the ending time of 9:00 p.m.; and [Cross Reference: O.C.G.A § 25-10-1(3)(b)] 
b.  On January 1, July 3, July 4, and December 31 of each year after the time of 9:00 p.m. and up to and including the time of 11:59 p.m.; and 
c.  On January 1 of each year beginning at the time of 12:00 midnight and up to and including the ending time of 1:00 a.m. 
(2)  An application for a special use permit may be made to be considered by the mayor and council to allow for a time outside the scope of the time permitted by state law. A non-refundable special use permit fee will apply. The special use permit shall designate the time or times and location that such person, firm, corporation, association or partnership may use or ignite or cause to be ignited from such fireworks. 
(c)  The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but the enumeration shall not be deemed exhaustive: 
(1)  Motor vehicles. The sounding of any automobile, motorcycle or any other motor vehicle horn; the sound of any automobile, motorcycle or any other motor vehicle being raced on any street or public place of the city. 
(2)  Exhausts. The discharging into the open air of the exhaust of any internal combustive engine, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises. 
(3)  Radio and similar devices. The operation of any radio set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents. Business establishments located in the downtown business district may host the performance of live music until 11:00 p.m. 
(4)  Construction equipment and activity. The operation of any equipment or the performance of any outside construction on buildings, structures, roads or projects (to include commercial solid waste activities) within the city between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday-Saturday. On Sunday, construction equipment and activity shall only be between the hours of 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m., with no solid waste activities allowed on Sunday. 
(5)  Animals. The keeping of any animal which, by frequent or continuous barking, meowing or other means of communication, disturbs the comfort or repose of the residents of any residential neighborhood, or animals that make any vocalizations for more than 15 minutes without interruption or more than 30 minutes if the vocalization is intermittent. 
a.  These time limits do not apply if the vocalizations are given as a warning to the presence of an intruder. 
b.  Officers enforcing this subsection are not required to measure the vocalizations with the use of a sound level meter. 
c.  Upon notification of a complaint concerning such vocalizations, the owner of such animal shall be given a written warning indicating that such animal is creating a disturbance, so long as the complainant provides the officer with the address of the owner, an a physical description of the offending animal. 
d.  If the disturbance is not resolved within two days or a subsequent complaint is made for such animal by a different individual, who resides at a different location from the first complainant, a court summons shall be issued in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(6)  Vehicle repair. The repairing, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within any residential area in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the residents of the area. 
(7)  Schools, churches, hospitals. The creating of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, church, or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed indicating that the same is a school, church or hospital. 
(8)  Maximum noise levels. It shall be a violation of city ordinance if any of the above noise levels exceed the below listed noise levels when measured in the home or business of the complaining party or the noise is generated from the stereo system of a vehicle and can be heard for more than 100 feet from the vehicle: 
Maximum 
Noise Level 
Limits 	Time 	Noise Levels 
Residential 	10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 
7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	55 dBA 
  
60 dBA 
Commercial 	10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 
7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	60 dBA 
  
65 dBA 
Light industrial 	10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m. 
7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	65 dBA 
  
70 dBA 
Heavy industrial 	Anytime 	75 dBA 
 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-10; Res. No. 91-03-25, 3-25-1991; Ord. No. 02-03-26, 3-26-2002; Ord. of 12-14-2015; Ord. No. 4003, 7-11-2016)  
Sec. 58-40. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise regulations set forth in section 58-39: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals and warning devices. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call. 
(3)  Noises resulting from emergency work, which is work necessary to restore property to a safe condition, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(4)  Any city sponsored event. 
(b)  After hours construction permit. Exemptions to the time restrictions set forth in section 58-39(c)(4) can be approved administratively. Applications must be approved by the chief of police or his designee and the building official or his designee. Applicants for this permit must: 
(1)  Demonstrate that being restricted to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. would cause a hardship and would not have an adverse effect on community health, safety, or welfare. 
(2)  Include in application the specific dates and times the work is to be done. If there is deviation from these times, the applicant must re-submit application. 
(3)  Notify residential properties within 750 feet of the location of work ten days before the work commences. 
(c)  Applications for other exemptions should be filed with the city clerk for approval by the mayor and city council and should state the time, date, organization and reason for the request. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-11; Ord. No. 5264-2018, 7-23-2018)  
Sec. 58-41. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement of section 58-39 shall be carried out by the city police department or building department. 
(b)  Any person who violates section 58-39 shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount not exceeding $100.00 for the first offense, $200.00 for the second offense, $400.00 for the third offense, $800.00 for the fourth offense and the maximum $1,000.00 for the fifth and each subsequent offense during a 12-month period. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed each day during or upon which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-12; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004;Ord. of 9-9-2013, § 1)  
Sec. 58-42. - Littering. 
Any person found throwing trash of any kind, such as cans, bottles, boxes, paper or litter of any kind, upon the streets, city property, or real and personal property of the city's citizens shall pay a fine of not more than $25.00 for the first offense, and not more than $50.00 for any subsequent offense. Construction site operators must control waste, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter and sanitary waste, at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-13; Ord. No. 11-18-2013; Ord. of 11-27-2017) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Authority to proscribe littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-48.  
Sec. 58-43. - Slingshots, air rifles, paintball guns and bows and arrows. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to project an object or cause an object to be projected from any slingshot, air rifle (BB gun, pellet gun, paintball gun, etc.) or bow and arrow within the corporate limits of the city, except as follows: 
(1)  If the person is operating the slingshot, air rifle, paintball gun or bow and arrow on the premises of a licensed shooting or archery gallery or range under such circumstances that such instruments can be fired, discharged or operated in such a manner as not to endanger persons or property and also in such manner as to prevent the projectile from traversing any grounds or space outside the limits of such gallery or range; 
(2)  If the person is using the slingshot, air rifle, paintball gun or bow and arrow on his own property in such a manner as to prevent any projectile emanating therefrom from leaving that person's property. For the purposes of ownership, all members of a person's family and all invited guests shall be deemed to be owners. 
(Code 1989, § 11-1-14; Ord. No. 96-08-27, 8-27-1996; Ord. No. 02-03-26, 3-26-2002)  
Secs. 58-44, 58-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Sept. 25, 2017, repealed §§ 58-44 and 58-45, which pertained to obstruction of officers and criminal trespass, and derived from Ord. No. 1179, adopted May 24, 2010.  
Sec. 58-46. - Urban camping and improper use of public places. 
(a)  Public property—City parks. It shall be unlawful to reside or to store personal property in any park owned by the city. No person shall occupy public property for habitation. No person shall reside in a vehicle or structure on public property except as part of a city event. 
(b)  Same—Sidewalks. It shall be unlawful to sleep, lie down, to reside or to store personal property on any sidewalk in the city. 
(c)  Same—Blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to use any public place to sleep, lie down, to reside or to store personal property or to sit or lie down on any public property so as to interfere with the ingress or egress from a building. 
(d)  Same—Urban camping. It shall be unlawful to use any public place, including city parks and sidewalks, for living accommodations or camping. 
(e)  Private property: Urban camping without the owner's permission. It shall be unlawful for anyone to camp, sleep, reside, store personal property, or lie down, outside on any private property without the owner's or leaseholder's permission. 
(f)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, storage shall mean leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for more than one hour. City parks shall expressly include but not be limited to city greenways, trails, and other pedestrian paths and areas. 
(g)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, this section shall not apply to nor be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using parks, sidewalks, or other public places; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades for which valid permits have been issued; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; 
(5)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(6)  Persons sitting down, lying down or napping while attending performances, festivals and concerts taking place in any park, street or sidewalk closed by permit for such purpose; 
(7)  Persons sitting on seats in bus zones occupied by people waiting for the bus; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; or 
(9)  Children under the age of 13 years sleeping in parks, or sleeping anywhere else while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage; 
(10)  Persons lying down or napping during park hours. 
(h)  Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this section may be subject to arrest or summoned to appear in court and upon conviction or other finding of guilt, may be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or 60 days of imprisonment, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1403, 1-13-2011)  
Secs. 58-47—58-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 58-71. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
Discharges to the City of Woodstock, Georgia's (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "city") municipal separate storm sewer system (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "MS4") that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
These nonstormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the city's MS4 from residential, industrial, commercial or institutional establishments. 
These nonstormwater discharges not only impact waterways individually, but geographically dispersed, small volume nonstormwater discharges can have cumulative impacts on receiving waters. 
The impacts of these discharges adversely affect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
These impacts can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the city's MS4; 
Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of State and Federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution due to improper nonstormwater discharges to the city's MS4; 
Therefore, the city adopts this article to prohibit such nonstormwater discharges to the city's MS4. It is determined that the regulation of spills, improper dumping and discharges to the city's MS4 is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety, and the environment. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2009)  
Sec. 58-72. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the city's MS4 to the maximum extent practicable as required by state and federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city's MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city's MS4 by any entity, person, or groups of persons; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city's MS4; 
(3)  Prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city's MS4; and, 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the limits of the city. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2009, § 1)  
Sec. 58-73. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city's MS4 any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city's MS4. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city's MS4 is prohibited. 
(1)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city's MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(2)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the city's public works department. 
(3)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the community development department requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the community development department. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2009, § 2)  
Sec. 58-74. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the city's MS4. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2009, § 3)  
Sec. 58-75. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(6)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2009, § 4)  
Sec. 58-76. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city's MS4, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to City Hall, attention environmental manager, within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2009, § 5)  
Sec. 58-77. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. This article shall be enforced by the city manager or his/her designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (e). 
(b)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
A.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
(2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager within ten days of service of notice of violation. 
B.  Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
(6)  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Appeal of notice of violation. The mayor and council shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error related to the issuance of a notice of violation under this article. 
Any person, firm or corporation receiving a Notice of Violation under this ordinance may file an appeal to such action as identified above. Such appeal shall be made within ten days following service of the notice of violation, by filing with the city manager a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The city manager shall forthwith transmit to the city council all documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
Within 15 days of the filing of the appeal with the city manager, the city council shall conduct a hearing at which the city manager, or his/her designee, shall present the code sections and justification for the action taken. The appellant may then present any evidence, statements or documents pertaining to the matter being appealed. 
The council may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from. 
(d)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 15 days of the decision of the mayor and council upholding the notice of violation, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property at the sole cost and expense of the property owner. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within ten days after abatement of violation, the owner of the property will be notified in writing of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs (the "assessment"). The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 15 days of receipt of the cost of abatement notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the cost of abatement notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(f)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations during the time set forth in the notice of violation or such greater time as deemed by the city, and after the city has taken one or more abatement steps described above, the city, in its sole discretion may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(g)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the Woodstock Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation remains uncured shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided herein, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(i)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies outlined in this article are in addition to, and not exclusive of, any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. 
The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the abatement of violations and enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the City of Woodstock by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. of 9-14-2009, § 6)  
ARTICLE IV. - PERSONAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES AND MODIFIED GOLF CARTS ON CITY STREETS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5357-2018, adopted Sept. 10, 2018, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 58-78—58-85, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to all-terrain vehicles and derived from a resolution adopted June 20, 2011, § 1. 
 
Sec. 58-78. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to provide standards for the operation of personal transportation vehicles (PTV) and modified golf carts on public rights-of-way within the incorporated limits of the city and to protect the welfare and safety of all citizens. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-79. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings as set out herein: 
City sanctioned event means, for the purposes of this article, an event that is sanctioned or organized by the City of Woodstock or any affiliate thereof. 
City street means any road, street or alleyway under the authority the City of Woodstock, with a posted speed limit of 25 mph or less. 
Golf cart means any motorized vehicle designed for the purpose and exclusive use of conveying one or more persons and equipment to play the game of golf in an area designated as a golf course. For such a vehicle to be considered a golf car or golf cart, its speed on a paved level surface shall not exceed 15 miles per hour. Golf carts shall not be operated outside of a golf course or on any road in conjunction with regular vehicular traffic. 
Modified golf cart means a golf cart that has been mechanically altered to meet the definition of a personal transportation vehicle (PTV). 
Operate means to ride in or on and control the operation of a PTV or modified golf cart. 
Operator means every person who operates a PTV or modified golf cart. 
Owner means a person, other than a person with a security interest, having a right of use regarding, property interest in or title to a PTV or modified golf cart and entitled to the use and possession of the vehicle. 
Person includes an individual, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity whether incorporated or not. 
Personal transportation vehicle (PTV) means any motor vehicle with a minimum of four wheels, capable of a maximum level ground speed of less than 20 miles per hour, with a maximum gross vehicle empty weight of 1,375 pounds, capable of transporting not more than eight persons. PTVs shall be operated only on roads with a posted speed limit of 25 miles per hour. 
Private property means property owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by city, county, state or federal government or any agency or subdivision thereof. 
Public property means any real property owned by or under control of the City of Woodstock, either through lease, ownership or public right, including city streets, roadways, parking lots, and associated accessways that are drivable and not privately owned with a posted or statutory speed limit of 25 mph or less. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-80. - Compliance. 
Compliance with this article is required to operate a personal transportation vehicle or modified golf cart on public property in the city. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-81. - Standards for operating on public property. 
(a)  Required equipment. A personal transportation vehicle and modified golf cart (hereinafter collectively referred to as "PTVs") can operate on public property only if the following equipment is installed: 
(1)  A braking system sufficient for the weight and passenger capacity of the PTVs, including a parking brake; 
(2)  A reverse warning device functional at all times when the directional control is in the reverse position; 
(3)  A main power switch. When the switch is in the "off" position, or the key or other device that activates the switch is removed, the motive power circuit shall be inoperative. If the switch uses a key, it shall be removable only in the "off" position; 
(4)  Headlamps; 
(5)  Reflex reflectors; 
(6)  Tail lamps; 
(7)  A horn; 
(8)  A rearview mirror; 
(9)  Safety warning labels; 
(10)  Hip restraints and hand holds or a combination thereof; and 
(11)  Lap belts as necessary to accommodate certain riders as required by section 58-81(b)(5). 
(b)  Operating regulations. The PTVs shall adhere to the following provisions when operated on public property: 
(1)  Operated only on streets with a posted speed limit of 25 mph or less, or in accordance with designated routes that may be updated by the city council by resolution; 
(2)  All equipment required by section 58-81(a) shall remain operational and maintained in good working order at all times, except as exempted by section 58-81(c); 
(3)  All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to automotive traffic; 
(4)  No operator shall enter any intersection without yielding the right-of-way to any vehicles, automobiles, or pedestrians at the intersection or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(5)  Lap belts shall be worn by all operators and passengers age 15 or less, but are optional for operators and passengers age 16 or older; 
(6)  All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during operation of the PTV. No person shall sit on the lap of any operator or passenger during the operation of the PTV. 
(7)  Only persons possessing a valid driver's license pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-5-20 may operate PTVs on public property; 
(8)  All laws and ordinances relating to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, shall apply to PTVs operating on public property; 
(9)  All operators of PTVs shall park only in marked parking spaces, not in landscaped areas or on sidewalks, or walkways. A private property owner may designate specific parking areas for PTVs as long as the designated parking does not violate other provisions of this Code. The city council may from time to time designate PTV parking on public property. 
(c)  Incidental usage. PTVs without some or all of the required equipment under section 58-81(a) may operate on public property under the following conditions: 
(1)  Operation is limited to commercial use that is conducted between buildings within a common development that may also contain public property (examples include the property manager of an apartment complex using a PTV to travel between buildings and must cross public streets to gain access, or a real estate agent carrying prospective home purchasers between a model home office and unit). 
(2)  Operating within a platted subdivision, campus, or common development where the operator is traveling between destinations within the same (examples include traveling from a unit to the pool or amenity area, or a groundskeeper traveling between buildings in an office park or college campus). 
(3)  Operation is limited to daylight hours except when proper headlamps and tail lamps are installed. 
(4)  Compliance with all provisions of this article is required except for section 58-81(a). 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018) 
State Law reference— Georgia Code: 40-6-331.1.(a).  
Sec. 58-82. - Registration requirements. 
(a)  Registration requirements for PTVs. 
(1)  Registration generally. Registration is required solely for the consistent tracking of PTVs operating on public property in the city, to ensure compliance with this article. 
(2)  Application. Any owner of a personal transportation vehicle or modified golf cart being operated on public property in the city shall register the vehicle with the city on forms provided by the city. Registration includes the name and address of the owner, make, model and serial number of the PTVs, and additional information as reasonably required. 
(3)  Registration number. Upon approval, the owner shall be issued a decal with a registration number assigned to the PTVs. The owner shall affix and maintain this decal to the rear fender directly behind the driver, visible to drivers viewing the back of the PTVs at all times. In the event the decal becomes worn or damaged and no longer legible, the owner shall contact the city immediately to request a replacement decal. 
(4)  Fee. The registration fee shall be established by city council. Registrations shall not expire, however, upon the sale or transfer of the PTVs, the purchaser shall contact the city to transfer the registration number prior to operating the PTVs on a public street in the city. 
(5)  Penalty. Failure to register PTVs shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-7. 
(b)  PTVs compliance, liability, and insurance. 
(1)  Compliance. The owner shall attest that the PTV is in good working condition in compliance with the provisions of this article. Owners shall sign a copy of this article, attesting to compliance with all requirements herein. 
(2)  Liability. A general release statement and/or disclaimer of any liability by the city for accidents involving the registered PTV shall be furnished by the owner. All persons who operate or ride upon a personal transportation vehicle (PTV) on public streets or roads do so at their own risk and peril, and must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicycles, and pedestrians. The City of Woodstock has no liability under any theory of liability and the city assumes no liability for permitting personal transportation vehicle (PTV) on public streets and roads. 
(3)  Insurance. Any person who operates a personal transportation vehicle (PTV) is responsible for procuring liability insurance sufficient to cover the risk involved in using a personal transportation vehicle (PTV) on the public streets and roads. Documentation of such coverage must be kept on the PTV or carried by the person operating the PTV or a passenger riding in the PTV. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-83. - Exemptions. 
The following uses are expressly exempt from compliance and the requirements of this article: 
(1)  All government-owned vehicles, including by city, state, and federal governments, except for the provisions under section 58-81. 
(2)  Operating PTVs exclusively on private property. 
(3)  With express written permission from the city manager, any nongovernment-owned vehicles associated with a special event or exigent circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-84. - Unlawful operation. 
(a)  Unless otherwise noted it is unlawful to operate a PTV: 
(1)  In a careless, reckless or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, or cause injury or damage to any person or property; 
(2)  In a manner, so as to violate the city's ordinances against loud and unnecessary noises (section 58-39, et seq.) reference with noise ordinance; 
(3)  To operate on any sidewalk or trail segment of the city whereby the city holds ownership or easement rights with respect to such trail, including those existing on privately owned property; 
(4)  To engage in racing of any form, except for special events approved by the city; 
(5)  To block public access, except for special events approved by the city; 
(6)  On any railroad right-of-way, except to cross at designated crossings; 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  In all other areas not generally intended for vehicular traffic. 
(9)  On United States Department of the Army Corps of Engineers property, unless the operator has the written permission of the Allatoona operations project manager, which such written permission shall be carried on the person of the permittee at all times during operation of the PTVs on such property or unless such person is an employee of the federal, state, Cherokee County or city government who is on duty and performing services for his or her governmental employer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to operate a PTV on public property, except as provided under section 58-81(c). 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-85. - Organized events. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the use of PTVs or modified golf carts within the city during city sanctioned organized events, if their use is permitted in writing by the city manager or police chief for such event. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-86. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this article shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-7.  
Secs. 58-87—58-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 58-111. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings as set out herein: 
ATV trails means the property designated and posted for lawful, authorized use by ATVs. 
All-terrain vehicles (ATV) means a motorized vehicle designed primarily for operation over natural terrain, to specifically include, but not be limited to, off-road motorcycles, three-wheelers, four-wheelers, and all other such vehicles with one or more wheels but excluding street legal vehicles operating on public road rights-of-way, golf carts and motorized wheelchairs. 
City sanctioned organized event means, for the purposes of this article, an event that is sanctioned or approved by the mayor and council and for which the council has approved the use of ATVs in such event. 
Golf cart means any motorized vehicle designed for the purpose and exclusive use of conveying one or more persons and equipment to play the game of golf in an area designated as a golf course. For such a vehicle to be considered a golf car or golf cart, its speed on a paved level surface shall not exceed 15 mph. Golf carts shall not be operated outside of a golf course or on any road in conjunction with regular vehicular traffic. 
Motorized wheelchair means a mechanized transport designed specifically for handicapped persons and being used by a handicapped person. 
Operate means to ride in or on and control the operation of an ATV. 
Operator means every person who operates an ATV. 
Owner means a person, other than a person with a security interest, having a right of use regarding, property interest in or title to an ATV and entitled to the use and possession of the vehicle. 
Person includes an individual, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity whether incorporated or not. 
Public property means any real property owned by or under control of a governmental entity, either through lease, ownership or public right. 
Public road right-of-way means the entire right-of-way of a public road, street or highway, including the traveled portions, banks, ditches, shoulders and medians of a roadway that is not privately owned. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-112. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to limit the use of ATVs within the incorporated limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-113. - Unlawful operation. 
(a)  Unless otherwise noted, it is unlawful for any person to operate an ATV: 
(1)  In a careless, reckless or negligent manner or heedlessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others, or in a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, or cause injury or damage to any person or property; 
(2)  On a public road right-of-way; 
(3)  In a manner so as to violate the city's ordinances against loud and unnecessary noises (section 58-39, et seq.) reference with noise ordinance. 
(4)  On private property without the express permission to do so by the owner and occupant of the property; 
(5)  On any public property, including, but not limited to, public school grounds, park property, playgrounds, recreational areas, public rights-of-way, cemeteries or any other public places; 
(6)  On United States Department of the Army Corps of Engineers property, unless the operator has the written permission of the Allatoona operations project manager, which such written permission shall be carried on the person of the permittee at all times during operation of the ATV on such property or unless such person is an employee of the federal, state, Cherokee County or city government who is on duty and performing services for his or her governmental employer; 
(7)  On any trail segment of the city whereby the city holds ownership or easement rights with respect to such trail, including those existing on privately owned property. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-114. - Age restrictions. 
No person shall operate an ATV in violation of the age requirements established by Georgia state law. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-115. - Organized events. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the use of ATVs within the city in city sanctioned organized events. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-116. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Motorboats; 
(2)  Any military, fire, or law enforcement vehicle; 
(3)  Any farm machinery, farm tractors, and other self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, for clearing land for planting, for utility services and maintenance, for earth moving, and for like activities; and 
(4)  Self-propelled lawnmowers, snow blowers, garden or lawn tractors, while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes and used in a location consistent with their designed purpose. 
(5)  Motorized wheelchairs. 
(6)  Private property. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-117. - Additional requirements. 
This section shall apply to the operation of ATVs that are otherwise operating in compliance with this article: 
(1)  No ATV shall enter any intersection without yielding the right-of-way to any vehicles or pedestrians at the intersection or so close to the intersection as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(2)  The operator of an ATV shall make every effort to be visible to oncoming traffic from any direction. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Sec. 58-118. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this section shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 5357-2018, 9-10-2018)  
Chapter 62 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Recreation system for municipality authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Use of facilities; reservations. 
(a)  All park properties are to be used on a first come, first served basis. 
(b)  Each person using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1989, § 7-2-1; Ord. of 4-14-2014)  
Sec. 62-2. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, city parks shall be open to the public daily between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. The city's trail system closes as dusk. No person, other than city personnel conducting city business, or engaging in a city sponsored event, shall occupy or be present in such parks during any other hours. 
(b)  Any section or part of a park (which shall include, but not be limited to city trails in the city's trail system city bike trails), or an entire park, may be declared closed to the public by the parks and recreation director or his/her designee at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. 
(c)  Posted signage shall indicate if a park or any section or part thereof is closed which signage shall state that persons present in a closed park or any section or part thereof is closed are subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in any closed city park or any closed section or closed part thereof at any time the park or any section or part thereof is closed to public use as indicated by posted signage. 
(Code 1989, § 7-2-2; Ord. No. 5166-2018, § I, 6-11-2018)  
Sec. 62-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Apr. 14, 2014, deleted § 62-3, which pertained to fees for use of lights and derived from Code 1989, § 7-2-3.  
Sec. 62-4. - Prohibited acts. 
No person using the parks, grounds or facilities shall: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any structures, equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances. 
(2)  Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of the waters. 
(3)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant. 
(4)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest or young of any other animal. 
(5)  Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. Refuse or trash shall be placed only in the proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the presence of the same, and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(6)  Disturb the peace, or use any profane or obscene language. 
(7)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act. 
(8)  Commit any assault or battery, or engage in fighting. 
(9)  Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic beverages, unless previously approved by the city council, or take illegal nonprescription drugs in the park. 
(10)  Violate any rule for the use of the park, made or approved by the parks and recreation board. 
(11)  Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use. 
(12)  Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided. 
(13)  Dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(14)  Use boats, canoes or any other flotation device in any waters or waterways, except in such waters and at such places as they are provided. 
(15)  Violate the noise ordinance as per city ordinance, with the exception of city sponsored events. 
(16)  Enter or remain in a city park or any section or part thereof which has been closed as indicated by posted signage. 
(Code 1989, § 7-2-4; Ord. of 4-14-2014; Ord. No. 5166-2018, § II, 6-11-2018)  
Sec. 62-5. - Motor vehicles. 
No person shall drive or park any motorized vehicle except on streets, driveways or parking lots in the park, or park or leave such a vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking. 
(Code 1989, § 7-2-5) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94.  
Sec. 62-6. - Limitations on games. 
No person shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts or areas provided therefor. 
(Code 1989, § 7-2-6)  
Sec. 62-7. - Fires restricted. 
No person shall build or attempt to build a fire except in areas and under regulations as may be designated by the parks and recreation director. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park area or on any contiguous highway, road or street. 
(Code 1989, § 7-2-7; Ord. of 4-14-2014) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42.  
Sec. 62-8. - Camping prohibited. 
No person shall set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such purpose. 
(Code 1989, § 7-2-8; Ord. of 4-14-2014) 
Cross reference— Urban camping and improper use of public places, § 58-46.  
Sec. 62-9. - Unleashed dogs, animals prohibited. 
No person shall bring any dangerous animal into any park. No dog may be in any park unless such dog is on a leash not more than ten feet long. 
(Code 1989, § 7-2-9) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14.  
Sec. 62-10. - Sales prohibited. 
No person shall vend, sell, peddle or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park, except at city sanctioned fairs and events. 
(Code 1989, § 7-2-10)  
Sec. 62-11. - Signs prohibited. 
No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park. This provision shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any official duty. 
(Code 1989, § 7-2-11)  
Sec. 62-12. - Penalties for violations of posted signage. 
Any person found in violation of section 62-2 shall pay a fine of not more than $100.00 for the first offense, $150.00 for the second offense, $200.00 for the third offense and not more than $1,000.00 for any subsequent offense, as determined by the municipal court judge. 
(Ord. No. 5166-2018, § III, 6-11-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5166-2018, § III, adopted June 11, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as § 62-5. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been included as § 62-12 at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 62-13—62-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Committees, § 2-211 et seq. 
 
Sec. 62-41. - Establishment, composition of board. 
The city parks and recreation advisory board shall consist of eight individuals who are residents of the city. Individuals chosen to be part of this board shall be selected by each councilmember and mayor, one appointee per ward and two appointees by the mayor. The board shall appoint a chairperson and other officers as deemed necessary at the first meeting following appointment of new members. A quorum shall consist of five board members. If a quorum of the appointed members is not present, such election shall be postponed until a quorum of the appointed members is present. 
(Code 1989, § 7-1-1; Ord. No. 00-02-22, 2-22-2000; Ord. of 8-15-2006) 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 3.13. 
State Law reference— Designation of board to conduct recreation activity, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-3.  
Sec. 62-42. - Term of office. 
The parks and recreation advisory board members' terms of office will expire contemporaneously with the expiration of the term of the individual who appointed such committee member. 
Additionally, the chairperson shall be appointed for a term of one calendar year by a majority vote of those members serving on the board. No individual shall serve as a chairperson for a period in excess of two consecutive terms. Such election shall be made by a majority vote of the members present at such meeting, provided a quorum of the appointed members is present at such a meeting. If such a quorum of the appointed members is not present, such election shall be postponed until a quorum of the appointed members is present. 
(Code 1989, § 7-1-2; Ord. No. 94-08-23, 8-23-1994; Ord. No. 96-01-09, 1-9-1996; Ord. No. 00-02-22, 2-22-2000; Ord. of 8-15-2006; Res. No. 2754, 1-27-2014)  
Sec. 62-43. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The parks and recreation advisory board shall assist and recommend to staff and council as to the location and development of all parks and trails in the City of Woodstock. The board shall also assist and recommend to staff and council as to the development and expansion of activities programming for all ages to be held within the city's parks and trails system. 
(b)  The parks and recreation advisory board shall inform and educate the public about the importance of and need for recreation programs, facilities, and services. 
(c)  The parks and recreation advisory board shall make annual site visits of all municipal parks and make recommendations to staff and council as to their condition, maintenance, appeal to public, and potential areas of improvement. 
(d)  The parks and recreation advisory board shall provide encouragement, support, and work in partnership with the parks and recreation department to provide a team approach in voicing concerns to and addressing issues with the city council. 
(e)  The parks and recreation advisory board shall assist staff in the creation and publication of marketing material for the parks and trails system, include a brochure with maps and location information. 
(Code 1989, § 7-1-3; Ord. of 8-15-2006; Ord. of 4-14-2014)  
Sec. 62-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Apr. 14, 2014, repealed § 62-44, which pertained to budget; receipt of monies, gifts and derived from Code 1989, § 7-1-4; and Ord. No. 99-04-13, adopted Apr. 13, 1999.  
Sec. 62-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Apr. 14, 2014, repealed § 62-45, which pertained to annual report and derived from Code 1989, § 7-1-5.  
Sec. 62-46. - Compensation. 
The compensation of the city parks and recreation advisory board shall be set at $50.00 per meeting, to be paid to only those members who attend such a meeting. 
(Ord. No. 01-03-13, 3-13-2001; Ord. of 8-15-2006)  
Chapter 66 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Licensing of peddlers by counties, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq.; prohibition against standing in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting business or contributions from vehicle occupants, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-98; prohibition against solicitation of sale of merchandise on public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 66-1—66-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ITINERANT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS, AND SOLICITORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4004, § 1, adopted July 11, 2016, renamed Art. II from peddlers and solicitors to itinerarnt merchants, peddlers, and solicitors. 
 
Sec. 66-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable purpose means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose for religion, health, education, social welfare, arts and humanities, environment, civic, or public interest. 
Contributions means the promise or grant of any money or property of any kind or value. 
Itinerant merchant means any person who idles, stops, or stands for more than 30 minutes at any location within the city, to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, or merchandise; and who, in furtherance of such purposes sets up displays or exhibits, distributes samples, or holds instructional demonstrations on the use of those goods, wares, or merchandise. 
Peddler means any person who travels throughout the city, generally limiting their time to 30 minutes or less per location, to sell or take orders for goods, wares, or merchandise which they carry, convey, or transport as they move from door to door or place to place; and who, in furtherance of such purposes, may distribute handbills or other materials which promote or advertise the sale or provision of goods or services. 
Person means an individual, a firm, a corporation, a partnership, a limited liability company, an association, a joint-stock company, a trust, an unincorporated organization, a league, a society, or any religious organization and includes any owner, employee, trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof. 
Religious organization means an entity which: 
(1)  Conducts regular worship services; or 
(2)  Is qualified as a religious organization under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. 
Solicitation activity means the request directly or indirectly of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value from another. These requests may be accomplished by using any of the following methods: 
(1)  Any spoken or written request; 
(2)  The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement, or publication; 
(3)  The making of any announcement to the press over the radio, by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale or social gathering, which the public is requested to patronize or to which the public is requested to make a [contribution]; or 
(4)  The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing. 
The term "solicitation" shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same received any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this article. 
Solicitor means any person who takes or attempts to take orders for goods, wares, or merchandise, including books, periodicals, magazines or personal property of any nature for future delivery; or, who seeks contributions in the form of information, money, donations, financial assistance, or anything else of value for any purpose; or who takes or attempts to take orders for services to be furnished or performed in the future. 
The terms "solicitor," "itinerant merchant" and "peddler" shall not include the following classifications of individuals: 
(1)  Any person, firm or corporation who solicits orders for the future delivery of goods to merchants for the merchants' resale. Orders solicited from merchants shall be orders for future delivery only. 
(2)  Individuals who sell agricultural produce produced by that individual. 
(Code 1989, § 9-3-1; Ord. No. 005-2007, 3-12-2007; Ord. No. 4004, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-32. - License required; prohibitions. 
(a)  Itinerant merchants prohibited. Itinerant merchants do not qualify for a license to operate within the city limits. 
(b)  Solicitors and peddlers. Each solicitor or peddler who contemplates doing or does any business within the city limits shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this article. The applicant must meet the zoning requirements as set forth in chapter 50 pertaining to the land development code. No license shall be issued to the applicant without the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 4004, § 2, 7-11-2016) 
Charter reference— Specific powers regulate itinerant trades, § 1.13(17). 
State Law reference— License required, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4004, § 2, adopted July 11, 2016, repealed the former § 66-32, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 66-32 pertained to license required and derived from the Code of 1989, § 9-3-2; Ord. No. 96-03-26, adopted Mar. 26, 1996; Ord. No. 04-03-23, adopted Mar. 23, 2004; and Ord. No. 005-2007, adopted Mar. 12, 2007.  
Sec. 66-33. - Application. 
Application for a license under this article shall be made as provided in chapter 86, article III except that such application shall contain the following additional information. 
(1)  Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address if other than present address; 
(2)  Address of place of residence during the past three years if other than present address; 
(3)  Age of applicant; 
(4)  Name and address of the person firm or corporation or association whom the applicant is employed by or represents and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
(5)  Name and address of employer during the past three years if other than the present employer; 
(6)  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage; 
(7)  Period of time for which the license is applied; 
(8)  Proposed route, including streets to be included on each day, which applicant intends to follow if soliciting from house to house or road to road; 
(9)  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for license under this chapter if any; 
(10)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, a crime of moral turpitude, or any other violation of any state or federal law; 
(11)  Names of magazines, books, or journals to be sold; 
(12)  Names of the three most recent communities where the applicant has solicited house to house, if any; 
(13)  Proposed method of operation; 
(14)  Description and license plate number of vehicle(s) intended to be operated by the applicant for the purpose of engaging in soliciting, if any; 
(15)  Signature of applicant; and 
(16)  Social Security number of applicant. 
All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within five years of the date of the application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; nor to any person whose license issued hereunder has previously been revoked as herein provided nor to any person who has been found to have made fraudulent statements on the application. 
(Code 1989, § 9-3-3; Ord. No. 005-2007, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 66-34. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a license required by this article, the chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made of those items requested in section 66-33 of this article. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the chief of police has determined that the applicant has been convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude within five years of the date of the application; has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; has previously had his/her license, which was issued hereunder, revoked; or has been found to have made fraudulent statements on the application, then the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval for the license and the reasons for the same, and notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police may appeal such decision to the city manager. 
(c)  If as a result of such investigation,the chief of police finds the applicant's application to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall, upon receipt of payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver the license to the applicant. The chief of police shall keep in his office a permanent record of all licenses issued, denied, or revoked together with all information and data pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1989, § 9-3-4; Ord. No. 005-2007, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 66-35. - Exhibition of license. 
All persons obtaining a license under the provisions of this article shall be required to exhibit such license at the request of any police officer or citizen of the City of Woodstock. 
(Code 1989, § 9-3-5; Ord. No. 005-2007, 3-12-2007)  
Sec. 66-36. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No licensee under this article, nor anyone in his behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device including any loudspeaking radio or amplifying system upon any of these streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. 
(b)  No licensee shall attempt to do business at any residence, office, or business clearly displaying a sign stating "No Solicitors or Peddlers Invited," "No Solicitation" or other similar language. 
(c)  No licensee may engage in door to door soliciting on Sundays or between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Mondays through Saturdays. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to enter any private dwelling without the consent of the owner or occupant, or to remain there after being requested or directed to leave. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to register and carry or produce for inspection a license when required under the provisions of this article. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any solicitor or peddler to make any false or deceptive statement on any registration hereunder. 
(Code 1989, § 9-3-6; Ord. No. 005-2007, 3-12-2007; Ord. No. 005-2007, 3-12-2007; Ord. No. 4004, § 3, 7-11-2016) 
State Law reference— Operation of mechanical sound making device within motor vehicle plainly audible at 100 feet prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14.  
Sec. 66-37. - Revocation of license. 
Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made by a solicitor or peddler to another while pursuing any matter or transaction contemplated under this article; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of any felony; 
(5)  Conviction of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
(6)  Conducting any business contemplated under this article, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(Code 1989, § 9-3-7; Ord. No. 005-2007, 3-12-2007; Ord. No. 4004, § 4, 7-11-2016)  
Sec. 66-38. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Any person who solicits or accepts money, donations, or financial assistance of any kind for any religious, charitable, educational, political, or nonprofit organization; sells merchandise for a fee on behalf of such an organization; or who leaves leaflets or flyers or other papers related to such an organization shall be exempt from the registration and license requirements of this article, unless solicitation occurs from a public right of way, in which case a permit may be required per section 66-39. 
(b)  Any person who calls upon homes, offices, or businesses at the request of or with the express permission of the occupants is exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Any officer or employee of the city, county, state, or federal government, or any subdivision thereof is not subject to the provisions of this article when such officer or employee is on official business. Such persons who qualify for any exemption outlined in this section shall remain subject to the prohibitions set forth in sections 66-31 through 66-37. 
(Ord. No. 005-2007, 3-12-2007; Ord. No. 4004, § 5, 7-11-2016)  
Sec. 66-39. - Charitable solicitations from a public right-of-way. 
(a)  Permit required. Any person soliciting funds on the roads and highways within the incorporated portions of the city shall have a permit issued by the governing authority of the city. 
(b)  Eligibility. Permits for soliciting funds on the roads and highways within the incorporated portions of the city shall only be issued to those persons or organizations which have a physical office in Cherokee County. Further, permits for soliciting funds on the roads and highways within the incorporated portions of the city shall only be issued to those persons or organizations which are "charitable organizations" registered in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5, or "charitable organizations" exempt from such registration in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. "Charitable organizations" as used herein shall have the meaning as defined in O.C.G.A § 43-17-2. The determination of whether the organizations have a physical office in Cherokee County shall be made by the staff issuing the permit based on documentation provided by the organization and documentation available on the Georgia Secretary of State's website and shall be appealable to the city manager. In the event the city manager upholds the decision to deny the permit, the city manager's decision shall be appealable to the mayor and council in the same manner as is set out in section 10.162 of the Land Development Code of the City of Woodstock. 
(c)  Application. Applicants for charitable solicitation permits shall make application with the city development services office, and shall provide the following information at the time of their application: 
(1)  Safety plans detailing safety measures to be utilized during solicitation; 
(2)  The site of any proposed solicitation and traffic plans which indicate that their proposed solicitation will not hinder the free and orderly flow of traffic on the roads and highways in the city; 
(3)  List of names, dates of birth, next of kin, emergency contact numbers, and address of each individual who will participate in the proposed solicitation; 
(4)  Insurance information on the individuals and the organization which will participate in the solicitation; 
(5)  A statement under oath that the organization is a charitable organization and that all proceeds raised will be used for the benefit of citizens to include those of the city; and 
(6)  The dates and times proposed for the solicitation. 
(d)  Issuance. Permits shall only be issued by the city development services office if he or she finds that the applicant is qualified and that the proposed solicitation shall not: 
(1)  Pose a risk to the health and safety of the citizens of the city; 
(2)  Pose a risk to the health and safety of the people participating in the solicitation; and 
(3)  Hinder the free flow of traffic on the roads and highways of the city. 
(e)  No one under the age of 18 shall solicit funds in any way from the right-of-way or driving surface of any road or highway in the city. 
(f)  Solicitation permits must be available for inspection at the site of the solicitation upon the request of any law enforcement officer. 
(g)  All persons participating in the solicitation of funds shall in some manner clearly and visibly identify the organization that is permitted to solicit funds and the organization for which they are soliciting funds. 
(h)  All persons participating in the solicitation of funds shall wear orange safety vests at all times while located in the roads and rights-of-way of the city. 
(i)  Permits are valid for seven calendar days. Solicitation may be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(j)  Variances to time limits for charitable solicitation permits shall only be granted by a majority vote of the city council after a showing by the applicant of the necessity of a variance. 
(k)  Any references to the Official Code of Georgia used herein shall be deemed to be to the same as they are amended or modified in the future. 
(Ord. of 4-22-2013; Ord. of 4-25-2016)  
Secs. 66-40—66-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 66-71—66-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 005-2007, adopted Mar. 12, 2007, deleted §§ 66-71—66-75 in their entirety. Former §§ 66-71—66-75 pertained to charitable solicitations and derived from Code 1989, §§ 9-3-21—9-3-25.  
ARTICLE IV. - FARMERS MARKETS 
 
Sec. 66-111. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Employee. Any person employed by a qualified seller at a regular salary, either full- or part-time, but not including any person whose compensation in whole or in part is based, or consists of, a commission on sales. 
Family member. A spouse, parent, child, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, or any other person regularly residing in the qualified seller's household. 
Market. A farmers' market, a market certified by the city and location, including, where authorized, temporary use of streets and/or parkland. 
Qualified seller. A person selling or offering for sale at the market an item or commodity for which she/he has: 
(1)  Grown upon land which the person controls, in the case of fruits, nuts, vegetables or other plant products 
(2)  Produce obtained from a reputable distributor may be re-sold at the market by a qualified seller. 
(Ord. No. 98-05-26, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 04-08-24, 8-24-2004) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-112. - Purpose. 
(a)  To establish a legal framework for the operation of a farmers' market within the city; 
(b)  To provide a flexible system of management over a farmers' market that is responsive to public input and acts in the interest of all residents of the city; sponsorship to be provided by the Woodstock Downtown Development Authority. 
(c)  To meet the need for control over space allocation and enforcement of rules for selling at a farmers' market; and 
(d)  To ensure that a farmers' market is successfully maintained primarily as an outlet for farmers to sell their produce directly to consumers on the designated dates set forth by the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-05-26, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 04-08-24, 8-24-2004)  
Sec. 66-113. - Permits and licenses. 
Proper permits and licenses will be solicited from the county extension and/or Georgia State Department of Agriculture. Permits are listed, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Processed food permits are available through the Georgia Department of Agriculture, and pertain to any food that has been packaged. Proper labeling must accompany packaging. 
(2)  Live plant growers license or live plant dealers license available through the Georgia Department of Agriculture. Pre-cut plants and flowers are exempt from this license, while plants and flowers with root systems must have been in the possession of the dealer for 60 days prior to the sale and proper licensing must be in hand. 
(Ord. No. 98-05-26, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 04-08-24, 8-24-2004)  
Sec. 66-114. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Vendors shall be local farmers and gardeners. Hand crafts shall not be allowed at this time. Entertainment such as local music talent, and special events such as cooking and growing demonstrations will be allowed. Any other vendor that does not fit into the aforementioned categories can contact the manager of the market to discuss their products. Prior written notice must be in hand at the market opening. 
(b)  Products offered at market should be of the highest quality within the rules and regulations set forth by the Georgia Department of Agriculture such as, but not limited to: cleanliness, spoilage, and damage to the product. 
(c)  Vendors must arrive thirty minutes prior to the opening time of the market. Sign-in, payment, and set-up of the booth must be completed by opening time. First-time vendors will be required to fill out a registration card prior to the market. Booth space is on a first come, first served basis, and top priority will be given to agricultural products. 
(d)  The price of a booth will be $5.00 per event. Each vendor is allowed a booth of 12 feet frontage. Multiple booths may be purchased at an additional cost, but cannot exceed more than two spaces unless prior arrangements are made. A lump sum fee may be paid in advance if the vendor wants to take part in multiple markets. The market will be held rain or shine, and refunds of fees will not be given. 
(e)  Vendors are responsible for their own messes. Clean-up facilities are not available at the market, so any refuse must be disposed of by the vendor. If refuse is not properly disposed of, the vendor will be subject to a fine of $25.00. 
(f)  Pricing of goods will be done by volume or by piece (such as $2.00 for a pumpkin, or $2.00 for a peck of beans), not by weight. These rules are enforced by the Georgia State Department of Agriculture. 
(g)  Behavior of vendors to consumers will be in a professional manner that fosters a sense of market community and camaraderie. Verbal or physical threats, foul language or gestures are grounds for immediate ejection from the market and possible permanent expulsion. 
(h)  A complete listing of rules and regulations will be made available to vendors, city council, and public entities. Rules and regulations will include a system of warnings and fines for any infractions. 
(Ord. No. 98-05-26, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 04-08-24, 8-24-2004)  
Sec. 66-115. - Permits to sell. 
No vendor will be allowed to sell their product unless they are properly licensed by supporting governmental entities and are recognized by the city and the Woodstock Downtown Development Authority. 
(Ord. No. 98-05-26, 5-26-1998; Ord. No. 04-08-24, 8-24-2004)  
Chapter 70 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Personnel policies, § 3.50. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(5); administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 54. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
207(k) employee means an employee engaged in fire protection or law enforcement activities with 28-consecutive-day work periods. 
Accrual means the process of earning a benefit such as vacation or sick leave. 
Adverse action means an action taken by the city manager, or his designee, that results in a suspension without pay, salary reduction, demotion or dismissal. 
Anniversary date means the date the employee began his employment in the most recent position. 
Date of hire means the effective date of the individual's employment with the city. 
Discharge means termination of an employee by the city. 
Doctor means a doctor of medicine, osteopathy, dentist or dental surgeon currently holding an active state license. 
Employee-initiated resignation means voluntary termination for any reason other than formal retirement. 
Exempt means employees exempted from the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). 
Flex-schedule/flex time means a variable work schedule deviating from the standard eight hours per day/five days per week work schedule that is traditionally expected to be worked by non-exempt employees who are not engage in fire suppression or law enforcement activities. These schedules allow employees to vary their hours to accommodate external constraints or other factors. A flex-schedule may take the form of four ten-hour workdays which yield a three-day weekend and reduced trips to and from work. 
Grievance means a condition thought to be unjust and grounds for a formal complaint. 
His. Use of this pronoun shall apply equally to both males and females. 
Immediate family includes spouse, child, parent, brother, sister, grandparents, parent-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law or grandchildren. The definition also includes any other person living in the employee's household who is recognized by state law as the employee's dependent. 
In-law means a relative by marriage such as mother-in-law, father-in-law, daughter-in-law and son-in-law. 
Layoff means termination of an employee by the city for lack of work, lack of funds, reorganization or other changes that have taken place. 
May. The term "may" is conditional and implies there is discretion concerning whether a condition exists or an action will take place. 
Nonexempt means employees covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
Outside employment means employment in a work outside of the duties as a city employee. This shall include self-employment and other business activity as well as working for a second employer. 
Overtime means all work performed in excess of the hours permitted under the Fair Labor Standards Act work period. 
Personnel records includes personnel and medical files. An employee's medical file shall be kept separate from his personnel file. 
Probation means a period during which a new employee or an employee who has been transferred, promoted or demoted is being tested on job capability and performance. 
Probationary employee means an employee on a trial status during a period of employment. Probationary periods may be extended under special circumstances. 
Probationary termination means discharge of an employee during the established probationary period, usually for the inability to meet position/department requirements. 
Regular employee means an employee who has successfully completed the probationary period and is assigned to a position which is regular full-time or regular part-time. 
Regular full-time employee means an employee who has successfully completed the probationary period, is assigned to a position which is expected to continue for an indefinite duration, and works a shift schedule which will total no less than 2,080 hours per year. 
Regular part-time employee means an employee who has successfully completed the probationary period, is assigned to a position which is expected to continue for an indefinite duration, and works a shift schedule of less than 40 hours per week. 
Service retirement means voluntary termination after having satisfied the age and length of employment requirements. 
Shall/will. These terms are unconditional and imply that a condition exists or an action will take place. 
Supervisor-initiated resignation means termination requested by the supervisor which permits the employee to resign in lieu of being discharged. 
Temporary part-time employee means an employee who is assigned to a position which is not expected to continue for an indefinite duration, and works a shift schedule of less than 40 hours per week. 
Two-week notice means 14 days. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-11; Ord. No. 99-09-28, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 2008-0016, Exh. B, 7-28-2008) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  The policies of this chapter are enacted by the city in order to further the following goals: 
(1)  To provide a uniform system of personnel administration throughout the city service. 
(2)  To ensure that recruitment, selection, placement, promotion, retention and separation of city employees are in compliance with federal and state laws. 
(3)  To assist managers in the development of sound management practices and procedures, and to make effective consistent use of human resources throughout the city. 
(4)  To promote communication between department heads, supervisors and employees. 
(5)  To ensure, protect and clarify the rights and responsibilities of employees. 
(b)  In the event of conflict between the policies of this chapter, or state or federal law, the terms and conditions of that law shall prevail. In all other cases, the policies of this chapter shall apply. 
(c)  Department heads shall be nominated by the city manager and confirmed by the city council. These appointments shall be made at the first regularly scheduled council meeting each year or as necessary to fill vacancies. 
(d)  In the event of the amendment of any ordinance, rule or law incorporated in this chapter or upon which the provisions of this chapter rely, these rules shall be deemed amended in conformance with those changes. 
(e)  The city specifically reserves the right to repeal, modify or amend the policies of this chapter at any time, with or without notice. None of these provisions shall be deemed to create a vested contractual right in any employee to employment nor to limit the power of the city manager or council to repeal or modify these rules. The policies are not to be interpreted as promises of specific treatment. All employees are employees at will and may be terminated with or without cause. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-1; Ord. No. 04-04-13, 4-13-2004) 
State Law reference— Term of employment, O.C.G.A. § 34-7-1.  
Sec. 70-3. - Discrimination. 
(a)  The city does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, marital status or disability in employment or the provision of services. It is the intent of the city to guarantee disabled persons equal opportunity to participate in or enjoy the benefits of city services, programs or activities, and to allow disabled employees a bias free work environment. The city, upon request, may provide reasonable accommodation in compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(b)  The city has a commitment to ensure equal opportunities for disabled city employees. Every reasonable effort will be made to provide an accessible work environment and additional accommodations, including auxiliary aids and services. Employment practices (e.g., hiring, training, testing, transfer, promotion, compensation, benefits, termination, etc.) will be administered in such manner as to not promote discrimination of disabled employees. 
(c)  Recruitment and selection processes will grant equal opportunity for employment to qualified applicants and will not discriminate on the basis of disability. Reasonable accommodation may be provided upon request during an application/interview process. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-2) 
State Law reference— Fair employment practices, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.  
Sec. 70-4. - Administration of employee personnel records. 
(a)  Establishment and maintenance. The city manager, or his designee, is responsible for establishing and maintaining an official personnel file for each employee of the city. 
(b)  Contents. Department heads are responsible for the forwarding of documents for inclusion in the personnel files of those employees assigned to their department. The following information shall be retained in a personnel records file throughout the association of an employee with the city: 
(1)  Employee application. 
(2)  Job description and specification information. 
(3)  Job performance information. 
(4)  Education/training information. 
(5)  Personnel action forms. 
(6)  Administrative correspondence relating to leave/vacation requests. 
(7)  Letters of appreciation, commendation or discipline. 
(8)  Other appropriate information for personnel administration purposes. 
(c)  Access to personnel records. All information in an employee's personnel records shall be considered a public record in accordance with Georgia § 50-18-70 except those which by order of a court of this state or by law are prohibited or specifically exempt from being open for a personal inspection by the general public, and shall be open for inspection by any citizen of the state at a reasonable time and place. 
(1)  The employee, the city manager, or his designee may examine all materials in an employee's personnel record. 
(2)  Any person authorized by court order may examine specified materials in an employee's personnel record. 
(3)  An official agent of the state or federal government may inspect personnel records to accomplish a proper governmental function. 
(d)  Redaction of employee information. Home addresses and telephone numbers, Social Security numbers, insurance information and medical information of all city employees shall be redacted from documents contained in their personnel record prior to release under a public records request. Police officer's home address or telephone number, social security number, insurance information, medical information and names of immediate family members or dependents shall be redacted from documents in the employee's personal record prior to release under a public records request. No records will be removed or expunged from an employee's personnel record except as allowed by state law. 
(e)  Records of former employees. Regulations for personnel records and access to the records shall apply to former employees as they apply to present employees. 
(f)  Objections to contents. An employee who objects to materials in his file may place in his file a brief statement about that which he considers to be inaccurate or misleading. 
(g)  Penalty for unauthorized access. Any employee who willfully allows unauthorized access to personnel records shall be subject to disciplinary action. Any employee who examines a personnel record without proper authorization shall be subject to disciplinary action. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-3; Ord. No. 04-04-13, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 05-05-24, 5-24-2005)  
Sec. 70-5. - Drug and alcohol use prohibited. 
Controlled substance and/or alcohol use by city employees during assigned working hours, in government buildings or on government grounds, or otherwise while on city business is prohibited. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-4) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6.  
Secs. 70-6—70-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Unlawful practices in employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-29. 
 
Sec. 70-41. - Equal employment opportunity. 
(a)  The city will ensure equal employment opportunity for all employees and appointed representatives. This commitment includes a mandate to afford equal treatment and services to all citizens, employees and city representatives, and to assure equal employment opportunity based on ability and fitness to all persons regardless of race, religion, color, creed, national origin, sex, marital status, age or the presence of any sensory, mental or physical disability unless such disability effectively prevents the performance of the essential duties required of the position and which are bona fide occupational qualifications which cannot be accommodated without undue hardship. 
(b)  All activities relating to employment including recruitment, testing, selection, promotion training and termination shall be conducted in a nondiscriminatory manner. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-12)  
Sec. 70-42. - Hours of work. 
(a)  The normal working hours for employees shall be as scheduled by the various department heads, with such schedule to be established so that the needs of the department to deliver services to the citizens are met. Such schedule shall be approved by the city manager. Employees are expected to be at their work location and ready to begin work at the beginning of their work schedule. The meal periods should be scheduled to allow for continuous staffing of offices with at least one person, except where more personnel are required to be on duty. 
(b)  The standardization of working hours is necessary to provide: 
(1)  Continuity in access by and service to the citizenry. 
(2)  Facilitation of teamwork. 
(3)  Facilitation of supervisory assistance. 
(c)  Occasions may arise when the service to the citizen can be improved through the adjustment of an employee's work hours. The department head shall obtain approval of the city manager for the adjustment in work hours. 
(d)  Individual requests for adjustment of working hours for personal reasons must be evaluated in light of the effect on the criteria enumerated in subsections (a)—(c) of this section. 
(e)  Advance notice of anticipated tardiness is expected; notice of unavoidable tardiness is expected when possible. Failure to do so will be construed as an unexcused absence, and the day missed will not be paid. Tardiness must be made up during the pay period in which it occurs. 
(f)  Notification by another employee, friend or relative is not considered proper except in an emergency situation where the employee is physically unable to make the notification. 
(g)  Daily attendance records will be maintained by each department, including the date and time of each absence and the reason for each absence. Attendance shall be a consideration in determining promotions, transfers, satisfactory completion of probationary periods, and continued employment with the city. Frequent tardiness or other attendance irregularities shall be cause for disciplinary action. This may take the form of progressive discipline. 
(h)  Hours for part-time and certain other employees may vary from the normal office hours noted above due to the nature of their duties and will be determined by the appropriate department head, with concurrence of the city manager. 
(i)  The city may provide compensatory time off in lieu of cash overtime compensation for nonexempt and 207(k) employees. The compensatory time received may be preserved, used or cashed out consistent with the provisions of section 7(o) of the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-13)  
Sec. 70-43. - Work periods. 
This section shall not apply to executive, professional, administrative and all other employees who are exempt from the Fair Labor Standards Act. The following work periods may be changed to accommodate special work schedules, such as summer maintenance schedules: 
(1)  The work period for any 24-hour shift firefighter shall be 28 days. All firefighters shall work a schedule of 24 hours on and 48 hours off for an average of 212 hours per 28-day period. 
(2)  The work period for any sworn police officer shall be 14 days. All sworn officers will be scheduled for an average of 86 hours per 14-day period. 
(3)  The work period for all other city employees shall be a seven-day period beginning on Thursday at 12:01 a.m. and continuing to Wednesday at 12:00 a.m. (midnight). The minimum work week for full-time employees shall be 40 hours. 
(4)  With respect to 207(k) employees, where hours worked are not in excess of the applicable maximum hours standard, the city may give the employee time off for the hours worked in excess of those normally scheduled. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-14; Ord. No. 011-2007, 7-9-2007)  
Sec. 70-44. - Nepotism. 
(a)  It is the city's policy that immediate relatives will not be employed in regular full-time or part-time positions where: 
(1)  One relative would have the authority to supervise, appoint, remove, discipline or evaluate the performance of the other. 
(2)  One relative would be responsible for auditing the work of the other. 
(3)  Other circumstances exist which would place the relatives in a situation of actual or reasonably foreseeable conflict between the city's interest and their own. 
(b)  Where business necessity requires the limitation of employment opportunity of spouses, the means chosen to meet the business necessity shall be those which have the least adverse impact on spouses or members of either sex. For example, the exclusion should be limited to the job, work crew, shop or unit where the reason for exclusion exists, and should not bar the person from the whole work force, unless the reason applies to the whole work force. When it is necessary to exclude a person because of what his spouse does, then the city shall determine which employee it shall keep on the job. The city may require one spouse to quit 60 days after marriage if they become in violation of this policy and a mutually-agreeable solution cannot be reached between the city and the employees. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-15)  
Sec. 70-45. - Probation period. 
(a)  All employees placed in new full-time and part-time positions must serve a six-month period of probation, except sworn police officers and firefighters who serve a 12-month period of probation. This applies to new hires, promotions and transfers. 
(b)  The probation period is designed to give the employee time to learn the position and to give the supervisor time to evaluate the employee's potential and performance. During the established probationary period, the city reserves the right to terminate the probationary employee's service on the basis of unsatisfactory performance or on the basis of other reasons deemed sufficient by the city. 
(c)  If an employee is unable to perform the work, the person must be terminated as early as possible. Early termination saves the city a time and dollar investment and saves the employee possible embarrassment and frustration. Rejected probationers shall be notified of such action in writing by the department head at any time during the probationary period and a copy of such notification shall be retained in the personnel files. 
(d)  Recurring, periodic performance evaluations are required for all probationary employees in full and part-time positions as well as for sworn police officers and fire fighters. An evaluation is required at the 90-day interval of probationary employment for regular full and part time positions that must complete six months of probation. For sworn police officers and fire fighters who serve one-year probationary periods, an evaluation at the six-month interval is required. These periodic evaluations are designed to assess performance and advise the new employee of work expectations as well as any deficiencies in work quality and quantity. At the close of the probationary period, an employee is required to be evaluated for a second time, demonstrating their competency in fulfilling the requirements of their position and being released from probationary status. 
(e)  Under unusual circumstances, the probationary period may be extended. This is only after an evaluation of the situation, the employee's abilities and demonstrated potential. Probation extension is done only upon recommendation of the supervisor, department head and approved by the city manager. 
(f)  If the employee successfully completes the probation period, he shall be informed that he is now a regular employee. This will be accomplished by the city manager's office with the approval of the appropriate department head via the personnel action form. 
(g)  When an employee first becomes a regular full-time employee, he becomes eligible for vacation and other appropriate leaves retroactive to the person's beginning date of employment. This is defined as six months for general employees and 12 months for sworn police officers and firefighters. Exceptions to this policy may only be approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(h)  If an individual has been transferred or promoted, he remains eligible for all fringe benefits included with the previous position during the probation period for the transfer or promotion. If the position to which an employee has been transferred or promoted carries benefits different from those of the previous position, the person becomes eligible for the benefits of the new position upon the satisfactory completion of the probation period retroactive to the date of the transfer or promotion. 
(i)  If an emergency arises during an employee's probationary period which requires a leave of absence, such time off, if granted, will not be considered as time worked. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-16; Ord. No. 04-04-13, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 2008-0016, Exh. A, 7-28-2008; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-46. - Reemployment. 
Any former regular employee who resigned from the city in good standing is eligible for reemployment. Persons interested in reemployment should file a completed city application form with the city manager's office. The individual will then proceed through the regular hiring procedures with other applicants. The date of hire will take the person's previous service with the city into account, however, future increases will coincide with the reemployment date. The individual's previous personnel file will be reactivated once reemployed by the city provided reemployment is within seven years after the original resignation. All individuals reemployed by the city must complete a new probationary period. Employees who are allowed to return to the same position they left within 30 days of departure may elect to bridge their service with leave time at the discretion of the city manager. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-17; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-47. - Eligibility for benefits. 
Nonexempt employee compensation will be stated in terms of hourly wage. Exempt and 207(k) employees are considered salaried. Employees classified as regular full-time employees shall receive all employee benefits provided by the city. Probationary employees shall be classified as regular full-time employees upon successful completion of their probationary periods, and shall be entitled to the same benefits as regular full-time employees subject to applicable eligibility provisions and time periods. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-18)  
Sec. 70-48. - Hiring process. 
The city manager's office will administer and coordinate the hiring process for all position vacancies to ensure compliance with contractual, legal and equal opportunity requirements. All hiring efforts are conducted in the spirit of equal opportunity. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-19)  
Sec. 70-49. - Testing. 
(a)  Examinations may be developed for certain positions based on the position's responsibilities, the qualifications required, and resources available. The examination may consist of oral interview/application review, a structured questionnaire, physical examination, practical tests, written tests, in-basket exercise or assessment center, etc. In all cases, the testing will be job related and designed to determine the candidate's knowledge, skills and abilities (KSA's) for the position. The examination contents are developed by the affected department Examination contents are confidential and unauthorized disclosure to any candidate is grounds for discipline. In certain situations, outside consultants may be contracted to assist with test development. 
(b)  The department head shall ensure that all testing is based on bona fide occupational qualifications. The department head shall ensure that reasonable accommodations are made in test procedures to assure that persons with disabilities can be tested in an appropriate manner. The following are ways in which the city may accommodate an applicant with a disability: 
(1)  Replace written tests with on-the-job tests or verbal testing; 
(2)  Enlarge print in exams, magnification, amplification devices and interpreters. 
(c)  All job applicants being considered for employment shall be required to pass a drug and alcohol screening test prior to being hired. All job applicants shall be informed in advance that such testing shall be required. Employees in safety sensitive positions or employees whose primary job duties require maintenance or operation of a motor vehicle or motorized equipment shall be required to submit to a drug and alcohol screening test at random or on a periodic basis from time to time as determined by the department head and the city manager or his designee. A drug and/or alcohol screening test based on reasonable suspicion can be undertaken in accordance with local regulations. All employees involved in a work-related incident causing personal injury or property damage may be tested promptly for drug and/or alcohol use in accordance with department policies. Any employee involved in a motor vehicle accident while driving a city vehicle on a public roadway and who is determined to have been at fault in the accident by the investigating police officer shall be tested for drugs and alcohol. Voluntary participation in an employee assistance program prior to an employee being requested to submit to a test is encouraged and such participation shall be kept confidential. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-20; Ord. of 8-26-2013, § 1)  
Sec. 70-50. - At-will employment. 
Employment by the city creates an at-will employment relationship between the city and its employees. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to establish or to confer a contractual right of employment. The city council may establish a contract for the position of city manager. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-21) 
State Law reference— Manner of at-will termination in Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 34-7-1.  
Secs. 70-51—70-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COMPENSATION 
 
Sec. 70-81. - Generally. 
(a)  Policy and purpose. It is the policy of the city and the purpose of this article to establish a compensation system that will allow the city to effectively compete for qualified personnel and to ensure that salaries are equitable and commensurate with the duties performed by each employee. 
(b)  Pay range schedule. The city's pay range schedules include minimum and maximum pay allowed by grade. The pay range schedules for employees shall be adopted by the city council. An employee's salary may not exceed the maximum step of their position's assigned pay grade. 
(c)  Cost-of-living. Cost-of-living adjustments may be granted by the city council upon recommendation by the city manager. If granted, they are generally effective on July 1. If a cost-of-living adjustment is made, the salary range allowed by grade will change by the amount approved by the city council. The employee's pay shall be adjusted in the range to reflect the cost-of-living increase. 
(d)  Reevaluation. If the salary of any position is reevaluated by the city manager and results in an increased salary range for the position, the employee shall retain his current salary within the range or assume the entry level step of the new range, whichever is greater. 
(e)  Classification plan. Jobs with similar duties and responsibilities are assigned to the same salary level. The city manager conducts periodic studies of various jobs when there is an indication the employee is working above or below the established responsibilities for that position. 
(f)  Maintenance of the salary plan. The city manager, or his designee, shall be responsible for the continuous maintenance and administration of the city's compensation plan. The review will include an analysis of prevailing rates of pay for similar positions in comparable labor markets, organizations, cost-of-living factors, budgetary considerations, and other related factors. On the basis of this information, the city manager shall recommend to the city council changes to keep the plan current, uniform and equitable. Such changes shall be approved by the city manager and shall then be submitted in the annual budget to the city council for approval. 
(g)  New employees. New employees will ordinarily be paid the minimum rate in the appropriate salary range. Exceptions to this policy may be approved by the city manager if funds are available in the adopted budget and if the need is warranted. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-28; Ord. No. 05-04-26, 4-26-2005; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-82. - Overtime. 
(a)  Fair Labor Standards Act. This section shall not contravene the provisions of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) pertaining to the minimum rate of compensation for employment in excess of an established workweek/period, excluding exempted positions. 
(b)  Qualification. To be eligible for overtime pay, the employee must have actually been present at work for the specified number of hours except on council designated holidays. However, employees working a flex-schedule are not eligible for overtime pay on a council designated holiday unless they work on the day coinciding with the council designated holiday. For all nonexempt employees, only hours worked count towards calculating overtime pay. 
(c)  Payment. The city's responsibility for payment of overtime is as follows: The city will generally compensate overtime at the rate of 1½ for hours worked in excess of the number of hours allowed per work week/period defined below: 
(1)  Nonexempt employees will be paid at the rate of 1½ for hours worked in excess of 40 hours per week. 
(2)  Sworn police officers (207(k) employees) will be paid at the rate of 1½ for hours worked in excess of 86 hours in a 14-day work period. 
(3)  Firefighters (207(k) employees) will be paid at the rate of 1½ for hours worked in excess of 212 hours in a 28-day work period. 
(d)  Roll call/training. All time spent by 207(k) employees in roll call and in training sessions is counted as hours of work but employees are not compensated at the overtime rate for roll call or training hours unless the total hours worked exceeds the maximum hours standard (police-171, fire-212). 
(e)  Compensatory time. Compensatory time shall be earned at a rate not less than 1½ hours for each hour of employment in excess of the maximum hours worked as defined in section 70-42. Accrued compensatory time shall not exceed 40 hours. 
(f)  Call-back pay. If an employee is called back to work outside of normal working hours, he will be guaranteed a minimum of two hours pay. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-29; Ord. No. 04-04-13, 4-13-2004; Ord. of 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 018-2007, 12-17-2007; Ord. No. 2008-0016, Exhs. A, B, 7-28-2008; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A) 
State Law reference— Overtime compensation, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-46.  
Sec. 70-83. - Date of hire/anniversary date. 
The term "date of hire" shall mean the effective date of the individual's employment with the city. The term "anniversary date" shall mean the date the employee began his employment in the most recent position. A regular employee who is promoted, demoted or transferred will have his anniversary date changed to the effective date of the promotion, demotion or transfer. A regular employee returning from a leave of absence without pay will have his anniversary date extended by the same length of time the employee was on leave without pay. There will be no change in an employee's anniversary date in the following instances: Reallocation of an employee's position to a new classification title when there have been no recent, abrupt and/or significant changes in assigned tasks and responsibilities. An employee reinstated to the same position or a position in the same class following layoff from the city will have his anniversary period extended by the same length of time as the duration of the layoff. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-30)  
Sec. 70-84. - Demotions and promotions. 
The following rules shall apply to demotions: 
(1)  An employee reassigned to a position in a lower classification regardless of the reason (disciplinary, in lieu of layoff, for reasons of disability or incapacity, department reorganization, etc.) will receive a cut in pay commensurate with the nature of the demotion as determined by the department head and human resource director in consultation with the city manager. 
(2)  Demotions do not change the person's date of hire. However, the anniversary date for future salary increases changes. 
(3)  No employee shall be demoted to a position for which he does not possess the minimum qualifications. 
(4)  An employee being demoted shall be notified two weeks prior to demotion except in emergency situations. 
(5)  Any demotion to prevent layoffs may be revised when the employee's previous position is reopened. 
(6)  Persons demoted to new positions will be subject to the standard probationary period for the new position. 
(7)  Employees in position classifications which are downgraded (or upgraded) in salary to reflect changes in market conditions will retain their existing anniversary date for future increases. 
(8)  The city shall attempt to fill all vacant positions with qualified city employees before advertising to the general public, following a policy of upward mobility whenever possible. 
(9)  Generally, employees are expected to serve in their current position for at least a year before being considered for a promotion or transfer. 
(10)  The selection of an employee for a promotion (or lateral transfer) is based on the employee's past work record, education, knowledge of the job duties, as well as time in service. 
(11)  When considering the promotion (or lateral transfer) of city employees having the same or similar qualifications, the position will be filled after considering the factors listed in subsection (10) of this section. 
(12)  In cases where only one employee applies for a position and the person's abilities and qualifications are known to the hiring department, the formal selection process may be dispensed with upon concurrence of the city manager. 
(13)  No offer of promotion may be made to any employee prior to completion of the recruitment and selection process. 
(14)  Whenever an employee is promoted to a higher position, such employee will enter the new grade/position at the entry level of the new position If the entry level of the new position does not provide a salary increase of five percent or more, the employee shall enter at the level which provides a salary increase of five percent or more so that the designated rate aligns with a grade/step on the adopted pay schedule. The new pay rate, upon promotion, shall not exceed the maximum of the new pay range. 
(15)  Promotions do not change the person's date of hire. However, the anniversary date for future pay increases will be revised to coincide with the promotion date. 
(16)  Persons so promoted will be subject to the standard probationary period for the new position, unless specifically waived by the city manager. 
(17)  Employees in position classifications which are upgraded or downgraded in salary to reflect changes in market conditions will retain their existing anniversary date for future step increases. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-31; Ord. No. 05-04-26, 4-26-2005; Ord. of 8-26-2013, § 1; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Aug. 26, 2013, § 1, changed the title of § 70-84 from "Demotions" to "Demotions and promotions."  
Sec. 70-85. - Transfers. 
(a)  Any current employee interested in applying for a transfer must file a completed city application form with the city managers office. If the employee meets the stated requirements for the position he will proceed through the regular hiring procedures with all other applicants. Transfers are made only when the city's service will benefit. All else being equal, current city employees will be given priority for open positions. 
(b)  Transfer employees will serve a probationary period in the new position. Transfer employees remain eligible for all fringe benefits included with the previous position. If the position to which an employee transfers carries benefits different from those of the previous position, the benefits of the new position apply. 
(c)  Transfers do not change a person's date of hire. However, the anniversary date for future step increases will be revised to coincide with the transfer date. 
(d)  Transfers may also be initiated by the city in instances where the city's best interests may be served. 
(e)  The salary offered to the employee must be consistent with the salary and requirements of the new position. Thus, an employee who meets only the minimum requirements for the position will be started at the bottom of the salary range regardless of the employee's current salary. Employees who exceed the minimum requirements for the position may be offered a salary consistent with the employee's level of skills, experience and knowledge, but in no case shall the salary be more than ten percent above the entry level pay for the position unless prior approval is obtained from the city manager. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-33; Ord. No. 05-04-26, 4-26-2005)  
Sec. 70-86. - Position descriptions. 
(a)  Position descriptions and job specifications shall be maintained by the city manager's office for all full-time positions. 
(b)  The position descriptions shall include: 
(1)  Class title; 
(2)  Grade number; 
(3)  Class code; 
(4)  Department; 
(5)  General purpose; 
(6)  Supervision received; 
(7)  Supervision exercised; 
(8)  Examples of duties; 
(9)  Minimum qualifications; 
(10)  Special requirements; and 
(11)  Selection guidelines. 
(c)  The position description does not constitute an employment agreement between the city and the employee and is subject to change as the needs of the city and the requirements of the job change. 
(d)  Examples of duties listed in the position description are intended only as illustrations of the various types of work performed. The omissions of specific statements of duties does not exclude them from the position if the work is similarly related or a logical assignment to the position. 
(e)  Each employee's position description is maintained as part of his personnel file. Additional copies of position descriptions may be requested through the department head. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-34)  
Sec. 70-87. - Reclassification. 
Revision of position descriptions and reallocations within the classification plan shall be made as often as is necessary to provide current information on positions and classes and shall be reviewed as part of the annual budget adoption process. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-35; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-88. - Annual evaluation increases. 
An employee's job performance shall be evaluated annually on their anniversary date for their current position. If the city council has approved an annual evaluation increase in that year's budget, and the employee receives a rating of satisfactory or above on their annual evaluation, the employee will be eligible for a one step pay increase of approximately two and one-half percent the pay period immediately following their anniversary date. 
(1)  Employees who have served a minimum of nine months since their last annual evaluation increase and who are selected for promotion, will be given an efficiency evaluation; and if rated satisfactory or above, if not at the maximum of their salary range; shall receive an increase of one step (approximately two and one-half percent) in addition to their promotional increase. 
(2)  Employees who have reached the maximum step of their pay grade, may not exceed the pay grade maximum, and will receive any annual evaluation increase as a one-time lump sum payment. 
(Ord. No. 05-04-26, 4-26-2005)  
Sec. 70-89. - Temporary assignments. 
Any employee may, if approved by the city manager, be placed on temporary assignment in another position for such purposes as training, accomplishing special projects, filling temporary vacancies, or other similar reasons. 
(1)  Duration. A temporary assignment will not normally exceed 180 continuous calendar days. 
(2)  Pay. If an employee is temporarily assigned to a position that is equal or lower in pay grade than his/her regular position, the employee's pay will not change. If the employee is temporarily assigned to a position that is in a higher pay grade than his/her regular position, pay will not change during the first 30 calendar days of the temporary assignment. If the employee remains in the higher rated position for more than 30 calendar days, the employee's pay will be adjusted to at least the entry level of pay for the temporary job for the remainder of the assignment. Such increase in pay will be at least two steps higher than the employee's regular pay. Upon completion of the temporary assignment, the employee's pay will revert back to his/her regular pay. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2013, § 1)  
Secs. 70-90—70-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 70-121. - Group health plan. 
The city offers to the mayor, council, and all its regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage and their eligible dependents group health coverage. Premiums for the mayor, council, and all its regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage who have single coverage may be paid in full by the city. The city pays a percentage, approved by the city council, of premiums for those with family coverage. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-41; Ord. No. 02-06-27, 6-27-2002; Ord. of 7-11-2006)  
Sec. 70-122. - Life insurance. 
The city provides life insurance to the mayor, council, and all its regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage. Premiums for the mayor, council, all its regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage may be paid in full by the city. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-42; Ord. No. 02-06-27, 6-27-2002; Ord. of 7-11-2006)  
Sec. 70-123. - Group dental plan. 
The city offers to the mayor, council, and all its regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage and their eligible dependents group dental coverage. Premiums for the mayor, council, and all its regular full-time employees who meet the eligibility requirements as set forth by the city's insurance coverage with single health coverage may be paid in full by the city. The city pays a percentage, approved by the city council, of the premiums for those with family coverage. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-43; Ord. No. 02-06-27, 6-27-2002; Ord. of 7-11-2006)  
Sec. 70-124. - Credit union. 
City employees and their family members are eligible to participate in an approved credit union. All contributions are financed 100 percent by the employee. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-44; Ord. No. 2009-0003, 4-13-2009; Ord. No. 1742, 10-10-2011; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-125. - Deferred compensation. 
(a)  The city provides an option to any eligible employee to invest a portion of his present earnings in a deferred compensation plan as approved by the city. This is an arrangement where a certain dollar amount can be designated by the employee to be withheld from his paycheck and invested for payment at a later date, usually at retirement, when most people are in a lower income bracket. Under this arrangement, neither the deferred amount nor earnings on the investments are subject to current federal income taxes until such time as the employee receives payment from the plan. 
(b)  The city-approved program includes various investment options. Enrollment can be arranged through the approved provider, and is open to any individual who has achieved regular employee status with the city. Contributions to the program are financed either through direct deposit or payroll deduction. The city may contribute an amount not to exceed five percent of an employee's annual pay if the employee contributes three percent or more of his annual pay. 
(c)  Benefits received through this program are in addition to any social security or public employees' retirement system benefits for which the participating employee would be eligible. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-49; Ord. No. 99-09-28, 9-28-1999; Ord. No. 04-04-13, 4-13-2004; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-126. - Retirement system. 
(a)  The city provides all regular full-time city employees a retirement program. Employees receive a defined benefit plan which is fully funded by the city. 
(b)  A regular full-time employee will be enrolled in the city's retirement program following one year of employment. 
(c)  A participant who meets the requirements of the city's retirement program, upon retirement on his normal retirement date, shall receive a monthly retirement benefit under which payments shall commence on the first day of the month coinciding with his normal retirement date and shall be payable on the first day of each month thereafter during his lifetime. The amount of the monthly retirement benefit of service shall be in accordance with the city's retirement program. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-46) 
State Law reference— Power to establish retirement plan, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-40.  
Sec. 70-127. - Social security. 
(a)  All employees are automatically included as participants in the social security system (FICA) which provides workers with the following benefits: retirement insurance, survivor's insurance, disability insurance, medicare for the disabled and the aged, and supplemental security income. These benefits are in addition to public employees' retirement system benefits for which the employee may be eligible to receive. 
(b)  Financing of the program is accomplished by employee payroll deduction contributions and through a match paid by the city. Employee contributions stop each year once they have paid the required percentage as designated by the federal government. The salary limit and percentage are subject to change at the beginning of each year according to federal guidelines. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-47)  
Sec. 70-128. - Unemployment compensation. 
The city is a covered employer under the unemployment compensation law. The basic objective of the program is to provide a partial replacement of wages for its employees during short periods of involuntary unemployment. The program is financed completely by the city. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-48)  
Sec. 70-129. - Worker's compensation. 
(a)  All employees are covered by worker's compensation, a program of industrial insurance to protect workers, their families and dependents from loss due to an injury caused by an accident arising out of and in the course of employment. The program provides for payment of medical and hospital bills, physical and vocational rehabilitation, and financial compensation while the worker is disabled, either temporarily or permanently, and is unable to work. It also provides for compensation for permanent partial disability such as the loss of a finger, eye, foot, etc., and assures death benefits and compensation to the worker's family or dependents in the event the injury is fatal. 
(b)  No compensation shall be allowed for the first seven calendar days of incapacity resulting from an injury, including the day of the injury, except the benefits provided for in O.C.G.A. § 34-9-200; however, if an employee is incapacitated for 21 consecutive days following an injury, compensation shall be paid for such first seven calendar days of incapacity. 
(c)  Generally, the average weekly wage over a 13-week period immediately preceding the injury shall be taken as the basis upon which to compute compensation. The city shall pay or cause to be paid a weekly benefit equal to two-thirds of the employee's average weekly wage but not more than the maximum amount allowed as designated by the Georgia State Worker Compensation Bill of Rights. 
(d)  Time spent on worker's compensation leave shall not be considered hours worked for purposes of leave accrual. 
(e)  An employee may be paid for earned sick leave while on worker's compensation leave. 
(f)  The mayor, members of the city council, certified volunteer police officers, and volunteer firefighters are covered by worker's compensation. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-49; Ord. No. 04-04-13, 4-13-2004; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-130. - Continuance of medical coverage (COBRA). 
(a)  Employee and/or dependent medical coverage under the current plan may cease as a result of one of the following events: 
(1)  Termination of employment. 
(2)  Change to nonparticipating employment status. 
(3)  Divorce or legal separation. 
(4)  Dependent child became ineligible. 
(b)  Employees or dependents may elect to continue medical coverage beyond the date that it would otherwise terminate by doing one of the following: 
(1)  Convert the group medical coverage to an individual policy provided directly by the insurance carrier. Employees will be sent benefit information and rates regarding conversion options directly from the insurance company. 
(2)  Continue to participate in the group medical coverage plan under the criteria outlined below: 
a.  Rights of employee. Employees presently covered by the insurance plan or health maintenance organization (HMO) may continue this coverage for up to 18 months from the date that employment terminates or status changed to a nonparticipating (noninsured) employment status provided that the employee pays the full cost of premium and any administrative fee (up to two percent) that may be imposed. 
b.  Rights of a spouse of employee. The spouse of an employee covered by the medical plan or a sponsored HMO has the right to continue coverage if the employee was terminated or changed to nonparticipating employment status, or if a divorce or legal court-decreed separation from the employee took place. Coverage under these circumstances may continue for a period up to 36 months provided that the spouse pay the premium in full and any administrative fee (up to two percent) that may be imposed. 
c.  Rights of children. Dependent children of an employee covered by the medical plan or a sponsored HMO have the right to continue coverage if group health coverage under the medical plan is lost because of termination of a parent's employment or change to nonparticipating employment status; parents' divorce or legal court-decreed separation; or the dependent ceases to be a dependent child under the medical plan. Coverage under these circumstances may continue for a period up to 36 months provided that the spouse pay the premium in full and any administrative fee (up to two percent) that may be imposed. 
(3)  A child born to or placed for adoption with the member who is on COBRA is defined as a qualified person. As a qualified person, the child: 
a.  May be eligible for independent election rights. 
b.  May be eligible for an additional 18 months of COBRA continuation if a second qualifying event occurs during the member's original 18-month continuation period. 
c.  May qualify for an 11-month extension due to disability. 
If a dependent is added, the premium will be adjusted accordingly. Dependent coverage must be elected within the plan's normal enrollment period. 
(c)  If an employee or eligible spouse or dependent does not elect to continue coverage, group health insurance will end as scheduled under the plan. 
(d)  If an employee elects to continue group medical coverage, the employee or eligible spouse or dependent is responsible for paying the entire cost (both employer and employee share). This cost will be subject to periodic rate changes. Employees are not required to show that they are insurable (by taking a medical exam) to continue the coverage. 
(e)  Continued coverage may be terminated earlier than the 18-month or 36-month period if group medical plans for all other employees are terminated, or if the employee or eligible spouse or dependent: 
(1)  Fails to remit the required monthly payments within 31 days of the due date; 
(2)  Becomes eligible under any other group medical plan and has satisfied the pre-existing exclusion provision under the new plan; 
(3)  A covered spouse remarries and becomes eligible to be covered under a group medical plan and has satisfied the pre-existing exclusion provision under the new plan; 
(4)  Becomes eligible for medicare. 
Under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, if you have a break in coverage of more than 63 days, you may have to satisfy a pre-existing exclusion under a new group health plan. 
(f)  A member or dependent may extend COBRA continuation if determined by the Social Security Administration (SSA) to be disabled before a qualifying event or within 60 days after a qualifying event. 
(g)  To request an 11-month extension due to disability, a member must submit a copy of the social security disability determination notice to the city within 60 days after the date the notice is received. The request must be made within the 18-month COBRA continuation period. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-50)  
Sec. 70-131. - Education. 
(a)  Tuition and expenses (required text, books, lab fees, etc.) for formal specialized training or college level courses in pursuit of a degree where training will be a direct benefit to the city may be paid by the city, contingent on budgeted funds, as follows: 
(1)  The cost may be paid for courses taken that are related to the employee's current job or to a position for which there is a reasonable expectation of promotion. For the purpose of this section, a related course is: 
a.  A required course in a curriculum leading to a degree directly applicable to city services and the employee's career path. 
b.  One or more courses that will improve the abilities and knowledge of the employee in his current job. 
c.  Any course or training assigned by management to improve city operations. 
(2)  Prior to course enrollment, the employee's request for city participation must be submitted and approved by the department head and an educational agreement properly executed by the city manager. All educational agreements are made part of the employee's personnel file. An employee must have completed his probationary period and be a regular full-time employee in order to be eligible for reimbursement of college level courses. 
(3)  Payment of tuition and expenses shall be contingent upon satisfactory completion of the course as defined by the educational agreement. 
(b)  Conferences, schools or short courses of instruction designed to advance specific technical or professional skill(s) shall be subject to approval by the department head and city manager. 
(c)  An employee shall remain employed with the city three months for each hour (i.e., semester hour) paid by the city for the cost of education. If the employee does not remain employed with the city for the required period, the employee must pay for all education cost paid by the city in full prior to termination. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-51)  
Sec. 70-132. - Employee recognition. 
(a)  Service awards. Employee tenure may be recognized at five-year consecutive increments by a certificate and service pin. These may be awarded to full-time and part-time employees by the mayor and city council at a council meeting. Gift certificates/gift cards may be granted as follows: 
Gift Value 
Years of Service 	Full-Time 	Part-Time 
5 	$ 50.00 	$25.00 
10 	  75.00 	 40.00 
15 	 100.00 	 50.00 
20+ 	 125.00 	 65.00 
 
(b)  Retirement. Upon retirement, an employee may be honored by the mayor and council with a plaque and gift and paid for out of the respective departmental operating budget. The value of gifts may be determined by the tenure of the employee: 
Years of Service 	Gift Value 
20+ 	$250.00 
 
(c)  Longevity pay. Regular full-time employees who have been employed by the city for consecutive years as of their anniversary date will be eligible to receive a lump sum longevity incentive annually at the next regularly scheduled payroll following their anniversary date based on their most recent date of hire as a regular full-time employee. Lump sum longevity incentives will be paid as follows, subject to annual budget appropriation: 
Years of Service 	Amount 
<5 	$  0.00 
5 	 250.00 
6-10 	 500.00 
11-15 	 750.00 
16-19 	1,000.00 
20> 	1,500.00 
 
(d)  Hospitalization. An employee who is hospitalized may receive flowers or a gift in an amount to be approved by the department director. 
(e)  Death. A spray of flowers, gift or a gift card may be bought on the death of an employee, retired employee or current or former elected official. In case of the death of an immediate family member of a current employee or a current elected official, a gift certificate may be sent to the family. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-52; Ord. No. 04-04-13, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 05-05-24, 5-24-2005; Ord. of 6-13-2016; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-133. - Vehicles. 
(a)  City vehicles. The city may provide employees with vehicles to help them in carrying out their job efficiently and effectively. 
(1)  Personal use. Employees shall not use a city vehicle for personal or private business. The only exception to this is commuting to and from work in a city vehicle. Employees who commute in a city vehicle shall be governed by the guidelines in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Authorization. Use of a city vehicle for commuting must be authorized by the city manager for one of the following reasons: 
a.  The employee responds to emergency or after hours calls; and 
b.  The cost of providing the vehicle is less than the expense of mileage reimbursements for using a personal vehicle on city business; or 
c.  The vehicle carries special equipment or personnel to respond to an emergency. Delays in getting this equipment or personnel to the scene of the emergency would result in increased danger to the public. 
(b)  Additional benefits. The city may provide a vehicle or an allowance for the use of a personal vehicle as an additional fringe benefit for selected personnel. The criteria for providing such a benefit shall be: 
(1)  The city receives intangible benefits from giving the employee the vehicle benefit such as the speed of response to emergencies or after hours services which justify the benefit. 
(2)  Provision of the vehicle benefit is considered to be a part of the total pay package for the position. 
(3)  An employee who is provided an allowance for the use of a personal vehicle during official business shall be covered by the city's vehicle insurance upon approval by the city manager and notification and approval is provided to the city by the city's insurer. The employee must have a minimum $50,000.00 liability coverage. 
(c)  Taxation. The value of the use of the city's vehicle will be reported as income to the employee for tax purposes. The city will withhold appropriate taxes from the employee for the value of the vehicle's use and will pay any taxes incurred as an employer. 
(d)  Penalty for abuse. Employees may not use a city vehicle for any personal use other than authorized commuting to and from work. Any further personal use of the vehicle will result in disciplinary action against the employee. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-53; Ord. of 9-25-2017)  
Sec. 70-134. - Employee assistance program. 
(a)  The city may maintain for its employees and their immediate family members a counseling and treatment program, referred to as the employee assistance program or EAP. This program, provided by an outside professional medical organization, assists city employees and their immediate family members with a wide range of personal problems that may have a negative effect on their well-being and/or job performance. The provider will furnish an assessment for the employee or family member and make recommendations for further counseling or treatment as needed either at their facility or by making a referral to an appropriate agency. 
(b)  Some typical problems for which employees may seek professional counseling through the employee assistance program are: 
(1)  Financial; 
(2)  Marital; 
(3)  Alcohol abuse; 
(4)  Drug abuse; 
(5)  Dealing with problem children; 
(6)  Coping with stress; 
(7)  Death of a family member; 
(8)  Divorce; and 
(9)  Children with attention deficit disorder. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-54; Ord. of 10-9-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-135. - Other benefits. 
(a)  Additional compensation for services rendered. The mayor and city council may authorize additional compensation for services rendered to both full-time and part-time employees in December each year. 
(b)  Uniforms. The city provides uniforms or an allowance for the purchase of uniforms to regular full-time employees in public works and public safety positions, as well as full-time building inspectors. 
(c)  Personal safety equipment. Employees may be eligible to purchase safety equipment such as safety shoes through a city contract. Employees may use payroll deductions to pay for these items. The city may pay for personal safety equipment at the discretion of the city manager. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-55; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A)  
Secs. 70-136—70-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - LEAVE 
 
Sec. 70-171. - Family medical leave. 
(a)  The city will provide employees with up to 12 weeks of unpaid family and medical leave during any 12-month period for the following: 
(1)  Birth, adoption or placement of a child for foster care. 
(2)  To care for a spouse, child or parent with a serious health condition or due to the disabling illness of the employee. 
(b)  To be eligible for leave, an employee must have worked for at least 12 months for the city and for a minimum of 1,250 hours during the previous year. 
(c)  Employees who take leave will be entitled to return to their positions, or positions with equivalent benefits, pay and other terms and conditions of employment. 
(d)  The city can deny a position to employees who are among the highest paid ten percent of the employees where the denial is necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic injury to the operations of the city. 
(e)  Employees will not accrue any seniority or employment benefits during any period of leave. 
(f)  The city will provide coverage under a group health insurance plan for employees who are on leave under the same conditions as coverage would have been provided if no leave had been taken. 
(g)  Employees are required to provide at least 30 days' notice before beginning to take leave. Leave resulting from the birth of a child or the placement of a child for adoption or foster care can not be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule unless the employee and city agree. 
(h)  Leave resulting from the serious illness of a child, spouse, parent or the employee can be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule when medically necessary. 
(i)  The city may require that any accrued personal leave of the employee be substituted for the 12 weeks of leave provided by the Federal Family and Medical Leave Act. 
(j)  Where leave is requested as a result of a serious health condition, the city can require the employee to provide a certification issued by a health care provider. The city can require an opinion from a second health care provider, which will be paid for by the city, where there is doubt as to the validity of the certification provided by the employee. If there is a conflict between the two opinions, the city may pay for an opinion by a third health care provider. The opinion of the third health care provider will be binding upon both the city and employee. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-61; Ord. No. 05-06-14, 6-14-2005)  
Sec. 70-172. - Bereavement leave. 
A regular full time employee who has a member of his immediate family taken by death shall receive up to three days off with pay as bereavement leave to arrange and/or attend funeral activities. If additional time is necessary, it shall be taken as personal leave or unpaid leave if personal leave has been exhausted with authorization of the appropriate department head and city manager. Time for attendance at the funeral of others may be granted using personal leave, leave without pay or made up within the same pay period. The employee must notify his immediate supervisor upon making determination to take time off from work. Employees who fail to return to work on the date specified to the department head without receiving an extension are subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-62; Ord. No. 04-04-13, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 05-06-14, 6-14-2005)  
Sec. 70-173. - Holidays. 
(a)  The city shall celebrate the following holidays off with pay for full-time employees: 
New Year's Day 	January 1 
Martin Luther King's Day 	Third Monday in January 
Memorial Day 	Last Monday of May 
Independence Day 	July 4 
Labor Day 	First Monday of September 
Veterans Day 	November 11 
Thanksgiving Day 	Fourth Thursday of November 
Day after Thanksgiving 	
Christmas Eve 	December 24 
Christmas Day 	December 25 
Personal Day 	
 
(b)  If a holiday falls upon a Sunday, the following Monday shall be deemed to be the legal holiday. If the legal holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be deemed to be the legal holiday. 
(c)  To receive pay for an official holiday, the employee must either: 
(1)  Work the days immediately before and after the holiday; or 
(2)  Be on approved paid leave on those days. 
(d)  Employees working flexible hours who are not scheduled to work on the day of a holiday will not have their holiday hours included in any calculations of overtime. Rather, they will be paid holiday hours in the amount proportionate to their daily flex time work hours. For example, if an employee is scheduled to work four ten hour days and the following day off coincides with a council designated holiday, then the flex time employee will receive ten hours of holiday pay. For the non-exempt flex time employee who is scheduled to work on a holiday, the individual will be paid for the hours worked in addition to the holiday hours granted in a proportional manner to the normal daily flex hours. Only the hours actually worked will be eligible for inclusion in the calculation of overtime. 
(e)  Firefighters and uniform sworn police officers (207(k) employees), and nonexempt employees that are not on flex schedules and authorized to work during any council designated holiday as defined in subsection (a) of this section, shall receive holiday pay for the council designated holiday at their normal hourly rates as well as pay for actual hours worked. Only the actual hours worked will be factored into the calculation of overtime pay. Holiday pay is not to be considered hours worked in the computation of overtime. 
Holiday pay for fire—12 hours 
Holiday pay for police patrol—12.25 hours 
Holiday pay for police admin—8.5 hours 
Holiday pay for general employees—8 hours 
(f)  Any employee who has accrued holiday hours [shall use such holiday hours earned prior to using vacation hours.] 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-63; Ord. No. 98-11-24, 11-24-1998; Ord. No. 01-02-27, 2-27-2001; Ord. No. 2008-0016, Exhs. A, B, 7-28-2008; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-174. - Jury/court leave. 
(a)  Any regular full-time employee who is required to serve on a jury, or as a result of official city duties is required to appear before a court, legislative committee or quasi-judicial body as a witness in response to a subpoena or other directive, shall be allowed authorized leave with pay. A probationary employee called will have his probationary period extended to by the same amount of time as required for serving on jury duty. An employee who receives notice of jury duty or witness service must notify his supervisor immediately in order that arrangements may be made to cover the position. The city reserves the right to request that an employee who is called for jury be excused if their absence would create a hardship on the operational effectiveness of the department to which they are assigned. 
(b)  Time away will not affect personal leave accruals. 
(c)  Employees who appear in court as the plaintive or defendant in any action not related to their official duties shall not be paid for time away from work unless that time is accrued personal leave. 
(d)  The employee may keep any court payment for services performed on the days of his regularly scheduled workday or performed while on personal leave. 
(e)  Employees are to return to work after jury duty although no more than the regularly scheduled number of hours for both jury duty and work shall be required. If excused as a juror on any given day, the employee is expected to contact his supervisor and to report to work as instructed. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-64; Ord. No. 05-06-14, 6-14-2005; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-175. - Leave of absence without pay. 
Requests for leave of absence without pay shall be in writing and shall state specifically the reasons for the request, the date desired to begin the leave, and the date of return. The request shall normally be submitted by the employee to the affected department head. The department head shall grant, modify or deny the request based upon the best interest of the city, giving due consideration to the reasons given by the employee, and the requirements of any applicable state and federal laws. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-65)  
Sec. 70-176. - Military leave. 
(a)  The authority for this section is derived from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279 and applies to all city employees who are affiliated with the United States Armed Forces, National Guard or Coast Guard. 
(b)  Employer's responsibilities: 
(1)  The city is obligated to release employees for service with the armed forces when the employee participates in: 
a.  Annual training. 
b.  Inactive duty training assemblies (weekend drills). 
c.  Involuntary call-up. 
(2)  Ordered military duty shall result in no loss of seniority status or benefits which would have normally accrued if the employee had not been absent for such purposes. 
(3)  The city is obligated to grant military leave with pay to the employees for absences not exceeding 18 calendar days per year in accordance with state law. The city shall not require the employee to use personal leave for such purposes. The employee may, however, request use of personal leave, or leave without pay, to supplement absences exceeding those covered by the 18-day military leave allowance. 
(c)  Employee's responsibilities: 
(1)  The employee is responsible to provide to his department head copies of all military orders which will result in a leave of absence for military duty. Orders must specify the duties of absence, promulgation authority, letter order number and signature of issuing authority. Employees are required to notify their supervisors at the earliest possible date upon learning of scheduled military duty. 
(2)  Employees who fail to return to work on the date specified in the leave request without receiving an extension in advance are subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
(3)  Inactive duty training dates (weekend drills) should be provided to the department head as soon as available if the dates conflict with scheduled employment with the city. 
(4)  Extended leave of absence (exceeding 18 calendar day allowance) will be pursuant to the policy on leave of absence without pay. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-66; Ord. No. 05-06-14, 6-14-2005) 
State Law reference— Rights of public officers and employees absent on military duty, O.C.G.A. § 38-2-279.  
Sec. 70-177. - Personal leave. 
(a)  Effective July 1, 2005, all full-time employees, whether paid on an exempt or non-exempt basis, shall accrue personal leave. Personal leave accruals may be used to receive pay if an employee is on an approved absence from work. A full-time employee shall accrue personal leave from their date of employment. Personal leave shall accrue to the credit of each employee up to a maximum total accumulation of 680 hours for general employees, 728 hours for 207(k) police department employees and 836 hours for 207(k) fire department employees as of June 30th of each fiscal year. 
(b)  Personal leave must be approved in advance by the employee's supervisor or department director. Timely requests for personal leave will be honored except when the supervisor or department director determines it would adversely affect the efficient operation of the department. In order to ensure effective operational scheduling, personal leave shall be requested as far in advance as possible but in no event less than one work day before the leave is to commence unless the failure to make a timely request is determined as beyond the employee's control by the department director. Department directors may require an acceptable notification period of up to ten working days for advanced notice to use personal leave for reasons other than sickness or emergency absences as long as that notification period is applied in the same manner for all department employees. 
(c)  In the case of unforeseen sickness or injury of the employee or an immediate family member, the employee must advised their supervisor or department director as soon as possible that they are going to be absent but not later than the employee's scheduled reporting time unless prohibited from doing so for reasons determined by the supervisor or department director to be beyond the employee's control. The employee should also let the supervisor know when they anticipate returning to work. This procedure shall be followed every day the employee is unable to work, unless the absence has been scheduled in advance. A physician's certification may be required as validation of an unforeseen sickness or injury to the employee or their family member. 
(d)  Upon termination from city employment, employees shall be entitled to compensation at their current hourly rate for up to 50 percent of their accrued personal leave provided they give at least two weeks' working notice or are not terminated for cause as defined in section 70-242. In the event of an employee's death, 50 percent of their accrued personal leave balance may be paid to the employee's dependent spouse or child or the employee's estate. 
(e)  A full-time employee using approved personal leave for personal illness or injury for a period of three days or longer shall, prior to returning to work, furnish without delay a report from a doctor verifying that the employee is able to return to work at either full or light duty. 
(f)  Accrual of leave for city employees is as follows: 
General Personnel 
Years of Service 	Hours Earned 
Each Month 	Hours Earned 
Each Year 
<5 	13.34 	160 
5 	18.00 	216 
10 	20.00 	240 
15 	20.67 	248 
20+ 	21.33 	256 
 
Sworn Police Personnel 
Years of Service 	Hours Earned Each Month 	Hours Earned 
Each Year 
<5 	13.75 	165 
5 	18.75 	225 
10 	20.92 	251 
15 	21.67 	260 
20+ 	22.33 	268 
 
Certified Fire Personnel 
Years of Service 	Hours Earned Each Month 	Hours Earned Each Year 
<5 	15.50 	186 
5 	21.67 	260 
10 	24.33 	292 
15 	25.42 	305 
20+ 	26.08 	313 
 
(g)  Personal leave shall not accrue during leaves of absence without pay. Employees with less than six months of city service are not allowed to use personal leave during that six-month period for any reason except illness or injury. 
(h)  Personal leave shall be rounded off to the nearest half hour. Personal leave may only be used by an employee once it has been accrued. 
(i)  Accrued personal leave must be exhausted prior to taking an unpaid leave of absence. 
(j)  To accrue personal leave, an employee must work more than 50 percent of their normal work schedule in the month. Hours on approved personal leave shall count as hours worked for purposes of accruing personal leave. 
(k)  In all cases, employees must use a minimum number of personal leave hours each fiscal year based on years of service as follows: 
General Employees 
Upon completion of one year through five years of service 	- 40 hours annually 
Upon completion of six years through 15 years of service 	- 80 hours annually 
Upon completion of 16 years of service and over 	- 120 hours annually 
 
Sworn Police Department Employees 
Upon completion of one year through five years of service 	- 44 hours annually 
Upon completion of six years through 15 years of service 	- 88 hours annually 
Upon completion of 16 years of service and over 	- 132 hours annually 
 
Certified Fire Department Employees 
Upon completion of one year through five years of service 	- 53 hours annually 
Upon completion of six years through 15 years of service 	- 106 hours annually 
Upon completion of 16 years of service and over 	- 159 hours annually 
 
To the extent that the employee did not take the required number of accrued hours of personal leave as shown above, up to the required number of hours will be automatically deducted from the employee's personal leave accruals on June 30th of each fiscal year. 
(l)  Employees who have used or had deducted the required annual minimum personal leave hours and exceed their maximum personal leave accruals on June 30th of each fiscal year, are eligible to receive a personal leave incentive of up to 80 hours for general employees, up to 88 hours for sworn police department employees, and up to 106 hours for certified fire department employees based on their actual accruals. The personal leave incentive will be paid during the pay period that includes November 1 each fiscal year. As of June 30th each fiscal year, no employee may exceed their assigned personal leave maximums of 680 hours for general employees, 728 hours for 207(k) police department employees and 836 hours for 207(k) fire department employees. 
(m)  Employees may contribute personal leave to other city employees providing the receiving employee has exhausted all of their personal leave accruals. Personal leave donations may be donated to another employee for that employee to deal with a personal illness or injury. Personal leave donations will not be made to an employee to provide a paid vacation. Employees terminating their employment with the city for any reason may not donate personal leave to other employees. Employees may receive a maximum of two work weeks personal leave donations for any specific incident. Donations greater than two weeks must be approved by the city manager. 
(n)  Holidays. Paid holidays occurring during personal leave are not charged to personal leave. 
(o)  Compensatory time. Compensatory time off must be exhausted before personal leave is taken, even if this will result in accrued personal leave being forfeited. 
(p)  Cash out personal leave time. An employee may cash out personal leave with approval of the department director and the city manager and subject to departmental funds availability in the annual budget. Employees will only be allowed to cash out 40 hours in a 12-month period. Requests must be for reasons of financial hardship like medical expenses, loss of family income, or legal matters resulting from something that was unforeseen and not budgeted. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-67; Ord. No. 04-04-13, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 05-06-14, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 2008-0016, Exh. A, 7-28-2008; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A; Ord. of 10-9-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-178. - Safety day. 
The city has established a safety program with emphasis on training and prevention to avoid on-the-job injuries in the workplace. Employees are strongly encouraged to practice safety while working and report or correct any situation that may result in possible injury to other employees or the public in their work areas. On-the-job injuries are costly to the public and should be avoided. Effective July 1, 2005, city employees will be eligible to earn safety day leave. Safety leave will be awarded to any full-time city employee who has not had an on-the-job injury during the prior fiscal year. Forty-hour workweek employees who have not had an on-the-job injury during the preceding fiscal year will be awarded eight hours of safety leave. Police department 207(k) employees who have not had an on-the-job injury during the preceding fiscal year will be awarded hours equivalent to the length of their normal shift of safety leave. Fire department 207(k) employees who have not had an on-the-job injury during the preceding fiscal year will be awarded 12 hours of safety leave. Employees who have had an on-the-job injury during the preceding fiscal year are ineligible for safety leave regardless of the circumstances. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-68; Ord. No. 04-04-13, 4-13-2004; Ord. No. 05-06-14, 6-14-2005; Ord. of 9-25-2017, Att. A)  
Sec. 70-179. - Educational leave. 
(a)  Time off during regular working hours by an employee who is voluntarily pursuing a course of study, whether related or nonrelated, shall be subject to the approval of the department head. An employee will not be compensated for classroom time required during regular work hours. Continued time off for class time is contingent upon the employee meeting all job responsibilities. 
(b)  Employees may from time to time be required to attend training when it is to the benefit of the city. Employees assigned to attend courses at the direction of the department head will be compensated for classroom time in the same manner as if on the job. 
(c)  A special leave of absence at full or part pay may, in extraordinary situations, be granted by the city manager, upon recommendation of the department head, to permit a city employee to take courses of study which will better equip the employee to perform his duties for the city (i.e., F.B.I. Academy). This special educational leave may not exceed six months. 
(d)  An employee granted educational leave in excess of 60 days with full or part pay shall agree in writing to return to the employment of the city upon completion of his training and remain in the employ of the city for a period equal to six times the educational leave which he received, or reimburse the city for all compensation received while on educational leave. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-69)  
Secs. 70-180—70-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CONDUCT 
 
Sec. 70-211. - Prohibited activities. 
Employees of the city are expected to follow the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. Additionally, since city employment is a position of public trust, certain activities are specifically prohibited. These activities include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Political activities. Neither the position or city time should be used for political activity. Employees may express their political opinions privately. Employees are encouraged to vote for the candidate of their choice. Further political activity should be avoided. No employee may use any supplies or equipment of the city for political or partisan purposes. 
(2)  Outside employment. City employees should avoid outside employment which might lead to a conflict of interest or have a negative impact on performance of his city functions. Any employee engaged in outside employment shall submit a written report of such employment to their department director or the city manager. Such reports shall be required on a semiannual basis. 
(3)  Gifts and favors. No city employee shall accept significant gifts or services from anyone who might expect to receive anything in return from the city. Gifts or services valued at more than $25.00 will be considered significant for purposes of this policy. No employee shall grant any improper favor, service or object of value in the discharge of his duties. 
(4)  Use of intoxicants. Employees should not have or consume any alcohol or other intoxicating drug during working hours. No employee shall be under the influence of alcohol or other intoxicating drug during working hours. Employees shall not possess, consume, manufacture or distribute illegal controlled substances at any time. This shall not apply to police officers in the lawful performance of their duty as an officer. 
(5)  Abuse/misuse of equipment. No employee shall abuse city equipment or supplies or use city resources for personal gain. 
(6)  Garnishments. Employee indebtedness is a personal concern, but multiple garnishments of an employee's salary may lead to disciplinary action. No employee shall allow his personal finances to hamper the performance of his job or create undue administrative problems for the city. A history of garnishments may be viewed adversely. 
(7)  Sexual harassment. Sexual harassment will not be permitted in any department of the city. Any employee who feels they are a victim of sexual harassment should report incidents to their department director, the human resources director or to the city manager immediately. Additionally, employees or supervisors who view sexual harassment in the workplace should report those actions immediately to their department director, the human resources director or the city manager. Sexual harassment includes unwelcome sexual advances or language that interferes with an employee's productivity or comfort at the work place, or dependence of any terms or conditions of employment on sexual favors. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-76(a)—(g); Ord. No. 010-2007, 4-23-2007)  
Sec. 70-212. - Reporting sexual harassment. 
A claim of sexual harassment bypasses the normal grievance procedure; the claims may be expressed to a department director, the human resources director or the city manager. If the employee feels that reporting to a department director, the human resources director or the city manager may adversely affect his employment, a written claim may be made to the city attorney. The city attorney shall convey the claim to city council for action. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-76(g)(1); Ord. No. 010-2007, 4-23-2007)  
Secs. 70-213—70-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DISCIPLINE 
 
Sec. 70-241. - Progressive discipline. 
Progressive discipline is a process in which disciplinary action is taken in degrees of increasing severity. The city shall use a policy of progressive discipline when applicable. An employee who fails to perform assigned duties adequately or who violates city policies will be disciplined. Disciplinary actions taken will depend on the degree and circumstances of the violation. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, all employees with the exception of the city manager, if the city manager has a contract with the city, are employees at will and may be terminated without cause. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-81; Ord. No. 010-2007, 4-23-2007)  
Sec. 70-242. - Causes for action. 
Causes of disciplinary actions are: 
(1)  Chronic, excessive or unexcused tardiness or absenteeism; 
(2)  Absence without permission or leave (A.W.O.L.); 
(3)  Falsification of personnel or city records, including employment applications, accident records, work records, purchase orders, time sheets, or any other report, record or document; 
(4)  Negligence, incompetency or inefficiency in performing assigned duties; 
(5)  Inability or unfitness to perform assigned duties; 
(6)  Discourteous, insulting, abusive or inflammatory language or conduct toward the public or co-workers; 
(7)  Improper racial or sexual comments, harassment or acts directed to any employee or the general public; 
(8)  Failure to complete employee performance evaluations in a timely manner; 
(9)  Deliberately or negligently misusing, destroying, or damaging any city property or property of an employee; 
(10)  Removal of city property or any employee's property from city facilities without proper authorization; theft of city property or any employee's property; 
(11)  Insubordination or the refusal to perform work assigned, or to comply with any legal written or verbal instructions of a supervisor; 
(12)  Refusal to fully and truthfully cooperate in an investigation conducted by or at the direction of the city; 
(13)  Threatening, intimidating, coercing, or interfering with city employees or supervision at any time, including abusive language; 
(14)  Failure to work overtime, additional assignments, standby duty, or special details after being scheduled according to overtime and standby duty policies without legitimate reason; 
(15)  Possession, use, sale, attempt to sell or procure illegal controlled substances at any time whether on or off city property or whether on or off duty; and possession, use, sale or attempt to sell or procure alcoholic beverages while on duty, on city property or while operating or riding in or on city equipment; 
(16)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages before and/or during regular working hours (including meal breaks) or while on call or called out; 
(17)  Unauthorized use or possession of a firearm, explosives or weapons in city buildings or when conducting city business; 
(18)  On or off the job conduct which adversely affects the ability of the employee to perform their duties and/or adversely affects the efficient operation of the city government or any department, division, or area of city government; 
(19)  Failure to report an accident or personal injury in which the employee was involved while on the job or in a city vehicle; 
(20)  Violating a safety rule or safety procedure; 
(21)  Personal use of the City of Woodstock tax exempt number for any reason; 
(22)  Failure to report loss of a city identification card; 
(23)  Improper use of city email or computer systems; 
(24)  Use of official position for personal advantage, including acceptance of a gift, service, or anything of value over $25.00 in the performance of duty or under circumstances where the employee knew or should have known it was given with an expectancy of obtaining a service or favored treatment by a city employee, department or agency; 
(25)  Violation of published city or departmental policies, rules, standard operating procedures or regulations; 
(26)  Commission of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude; 
(27)  Conduct reflecting discredit on the city or any of its departments; 
(28)  Political activity that is prohibited by the policies of this chapter, state law or federal law; or 
(29)  Any other action or inaction not in the city's best interest. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-82; Ord. No. 010-2007, 4-23-2007; Ord. of 7-14-2014)  
Sec. 70-243. - Types of action. 
(a)  Disciplinary action. Disciplinary actions fall into two general classes as follows: 
(1)  Reprimands. A reprimand is a formal means of advising the employee that a problem exists and must be corrected. 
a.  Oral reprimand. A verbal explanation of a problem with an employee and what must be done to correct the problem. This discussion should be between the department head or city manager and the employee in a private setting. 
b.  Written reprimand. A written statement of a problem with an employee and what must be done to correct the problem. The reprimand should also reflect the likely result of not correcting the problem. The employee should be given a copy of this reprimand in a private interview with the department head or city manager. 
(2)  Adverse action. An action taken by the city manager or department head that results in a suspension without pay, salary reduction, demotion or dismissal. 
a.  Suspension without pay. An employee may be suspended without pay, not to exceed 30 days, for a violation of policies governing performance and conduct. 
b.  Salary reduction. An employee's salary may be reduced for disciplinary purposes. A salary reduction is not a demotion in pay grade. 
c.  Demotion. An employee may be demoted for disciplinary or other involuntary reasons if a lower position is open, and the employee is qualified to perform the work at the lower position. A disciplinary demotion must include a decrease in salary. 
d.  Dismissal. An employee may be dismissed for disciplinary or other involuntary reasons when other actions did not solve the problem. A dismissal may also take place if the employee must be removed from the work place immediately and/or permanently. 
(b)  Emergency action. The city manager, department director and/or their designee may take immediate action against an employee under emergency situations. Immediate action shall be to suspend the employee with pay until an investigation can be conducted. For the purpose of this policy, an emergency situation may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  An employee commits a felony or crime of moral turpitude; 
(2)  When an employee may harm himself, fellow workers or the general public; or 
(3)  When an employee may damage public property. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-83; Ord. No. 010-2007, 4-23-2007)  
Sec. 70-244. - Grievance/appeals process. 
(a)  The grievance procedure is established to provide opportunity to non-probationary employees to bring to the attention of management, situations that directly affect the employee's working conditions. It is the intent and desire of the city to adjust complaints or grievances informally, and both supervisors and employees are expected to make reasonable efforts to resolve problems as they arise. However, it is recognized that there will be grievances, which will be resolved only after an appeal and review. The submission of a grievance by an employee shall in no way adversely affect the employee or their employment with the city. 
(b)  Only full-time and part-time employees who have completed the initial probationary period are eligible to file appeals or grievances under this procedure. Employees who are currently assigned to probationary periods based on promotion, demotion, or transfer who have completed the initial probationary period are considered eligible to file appeals or grievances under this section. 
(c)  In order to assure non-probationary employees', a method by which the employee can get a particular grievance considered rapidly, fairly and without reprisal, the following steps are provided: 
Step 1 — Supervisor 
The aggrieved employee shall, within three working days of the incident, explain and discuss the complaint or grievance orally with the supervisor involved. Higher level supervision may be called into the discussion in an effort to achieve a prompt adjustment. 
The supervisor will make a decision and notify the employee in writing within a reasonable time after discussion with the employee. Normally a reasonable time as used herein would be considered to be three working days. Circumstances may warrant a longer time frame. Ultimately, the city manager will determine whether the response was within a reasonable time. 
The supervisor must provide the department director with a copy of the written decision. 
Step 2 — Department Director 
If the aggrieved employee feels that the matter has not been settled or adjusted to his/her satisfaction by the supervisor, they may submit the matter in writing to the department director within three working days from receipt of the answer in Step 1. 
The department director or his/her designee, shall meet with the employee within a reasonable time. The department director or his/her designee will provide a written answer to the employee within a reasonable time. 
The department director must provide the human resources director copies of all relating documents and the written decision in Step 2. 
The department director at Step 2, is the final appeal level for all grievance and appeals other than adverse actions as defined in section 70-243(2), grievances involving sexual harassment; or grievances regarding actions under section 70-3, Discrimination which are herein referred to as "Appealable Grievances." 
Step 3 — City Manager 
If the aggrieved employee feels that an appealable grievance has not been settled or adjusted to their satisfaction by the department director, they may submit the matter in writing for review by the city manager. Requests to submit grievances or appeals to the city manager must be submitted to the human resources director within five working days from receipt of the answer in Step 2. 
The city manager or his/her designee shall meet with the employee within a reasonable time after receipt of the grievance. The city manager or their designee will provide a written answer to the employee and the human resources director within a reasonable time. 
Step 4 — City Council 
If the aggrieved employee feels that the matter has not been settled or adjusted to their satisfaction by the city manager, they may submit the matter in writing for review by the city council. Requests to submit grievances or appeals to the city council must be submitted to the city clerk within five working days from receipt of the answer in Step 3. 
The city council has the option to hear or decline to hear any appeal 
(d)  Any grievance shall be considered settled on the basis of management's response at the completion of any step, unless it is appealed within the time limits set forth. 
(Code 1989, § 2-5-84; Ord. No. 010-2007, 5-14-2007)  
Sec. 70-245. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 010-2007, adopted May 14, 2007, deleted § 70-245 in its entirety. Former § 70-245 pertained to appeals and derived from Code 1989, § 2-5-85; and Res. No. 97-02-25, adopted Feb. 27, 1997.  
Chapter 74 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance adopting or amending the comprehensive plan saved from repeal, § 1-11(6); administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; land development code, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 74-1—74-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION AND AUTHORITIES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Committees, § 2-211 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 74-31—74-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 27, 2017 repealed div. 2, §§ 74-51—74-55, which pertained to planning commission and derived from Code 1989, § 8-1-1—8-1-5; Ord. No. 96-06-11, adopted June 11, 1996; Ord. No. 00-02-22, adopted Feb. 22, 2000; Ord. No. 04-03-23, adopted Mar. 23, 2004; Ord. No. 04-04-13, adopted Apr. 13, 2004; an ordinance adopted Nov. 28, 2006(2); and an ordinance adopted Nov. 12, 2012(2). Ordinance of Mar. 27, 2017 also states that provisions for the planning commission are in section 10.110, chapter X—Administration and Enforcement of the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance. 
 
Secs. 74-51—74-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— The Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 74-81. - Declaration of need. 
There is determined and declared to be a present and future need for a downtown development authority (as more fully described and defined in the Downtown Development Authorities Law) to function in the city. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-41) 
State Law reference— Creation of authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-4.  
Sec. 74-82. - Activation. 
There is activated in the city the public body corporate and politic known as the "Woodstock Downtown Development Authority," which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Downtown Development Authorities Law. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-42)  
Sec. 74-83. - Members. 
The downtown development authority shall consist of seven directors, each of whom is a taxpayer of the city, residing in the city, and not less than four of whom either have or represent a party who has an economic interest in the redevelopment and revitalization of the downtown development area. Directors shall serve for six-year staggered terms. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-43) 
Charter reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 3.13.  
Sec. 74-84. - Organization. 
The board of directors elected under this division shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Downtown Development Authorities Law as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-44)  
Sec. 74-85. - Downtown development area defined. 
The downtown development area shall be that geographical area described in an appropriate map on file in the city clerk's office where it is available for public inspection. The area, in the judgment of the city council, constitutes the central business district of the city as contemplated by the Downtown Development Authorities Law. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-45) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-86. - Effect. 
The action taken by the city council as specified in this division is not intended in any way to affect any public corporation, industrial development, downtown development or payroll authority previously created by legislative act or constitutional amendment including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organization, powers or function. 
(Code 1989, § 8-1-46)  
Chapter 78 - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted September 26, 2011, effective October 10, 2012, amended Ch. 78 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 78, §§ 781—78-149 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1989, §§ 5-4-1—5-4-12, 5-4-14—5-4-16, 5-4-18, 5-4-19, 5-2-1—5-2-4, 5-2-7—5-2-12, 5-3-1—5-3-8, 5-3-10; Res. No. 91-11-25(3), adopted Nov. 25, 1991; Res. No. 92-08-24(02), adopted Aug. 35, 1992; and Ord. No. 03-09-02, adopted Sept. 2, 2003. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Const. of 1983, Art. IX. Sec. II, Para. III (a)(2). 
 
ARTICLE I. - NONCOMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
Bulky waste. Those items of furniture, such as sofas, chairs, tables, carpets and other large items such as mattresses, electronics, tubs, toilets, picnic tables and benches, which cannot reasonably be placed in a 95-gallon rollout cart. 
C & D materials. Waste materials generated by the construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of residential, commercial or other structures. 
Collector. A person who is permitted by the city by franchise agreement to engage in the business of collection or transportation of solid waste, with or without compensation, from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from his own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial premises. All non-residential premises, public or private, requiring solid waste collection within the city, including commercial, industrial, institutional, and governmental premises. 
Commercial solid waste. All garbage, rubbish and other acceptable waste generated by commercial premises and all C & D Materials, excluding hazardous waste. 
Composting. The controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into stable, odor free humus. 
Construction/demolition waste. Waste building material and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to asbestos, asbestos containing waste, wood, brick, metal, concrete, wall board, paper cardboard, inert waste, landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Curbside. The location adjacent to the traveled portion of a publicly owned roadway designated by the contractor for the placement of carts and other solid waste and recyclables for collection. 
Disposal facility. Any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing, or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal operation. The performance of solid waste disposal, including administration, personnel, land, equipment, design, and other elements necessary or used in the work of solid waste disposal. 
Disposal site. The location or land area where the final disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Dispose. To get rid of, deal conclusively with or transfer to the control of another. 
Franchisee. The person or company chosen to haul and dispose of solid waste for the citizens of the city by the mayor and council. 
Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Hazardous waste. Solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides and drugs (other than normal household use); pathological wastes; highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; sewage sludge; and other waste material determined to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety, or environment, except radioactive waste materials as provided for in Rules of the Department of Human Resources, Chapter 270-5-20, entitled "Radioactive Materials." 
Industrial waste. Waste materials generated in industrial operations. 
Landfill. A method of disposing of solid waste, other than putrescible waste or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Municipal solid waste. All types of solid waste including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks from hotels, motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include construction and demolition waste and solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial process or operations. 
Open dump. A disposable site at which solid waste from one or more sources is consolidated and left to decompose, burn, or to otherwise create environmental pollution or nuisance. 
Owner. Any person, firm or corporation owning, leasing, renting occupying, or managing any premises in the jurisdiction of the City of Woodstock. 
Person. The State of Georgia or any other state agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer of governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. 
Plastic bag. A polyethylene or other heavy duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation Standard of at least 1.5 mills and not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, with securing twist ties. 
Putrescible waste. Wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms, including kitchen wastes, manure, offal, hatchery and poultry wastes, and garbage. 
Reclamation. A controlled method of sorting and storing solid wastes for future use in accordance with an approved plan. 
Recovered materials. Those materials which have known uses, reuses, or recycling potential such as newspaper, glass, cardboard, aluminum cans, metal cans, and plastics; those items that can be feasibly used, reused, or recycled; and those items that have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. 
Recycling. Any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Refuse. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid commercial and industrial wastes. 
Residential premises: A dwelling within the city limits occupied by a person or group of persons, including single family homes, duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes, and mobile homes whether such mobile homes are registered as vehicles or assessed as real property. 
Rubbish. Non-putrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
Sanitary landfilling. A method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Scavenge. Uncontrolled picking from discarded waste materials. 
Service provider. A person, persons or entity granted an authorization to provide service by the City of Woodstock governing authority who, under written agreements for compensation by those receiving services, does the work of collecting and transporting solid waste from industry, offices, retail outlets, institutions, and similar locations. 
Solid waste. Discarded putrescible and non-putrescible waste, except water carried body waste and recovered materials, and shall include garbage; rubbish - such as paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture and appliances, metal, tin cans, glass, crockery, or dunnage; street refuse; dead animals; sewage sludge; animal manure; industrial waste; such as waste materials generated in industrial operations; residue from solid waste; thermal treatment technology; food processing waste; construction waste; and any other waste material in a solid, semi-solid, or liquid state not otherwise defined. 
Solid waste handling. The storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposing of solid wastes, or any combination thereof. 
Solid waste handling facility. Any facility the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal or any combination thereof, of solid waste. 
Transfer station. A facility used to transfer solid wastes from one transportation vehicle to another for transportation to a disposal facility. 
Waste stream. The total flow of solid waste from commercial establishments, institutions and the like to its ultimate disposal site or facility. 
Yard trimmings. Leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operation. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-2. - Administration. 
(a)  The mayor is hereby authorized on behalf of the city to enter into an agreement with a franchisee to provide for solid waste management to include, but not be limited to, the collection, removal and disposal of solid waste for all citizens residing at residential premises. The mayor shall, with the approval of the city council, execute an agreement binding the city to the franchisee for such a period of time as may be allowed by law and as determined by the city council to be in the best interest of all the citizens of the city. 
(b)  The building inspector shall have the power and authority to enforce the duties and obligations of the franchisee under the franchise agreement between the franchisee and the city. 
(c)  To the extent it is necessary to carry out the administration of the solid waste management code, the building inspector shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations not inconsistent with any terms contained in the solid waste management franchise agreement between the franchisee and the city. 
(d)  The building inspector shall have the power and authority to enforce the requirements for solid waste management as specified throughout this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to adhere to the provisions provided for in this chapter. 
(e)  Nothing herein shall be deemed to require those persons who dispose of solid waste generated only in their own private residence by personally delivering such solid waste directly to an approved landfill, an excluded private resident. 
(f)  Further, to the extent there is a binding irrevocable contract in place for solid waste pickup with a person, this chapter shall not be binding on such person (an excluded private resident) until such time as such contract expires. Said contract may not be renewed after the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(g)  All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the franchisee at a permitted subtitle D sanitary landfill designated by franchisee. The franchisee shall have the ability to recommend regulations concerning precollection practices for both refuse collection and recyclable item collection, the days of collection, type and location of waste containers and recycling bins, and such other matters pertaining to the collection, conveyance, and disposal as it shall find necessary, and to recommend changes and modifications to the same. The franchisee shall agree that it has been provided with a copy of this chapter, and is familiar with and to the extent required will adhere to its provisions. 
(h)  All refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the franchisee, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. No other person shall collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city. Nothing contained in this chapter shall preclude any producer from recycling any garbage or rubbish generated by that producer; provided, that recycling function is carried on entirely by that producer and is transported to a recycling facility in a vehicle owned or leased by and driven by that producer. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-3. - Preparation and storage of waste. 
(a)  No person shall keep or store solid waste outside of any residence or building within the city, except in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared, as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Garbage containers shall be provided by the owner or occupant of each residence or establishment sufficient in number to accommodate such waste generated by the residence or establishment between collections or shall be provided by the city's franchisee. Containers shall be of durable metal or plastic, water-tight, non-absorbent, rust-resistant, rodent-proof, and easily cleaned. Containers shall be equipped with handles and tightly fitted covers and shall have a capacity of not less than 15 gallons nor more than 35 gallons except as provided by franchisee. Containers failing to comply with these provisions or defective containers shall be promptly replaced. 
(c)  Disposable paper or plastic bags of a type, size, and material designed for solid waste disposal may be used to contain refuse for storage and collection, provided they are unbroken, sealed, and loaded in such manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-4. - Placement of waste containers for pickup. 
On days designated as collection days by the franchisee, garbage and/or rubbish shall be placed for collection on the curb or beside the roadway in front of the residence or establishment owning same, or if the property abuts on an alley, at the rear of the property, but not in the gutter or in the street or alley in such manner as to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. By previous agreement with the franchisee, residential, collection procedures, may be altered to provide for placement of garbage and/or rubbish in an area adjacent to the residence. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-5. - Collection of waste. 
(a)  Industrial waste, large dead animals over ten pounds, or waste from construction, demolition, landscaping, or processing operations will be collected, transported, or disposed of in accordance with the city's contract with the franchisee. 
(b)  No person shall place or cause to be placed in any container, box or bundle, or otherwise for collection, any hazardous waste of any kind except upon specific prior arrangement with the city, county health department and the franchisee. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-6. - Unauthorized accumulation of waste; nuisance. 
Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The building inspector by written notice shall notify the owner or occupant of any premise with such solid waste accumulation to remove same. Failure to remove such accumulation within two weeks of the date of such written notice shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and subject the owner or occupant to penalties hereinafter set forth. A separate violation shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which such unlawful accumulation continues. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-7. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)  All disposal of solid waste shall be at disposal sites operated in accordance with state laws and with rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, and at no other place. Waste deposited during the operating hours at any site operated by the county or municipality shall be placed as designated by the attendant on duty. 
(b)  No truck shall discharge waste at a publicly operated disposal site unless the owner's name, telephone number, permit number, truck number, and rated load capacity are clearly printed on the door of such truck or in an equally conspicuous place. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-8. - Scavenging. 
No person other than the owner or authorized collection personnel shall sift the contents of or remove anything from containers, boxes, or bundles containing garbage or rubbish. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-9. - Littering. 
No person shall throw or deposit any litter within the city except in public receptacles or in private receptacles authorized by this chapter for collection. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-10. - Service charges. 
(a)  Solid waste service charges for the purpose of financing the collection and disposal of refuse in the city shall be as established in the franchise agreement between the franchisee and the city and shall be levied upon every residence, except the excluded private residents. The schedule of rates shall be maintained on file in the office of the general government administration department where it is available for inspection by the public. 
(b)  Delinquent accounts shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  A ten-percent penalty shall be assessed on all accounts considered delinquent. 
(2)  All accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid by the 25th of this second month following the prior billing date and shall subject the customer to an additional penalty of ten percent of the total utility bill. An administrative fee will be assessed for the delinquent notice. All delinquent accounts are subject to stoppage of service without notice. 
(3)  Upon delinquent notification, if a delinquent account is not paid within 48 hours, the franchisee may cease all refuse collection for that account. Service shall be resumed thereafter only upon payment of the entire balance on the account plus all penalties, and all applicable reconnection or container resetting charges. 
(4)  The stoppage of services for nonpayment of collection charges shall be in addition to the right of the franchisee to proceed for the collection of such unpaid charges in a manner provided by law. 
(c)  Solid waste deposits and service charges shall be collected and/or billed by the franchisee directly to the customer in accordance with the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-11. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The building inspector shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. He shall inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors and private transportation and disposal systems to insure that such operations are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All regulatory actions of the building inspector shall be subject to the review of the city council. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the action of the building inspector shall have the right to appeal to the city council, who may, upon hearing, confirm, modify, or revoke such action. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-12. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00 for each violation or be imprisoned not to exceed 30 days, or both, at the discretion of the judge of the municipal court. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE 
 
Sec. 78-13. - General. 
(a)  No person shall engage in solid waste handling in a manner which will be conductive to insect and rodent infestation or the harboring and feeding of wild dogs or other animals; impair the air quality; impair the quality of the ground or surface water; impair the quality of the environment; or likely create other hazards to the public health, safety, or well-being as may be determined by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(b)  Provisions of this chapter apply to all persons presently engaged in solid waste handling as well as all persons proposing to engage in solid waste handling. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-14. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any individual disposing of household solid wastes originating from his primary residence onto land or facilities owned by him when disposal of such wastes does not thereby adversely affect the public health. 
(b)  Provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity not collecting and disposing of municipal solid waste, commercial solid waste, construction/demolition waste, or industrial waste for a fee, but who are holders of valid solid waste handling permits from the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division 391-3-4-.02 and 391-3-4-.06 for disposal or onsite burial. Such disposal shall be governed by State Environmental Protection regulations. 
(c)  Composting is expressly allowed or permitted pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  Dead animals shall be disposed of pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-15. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall engage in solid waste handling except in such manner as to conform to and comply with this ordinance and all applicable state and federal legislation, rules, regulations and orders. 
(b)  No individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall collect and dispose of municipal solid waste for a fee without obtaining a business license to provide service from the City of Woodstock. 
(c)  No solid waste may be disposed of by any person in an open dump, nor may any person cause, suffer, allow or permit open dumping on his property as defined by the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, EPD, Chapter 391-3-4-04. 
(1)  A person shall be presumed to have violated this provision if, upon written notification by the city manager or his/her designee that litter or solid waste has been dumped on that person's property, not otherwise subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-51 through 16-7-54, and fails to provide the chief of the City of Woodstock Police Department or his/her designee within 15 days of notification with written assurance that the accumulation of litter or solid waste will be properly disposed of within 30 days from the original date of notification. 
(2)  No person who first informs the city manager or his/her designee in writing that illegal dumping has occurred on a particular parcel of that person's property shall be deemed to have violated this provision, if such person provides written assurance that all accumulated litter or solid waste will be properly disposed of by a collection service provider who meets the requirements of this chapter within 45 days of the date of such written notification and subsequently provides proof of such disposal. 
(d)  The owner or occupant of any premises, office, business establishment, institution, industry, or similar facility shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste and shall be responsible for the collection of transportation of all recovered materials accumulated at the premises, office, business establishment, institution or similar facility to a solid waste handling recycling facility operating in compliance with the Georgia Environmental Protection Division Rules and Regulations unless arrangements have been made for such services with a collector operating in compliance with this chapter. 
(e)  No owner or occupant shall allow the accumulation on premises under his or her control, or on or about his or her commercial establishment of solid waste where such solid waste creates or may create a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or is unsightly, or emits foul or obnoxious odors which constitute either a public or private nuisance. Such conduct shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Each day the solid waste remains on the premises may constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(f)  No person may dispose of yard trimmings in the City of Woodstock or dispose of yard trimmings generated in the City of Woodstock unless such disposal is carried out in accordance with the following restrictions: 
(1)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with municipal solid waste; 
(2)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of in municipal solid waste disposal facilities that have liners and leachate collection systems or that requires vertical expansion; 
(3)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in a manner that facilitates collection, composting, or other lawful handling; 
(4)  Upon collection, yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled until their ultimate disposal by chipping, mulching, or other beneficial use. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-16. - Authorization to provide service. 
(a)  Copies of this chapter shall be available for public inspection in the offices of the city clerk and at other locations as designated by the clerk. 
(b)  Nonexclusive authorization to provide services for commercial collection and disposal shall be granted upon application to the city manager or his/her designee, provided the authorization to provide services shall meet at least the minimum requirements set out in this chapter. The right to provide service authorized in collection and disposal of solid waste shall be granted for a period of no more than four calendar years from January 1 to December 31. 
(c)  The city manager or his/her designee reserves the discretionary authority to revoke or rescind any such authorization to provide service in the interest of the health, safety, welfare of the citizens of the City of Woodstock. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-17. - Requirements for service providers. 
All service providers must meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Permit. Prior to engaging in solid waste handling in the City of Woodstock, service provider must have obtained a solid waste handling permit from the director of environmental protection division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or any successor agency authorized to issue permits pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-8-24. 
(b)  Insurance. At the time of submission of a signed authorization service agreement ad prior to engaging in solid waster handling in the City of Woodstock, and annually thereafter, each service provider shall provide the City of Woodstock City Manager or his/her designee, proof of insurance as follows: 
(1)  Comprehensive general liability insurance: $500,000.00. 
(2)  Vehicle liability. 
a.  $500,000.00 limit per occurrence for bodily injury and proper damage; 
b.  Comprehensive covering all owned, non-owned and hired vehicles; and 
c.  All insurance contracts must specify vehicles for solid waste collection. 
(3)  Umbrella liability insurance coverage at least as broad primary coverage in an amount of $1,000.000.00. 
(4)  All comprehensive general liability, vehicle liability, and umbrella liability policies shall show the City of Woodstock as an additional insured and shall provide for 30 days' notice of cancellation to the city council. 
(c)  Indemnification. Service provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments from third parties for damages which may be the result of willful, negligent or tortious conduct or operations arising out of the business of collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste, whether or not the action or omission complained of its authorized, allowed or prohibited by this ordinance. 
(d)  Vehicles. 
(1)  All vehicles and containers used for collection operations shall comply with the requirements of Rule 391-3-4-.06 of Chapter 391-3-4 (Solid Waste Management) of the Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, and must be compactor-type trucks, covered or enclosed vehicles. All vehicles must be constructed to be substantially leak proof, constructed of durable metal, easily cleanable and able to prevent litter from escaping during movement of the vehicle. 
(2)  Vehicles and containers shall meet all requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation for highway and local ordinances governing weight and size for the streets which must be traveled for pickup. All vehicles shall be subject to unannounced by city officials for compliance with environmental and highway safety standards. 
(3)  All vehicles shall have, in letters at least six inches high and conspicuously placed in three places on the vehicle, the name and telephone number of the service provider. 
(4)  Service providers shall provide an adequate number of vehicles for regular collection services. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit service providers from sharing backup vehicles with other service providers provided that such sharing is adequately covered by insurance. 
(5)  Vehicles used exclusively for collection and transporting recovered materials shall be exempt from this entire article except that an adequate cover shall be used to prevent litter from escaping during movement. 
(e)  Reporting requirements. Within 30 days following the close of each calendar quarter ending March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 of each year of operation, service provider shall submit to the city manager or his/her designee reports of operation showing the following: 
(1)  Gross collection revenues and average number of customers during quarter by service by type. 
(2)  Tonnage figures showing total waste tonnage collected by service type. 
(3)  Tonnage figures showing total recovered materials collected by type, and proof of recycling in the form of manifests, bills of sale, or other records showing adequate proof of movement of the material to a recycling facility as provided in this ordinance. 
(4)  Proof of disposal of nonrecovered materials at state approved disposal facilities and name of each such facility. 
(5)  Service provider shall maintain at its place of business books and records showing the names and addresses of all owners and tenants with whom service provider contracted for solid waste handling services, including the street address for the property served. Service provider shall submit upon reasonable request of the city manager to a financial audit by a certified public accountant or auditor employed by the City of Woodstock. Except for the operating reports described in subparagraphs (1)—(4) above, the information provided in accordance with this section shall be confidential. 
(f)  Disposal assurance. As a precondition of the authorization to provide services and/or authorization renewal, all applicants shall obtain a letter of solid waste disposal assurance governing the next ten years from the landfill owner or operator where its solid waste is delivered. The letter of solid waste disposal must be on the letterhead of the company owning the landfill and signed by the chief executive operating officer or other appropriate official of the company. The letter must contain the following information. 
(1)  Telephone number and title of the company official signing the assurance letter. 
(2)  Address of the landfill; 
(3)  Remaining permitted capacity of the landfill in cubic yards; 
(4)  Estimated life of permitted capacity remaining at current and projected rates of waste disposal in tons or cubic yards; 
(5)  A statement that sufficient landfill capacity exists to accommodate the applicant requesting the letter over the expected remaining life of the landfill based on remaining landfill capacity and the amount of waste received at the landfill; and 
(6)  A statement that appropriate arrangements are in place that the landfill will reserve a portion of its capacity on behalf of the applicant over the remaining life of the landfill. 
(g)  If the landfill operator currently lacks capacity for the next ten years, the landfill operator shall provide a statement containing the following, if applicable: 
(1)  Expected future additions or expansions of the landfill; 
(2)  Additional capacity in cubic yards from such expected expansions; 
(3)  When such future additions or expansions will be begun or completed; 
(4)  Where such additions or expansions would take place; and 
(5)  A statement that sufficient capacity will exist in the future addition or expansion of the landfill to accommodate the applicant over the designated time period. Otherwise, the landfill operator should indicate that no plans exist to continue landfill operations after the closing of the current landfill. In addition to initial letter requirements for obtaining an authorization to provide service, all letters of solid waste disposal assurance must be filed annually with the city manager or his/her designee by July 30 as a pre-condition for obtaining or continuing an authorization to provide service in the city. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-18. - Regulatory fees. 
(a)  A regulatory fee of $1.50 per month shall be charged to the service provider for each commercial customer to whom solid waste collection service was provided and billed during any portion of the quarter for which an authorization to provide service was granted. Said fees shall be due and payable to the office of the city clerk at the time for quarterly reporting under subsection 78-17(5). Proceeds from regulatory fees shall be used to defray the cost of the city monitoring and enforcing compliance with the ordinance and for meeting requirements dictated by state law including studying and implementing plans and methods for handling of solid waste and reduction of solid waste generated within the City of Woodstock. Said fees shall be paid into a special fund for such purpose. 
(b)  A franchise fee of ten percent of the service provider's monthly gross revenue from commercial collections within the city shall be charged. Said fees shall be due and payable to the office of the city clerk at the time for quarterly reporting under subsection 78-17(5). 
(c)  A surcharge fee of $1.00 per ton of solid waste received, collected, handled or disposed of at any private landfill or other private disposal facility presently located within the City of Woodstock is hereby imposed upon the operator(s) of said facility in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39(d). 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-19. - Commercial services. 
Applicants for commercial authorization to provide services are subject to the requirements for a solid waste handling permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-20. - General conditions of commercial collection. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises, office, business establishment, institution or industry or similar commercial establishment, other than those located in the downtown area, shall be responsible for the collection and transportation of all solid waste accumulated at such premises, establishment or facility to a solid waste facility operating in compliance with state regulation, and must arrange for service with an approved service provider. 
(1)  Holders of a valid solid waste handling permit from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources shall be exempt from such contracting, but shall comply with the requirements of subsections 78-17(4), (5) (6)a., b., c.. 
(2)  No business license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the owner or occupant of such premises provides the business license office of the City of Woodstock with the name of the service provider which provides collection for the business, or an exception has been granted by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(3)  Yard trimmings from commercial premises or collected or disposed under commercial accounts shall be managed as provided in subsection 78-15(6) of this chapter. Yard trimmings must be bundled or placed in a suitable container for collection. Yard trimmings may not be placed in plastic bags. 
(b)  The City of Woodstock reserves the right at all times to direct and control the time, place and manner of commercial solid waste handling. Nothing in this ordinance is intended to abridge the City of Woodstock's right of ownership and control of the waste stream. 
(c)  Each service provided shall be responsible for all billing, invoicing, and collecting of service fees to its customers. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-21. - Recycling requirements. 
(a)  Each service provider shall by written agreement with the City of Woodstock arrange for recovered materials as they are defined in this chapter to be properly disposed of at an approved recycling facility. 
(b)  If recovered materials are not properly disposed of at an approved recycling facility, the business license of the service provided shall be suspended until the city manager or his/her designee is satisfied with proof of compliance according to this provision. Lacking compliance, the city shall be permitted to initiate termination of the authorization to provide services as set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-22. - Termination of authorization to provide services. 
(a)  Authorization to provide services may be terminated by mutual agreement of the City of Woodstock and service provider at any time. Service providers may terminate authorization to provide services by giving 60 days' notice to the city manager or his/her designee and furnishing proof of the city manager or his/her designee that all advance payments have been used by providing a service or have been refunded. 
(b)  The city manager or his/her designee shall notify any service provider of the violations by the service provider of this chapter. Upon notification of the alleged violation, a service provider shall have seven calendar days to comply with any directive of the city manager or his/her designee to correct any such violation. If service provider shall fail to comply within seven days of notification, or shall have received notices of unresolved violations in any one quarter in excess of 25 or .25 percent, whichever is less, for service providers with fewer than 10,001 customers; 50 or .20 percent, whichever is less, for service providers with 10,001 to 25,000 customers; 75 or .5 percent, whichever is less, for service providers with 25,001 to 50,000 customers, or 100 or .15 percent, whichever is less, for service providers with more than 50,000 customers, or at the discretion of the city manager or his/her designee, a hearing shall be held before the governing authority with the service provider being notified in writing of the time and place of the hearing and the violations(s) of this ordinance which have not been corrected. Service provider will be given the opportunity to appear by representative or counsel to answer any such charge. Should the governing authority determine that any of the provisions of this chapter have been violated by the service provider, the governing authority shall have in its discretion, the absolute right to suspend or revoke the authorization to provide service or provide for probation for the service provider. 
(c)  Authorization to provide services are nontransferable. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-23. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation or any employee or agent of any firm or entity violating any provision of this chapter may be fined up to $500.00 per violation. Each full day a violation continues may constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  Any service provider who is found to have any of the provisions of this chapter by a court of law following the appeal procedures outlined herein shall be subject to the same penalty and may also be restrained from operating as a service provider and a civil action may be filed by the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-24. - Enforcement. 
Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be reported initially to the city manager or his/her designee, which office is charged with administration of all sections herein. 
The city manager or his/her designee shall designate and publicize a special telephone number to be called to report violations. 
The provisions of this chapter regarding applications for the termination of authorization to provide services shall be enforced by the City of Woodstock through the city manager or his/her designee. 
The provisions of this chapter regarding collection and removal of solid waste shall be enforced by the City of Woodstock Police Department. 
The provisions of this chapter regarding the disposal or burial onsite of solid waste shall be enforced by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. 
The city manager or his/her designee may grant exceptions to these rules provided service providers make written application showing the following: 
(1)  The method proposed utilizes a new experimental, cost effective or innovative technology concept or theory of solid waste storage, collection, transportation or disposal; and 
(2)  The method proposed has been certified by the Cherokee County Board of Health not to create a health hazard to the public; and 
(3)  The method proposed is to be utilized by at least ten customers; and 
(4)  Any exception granted does not violate the requirements of this article. 
Any exception granted by the city manager or his/her designee shall be for a one year term and shall be nonrenewable. At the end of six months of operation of the excepted method, the service provider shall submit data to the city manager or his/her designee sufficient to enable a determination of success of the method. If found to be acceptable to the City of Woodstock, this chapter may be amended to allow such method without exception. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-25. - Severability. 
If any portion of this chapter or the application thereof shall be held invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions of this chapter shall not be affected, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Sec. 78-26. - Effective date. 
The effective date of this ordinance shall be October 10, 2012. 
(Ord. of 9-26-2011, Exh. A)  
Chapter 82 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to regulate streets and sidewalks, § 7.10. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment saved from repeal, § 1-11(8); any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); any ordinance establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk saved from repeal, § 1-11(12); buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; land development code, ch. 50; public drinking, § 58-35; parks and recreation, ch. 62; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 66; planning, ch. 74; telecommunications, ch. 90; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94; riding on sidewalks, § 94-4; utilities, ch. 98. 
State Law reference— Constitutional powers regarding streets, Ga. Const. of 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); authority of municipalities to own, operate and maintain streets, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street obstructions, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; municipal street administration, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq.; assessment for improvements, O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 39. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 82-1. - Composition of public works department. 
(a)  The public works department shall consist of the public works director, who shall be the head of the department, and all officers and employees assigned thereto by the city council. 
(b)  The public works director shall have control and supervision over all officers and employees assigned to the department, subject to the control of the city council. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-1; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-2. - Duties of public works department. 
(a)  All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, curbs, sidewalks and other public ways shall be under the supervision of the public works director, who shall have the responsibility of enforcing all provisions of this chapter and all ordinances of the city relating to such public ways. 
(b)  The public works department shall keep walkways in good repair at all times and shall remove from them snow or ice whenever necessary. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-2; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-3. - Maintenance of property between sidewalks and streets. 
(a)  All persons who own real estate in the city which abuts upon any paved sidewalk shall be required to keep that portion of the sidewalk which lies next to their property in good and smooth condition and free from growing weeds and unsightly vegetation or other things which would detract from the beauty and cleanliness of the street upon which their property abuts. 
(b)  Any property owner who shall place or allow grass to grow upon the portion of sidewalk lying between the property line and the curbline of the street, and upon which his real estate abuts, shall keep such grass properly mowed and free from rubbish of all kinds. 
(c)  If the owners are not in the possession of their property, then this section shall apply to their tenants or those who have possession or control of the same. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-3)  
Sec. 82-4. - Encroachment. 
No person shall erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, nor erect any poles or wires nor maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley or other public way, without having first secured a permit from the city clerk in the manner specified in section 82-16. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-5) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to allow street obstructions limited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10.  
Sec. 82-5. - Depositing discharges onto streets. 
(a)  No person shall deposit on any street or sidewalk any rubbish or any material which may be harmful to the pavement, or any waste material, or any glass or other article which may injure any person, animal or property. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or allow to be discharged onto any public street or sidewalk any water or other fluid material containing objectionable material such as sewage, waste milk or other organic material. No one may wash autos on the city sidewalks. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-6)  
Sec. 82-6. - Reports of obstructions, encroachments. 
Every city officer and employee who becomes aware of any defect or obstruction, or of any unlawful deposit or discharge, in or on any public street, alley, curb, sidewalk or other public way of the city shall report it to the public works director as soon as possible. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-7; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-7. - Openings. 
(a)  No person shall construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any public street, sidewalk or alley without first obtaining a permit from the city in the manner specified in sections 82-16. 
(b)  All lawfully maintained openings or stairways shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing approved by the public works director. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-8; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-8. - Trees and shrubs—Planting and removal; posting. 
(a)  No person shall plant, remove, injure or cut any tree, bush or shrub in or from any public street, parkway or other public place without first obtaining a permit from the city as outlined in section 82-16. 
(b)  No person shall attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any public place. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-9)  
Sec. 82-9. - Same—Interference with public streets, sidewalks, utility poles. 
(a)  Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. 
(b)  Any tree or limb of a tree which is likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. 
(c)  The public works director may cause to be trimmed or removed any and all such trees or shrubs so that the obstruction or danger to traffic or passage shall be removed. 
(d)  Any person or company which maintains poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other public places of the city shall keep such wires and poles free and away from any nearby trees or shrubs in such places, and keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the public works director. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-10; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-10. - Burning of rubbish on streets. 
No person shall burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-11) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42.  
Sec. 82-11. - Tampering with street signs. 
No person shall remove, tamper with or mutilate any street sign in the city or any city sign. Violators shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $100.00 per offense and/or be confined to 30 days confinement or work on the public works. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-12)  
Sec. 82-12. - Street construction specifications. 
(a)  All street and sidewalk pavement and all curbing shall be laid in conformity with the specifications established or approved from time to time by the city council. 
(b)  The standard for construction of curbs on each side of any city street, or any connecting street or road for which curbs have been prescribed, shall be not less than one ramp per lineal block giving in the crosswalks at intersections. Such ramps shall be at least 40 inches wide and so constructed as to allow reasonable access to the crosswalk for physically handicapped persons. 
(c)  Crosswalks installed with new development shall include pedestrian activated equipment, signaling that pedestrians are entering the crosswalk for passage across the street. This requirement may be waived through the land development review process under chapter III of the Land Development Ordinance, as determined by the development process committee (see also section 94-3). 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-13; Ord. of 12-11-2017, § I) 
Charter reference— Special assessments, § 6.17; streets, § 7.10.  
Sec. 82-13. - Barricades. 
Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work, which barricades shall be protected by a light at night. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-14)  
Sec. 82-14. - Driveways and curbs—Permit; standards for issuance. 
(a)  No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any driveway, curb or curb-cut on city streets without first obtaining a permit from the city planning office in the manner specified in section 82-16. 
(b)  The city planning office shall issue a permit under this section when it finds the: 
(1)  Plans for the proposed operation have been approved by the city engineer and building inspector, to whom such plans shall be forwarded by the city planning office within a reasonable time after receipt thereof; 
(2)  Work shall be done according to the standard specifications of the city for public work of like character; 
(3)  Operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the means of ingress to and egress from the affected and adjacent properties; and 
(4)  Health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-15)  
Sec. 82-15. - Same—Bond, supervision. 
(a)  The city planning office shall have the authority to require an applicant for a permit pursuant to section 82-14 to file a bond with his application conditioned to protect and save harmless the city from all claims for damages or injury to any persons by reason of the proposed work. 
(b)  All work for which a permit is granted under this chapter shall be under the direction and supervision of the public works director. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-16; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-16. - Permit procedure. 
(a)  Every person required to procure a permit under the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance or municipal law relating to the subject matter of this chapter shall submit a written application for such permit to the city planning office. The written application shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The purpose for which the application is submitted. 
(3)  The nature and location of any work proposed to be done and the name of the person or firm who is to do such work. 
(4)  The estimated cost of the proposed work. 
(5)  The date of commencement and date of completion of the proposed work, and other dates or plans as may reasonably be required by the city planning office or the public works director. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided, each application for a permit under this section shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be set from time to time by the city council. 
(c)  The city planning office shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a permit. The receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted, the city planning office shall refund the fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the application for a permit, the city shall approve or disapprove such application within seven days after receipt and return the application to the city clerk. 
(e)  Upon receipt of an approved application from the city engineer, the city planning office shall issue a permit to the applicant stating the nature of the work to be done or activity to be carried out, the date of issuance, and the signature of the city clerk. 
(f)  The permittee shall keep his permit in a conspicuous place at the work or activity site. No person shall exhibit such permit at or about any location not covered thereby, or misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no permit shall be issued to any applicant who has failed to satisfy any bonding requirements imposed upon persons engaged in the kind of work or activity proposed to be done or carried out by such applicant. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-17; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-17. - Sidewalk cafes—Downtown district. 
l.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the authorization and regulation of sidewalk cafes on public sidewalks under certain conditions and within authorized areas of the City of Woodstock Downtown District. 
2.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, these terms shall have the following definitions: 
Authorized business means a licensed business is permitted to provide a sidewalk cafe under the provisions of this section. 
Encroach or encroachment means any intrusion onto the public sidewalk. 
Licensed business means a business with an active business license with no occupation taxes due to the city. 
Sidewalk cafes means any encroachment of seating, tables, kitchen equipment, trash cans, or other furnishings and appurtenances for use by patrons or to serve patrons or used by the general public. Sidewalk cafes are considered temporary. 
3.  Sidewalk cafes—Authorization and requirements. 
a.  Authorization. Only authorized businesses may provide a sidewalk cafe, only within the DT-CBD zoning district and only with frontage along Main Street, East Main Street, and Chambers Street. The provision of a sidewalk cafe on a public sidewalk in any other zones or locations is expressly prohibited. Additionally, any placement of a sidewalk cafe constitutes consent to comply with the requirements of this section. All sidewalk cafes on public property must comply with the provisions of this section. 
b.  Opt-out provision. An authorized business may elect not to provide a sidewalk cafe and not to provide the information required under this section. By doing so, the authorized business is no longer authorized to provide a sidewalk cafe. A business may elect to opt back in at any time and should the business place a sidewalk cafe after opting out, the business automatically consents to comply with the provisions of this section. 
c.  Registration. An applicant for a sidewalk cafe shall provide the following information with the business license application and at the annual renewal of the business license: 
i.  Location, layout. The sidewalk cafe may extend from private property onto the public sidewalk, only the width of the storefront leased or owned by the authorized business. The sidewalk cafe may be enclosed with a temporary barrier, which must be approved by the director of community development. The temporary barrier must be black in color and if a chain is used with the barrier, it must be black or silver. The sidewalk cafe may not extend more than six feet from the building and a minimum of five feet of sidewalk clearance shall be maintained at all times. A drawing identifying the perimeter area, the dimensions of the area, the distance from perimeter to curb or nearest obstacle, number and placement of tables shall be provided. The distance from the edge of the sidewalk cafe to the curb and the total encroachment into public property shall be indicated; all measurements shall be provided in feet. 
The drawing should also include the location of the sidewalk cafe in relation to the surrounding buildings, streets, and sidewalks, along with the location of all furnishings to be placed in the sidewalk cafe. 
ii.  Insurance. A current certificate of insurance with general liability insurance naming the city as an additional insured in the following minimum amounts: $500,000.00 per person; and $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, with an additional $1,000,000.00 umbrella coverage. Not applicable as to private property. 
iii.  Indemnification. As a condition of encroachment, the approved applicant and any person acting under or pursuant to said approval, agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, release, and defend (even if the allegations are false, fraudulent, or groundless) to the maximum extent allowed by law, the city manager, community development director, the city, its city council, and each member thereof, and its officers, employees, advisory board members and representatives, from and against all liability, loss, suits, claims, damages, costs, judgments, and expenses (including attorneys' fees and costs of litigation) which in whole or in part result from arise out of, or are claimed to result from or arise out of, any acts, negligence, errors or omissions of approved applicant, its employees, representatives, contractors, subcontractors, or agents by reason of or arising out of, or in any matter connected with, any and all acts, operations, privileges authorized, allowed, or undertaken pursuant to the use approval under their ordinance including, without limitation, any condition or property used in operations. 
d.  Operating standards. 
i.  Limitations on area. In no event shall a sidewalk cafe reduce the portion of any public sidewalk customarily used by pedestrians to less than five feet in width. If a proposed or installed sidewalk cafe cannot maintain five feet of clearance for pedestrians, then it is not allowed and must be removed. Nothing will be placed within five feet of a fire hydrant, pedestrian crosswalk, or handicapped corner curb cut. 
ii.  Tables and chairs. Tables and chairs shall match and be made of safe, sturdy, and durable material. All furniture shall be commercial grade and manufactured for outdoor use. White plastic or PVC furniture shall be prohibited. 
iii.  Furnishings. Furnishings shall not be secured to lamp posts, streetlights, trees, or any public fixtures. All furnishing shall be removed from the sidewalk cafe from time to time as required by the city. 
iv.  Umbrellas. Each table may be equipped with one umbrella and shall be maintained in good, clean, and operable condition. Table umbrellas shall have no signs or advertisements on them, be completely contained within the sidewalk cafe area, even when fully extended, and the lowest dimension of the umbrella shall maintain a minimum of seven-foot vertical clearance above the sidewalk to allow for patron and server circulation. 
v.  Alcohol. Only an authorized business which holds a valid alcohol license for consumption on premises, may serve alcohol to customers in the sidewalk cafe, subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  Alcohol may only be served in the sidewalk cafe during the hours allowed under the city's ordinance for service. 
(b)  The sidewalk cafe shall be considered part of the premises for the purposes of consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Alcohol shall not be served from temporary locations upon the premises unless specifically allowed by issuance of a special event permit (see section 6-117(c)). 
(d)  Patrons may only remove alcohol from the premises in accordance with the provisions of section 6-117 in the entertainment district. 
vi.  Kitchen equipment. Kitchen equipment and refuse containers used to service the sidewalk cafe are permitted. 
vii.  Smoking. Patrons shall not be allowed to smoke within the sidewalk cafe. 
viii.  Sound. Music, live or recorded, or other amplified sound shall be allowed within the sidewalk cafe, provided it does not violate the city's ordinances related to noise. 
ix.  Sanitation. The authorized business shall keep the sidewalk cafe clean, neat, and orderly at all times, and is responsible for removing all debris and trash from the sidewalk cafe at all times. 
x.  Americans with Disabilities Act. Any person encroaching agrees to fully comply with all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act as currently existing or as may be hereafter amended. 
xi.  No property right. The provisions of this section shall not be construed or interpreted to convey any property rights or any estate in land to any person or business. 
xii.  Closing of sidewalk cafe. Sidewalk cafes may be ordered closed at any time by the city, for any reason including, but not limited to, construction, maintenance, public health, safety or welfare, emergencies, public parades, and special events. 
xiii.  Compliance with regulations. The applicant must sign a copy of this section, acknowledging and agreeing to comply with these regulations. 
4.  Suspension. The use of a public sidewalk for a sidewalk cafe or encroachment can be suspended by the director of community development at any time for any of the reasons listed below. The director of community development shall issue the suspension in writing to the person violating this section. 
a.  The business license or health permit has been suspended, revoked, or cancelled. 
b.  The authorized business is not in compliance with any of the regulations with respect to the sidewalk cafe or encroachment. 
c.  The authorized business has failed to correct violations of this chapter or any other ordinance within 48 hours of receipt of the notice of same delivered in writing to the authorized business. 
d.  The authorized business has a history of violations of this chapter of three or more within a two-year period, or immediately upon any violation depending upon the severity of the violation. 
e.  The use of the public sidewalk in accordance with this section may be suspended for a period up to 12 months depending upon history and severity of the violation. 
5.  Appeals. A person may appeal a suspension directly to the city manager. The appeal shall be filed within ten days from the receipt of the written suspension from the director of community development. The city manager will adjudicate the appeal within 30 days from receipt, responding to the appellant in writing. Thereafter, the appellant may appeal directly to the city council in accordance with the appeal provisions of this Code. 
6.  Compliance grace period. Upon adoption, a 45-day compliance grace period will commence, where the community development department will contact and educate business owners and property owners on the provisions of this section and no penalty shall be assessed, giving business owners and property owners time to comply. At the expiration of the 45 days, compliance with this section is required and the penalty provision shall take effect. 
7.  Penalty. Any violations of this section will be punished in accordance with section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5477-2018, 10-22-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5447-2018, adopted Oct. 22, 2018, amended § 82-17 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 82-17 pertained to sidewalk cafes and derived from Ord. No. 3334-2015, adopted Mar. 23, 2015; and Ord. No. 3806, § IV, adopted Mar. 14, 2016.  
Sec. 82-18. - Sidewalk encroachment. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the authorization and regulation of encroachment on public sidewalks under certain conditions and within authorized areas of the City of Woodstock Downtown District. 
2.  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, these terms shall have the following definitions: 
Authorized business means a licensed business is permitted to provide a sidewalk cafe under the provisions of this section. 
Encroach or encroachment means any intrusion onto the public sidewalk. 
Licensed business means a business with an active business license with no occupation taxes due to the city. 
Outdoor display of merchandise means merchandise displayed temporarily outside of an authorized business. 
Stoop line stand means retail businesses operating outside of their storefront to sell fruits, vegetables, soft drinks, flowers, or ice cream. 
3.  Sidewalk encroachment—Authorization and requirements. 
a.  Authorization. Only authorized businesses located on the ground floor may encroach on public sidewalks directly in front of their business to display merchandise, only within the DT-CBD zoning district and only with frontage along Main Street, East Main Street, and Chambers Street. The provision encroachment on a public sidewalk in any other zones or locations is expressly prohibited. Additionally, any encroachment constitutes consent to comply with the requirements of this section. All encroachment on public property must comply with the provisions of this section. 
b.  Opt-out provision. An authorized business may elect not to encroach on a public sidewalk and not to provide the information required under this section. By doing so, the authorized business is no longer authorized to encroach on public sidewalks. A business may elect to opt back in at any time and should the business encroach on a public sidewalk after opting out, the business automatically consents to comply with the provisions of this section. 
c.  Registration. An authorized business applying to encroach on a public sidewalk shall provide the following information with the business license application and at the annual renewal of the business license: 
i.  Location, layout. Encroachment may extend from private property onto the public sidewalk, only the width of the storefront leased or owned by the authorized business. Outdoor displays of merchandise and stoop line stands may not extend more than five feet from the building and a minimum of five feet of sidewalk clearance shall be maintained at all times. A drawing identifying the perimeter area, the dimensions of the area, and the distance from perimeter to curb or nearest obstacle. The distance from the edge of the outdoor display of merchandise or stoop line stand to the curb and the total encroachment into public property shall be indicated; all measurements shall be provided in feet. The drawing should also include the location of the outdoor display of merchandise or stoop line stand in relation to the surrounding buildings, streets, and sidewalks 
ii.  Insurance. Commercial general liability occurrence at $1,000,000 and aggregate at $2,000,000. The City of Woodstock should be included as additional insured. Coverage should be primary and noncontributory. A wavier of subrogation should apply in favor of the city and a 30 day notice of cancellation should apply in favor of the certificate holder. 
Umbrella/excess occurrence at $1,000,000. Policy should follow form of the underlying coverages and a 30 day notice of cancellation should apply in favor of the certificate holder. If the policy is not a follow form policy then the City of Woodstock should be included as additional insured and a waiver of subrogation should apply in favor of the city. 
iii.  Indemnification. As a condition of encroachment, the approved applicant and any person acting under or pursuant to said approval, agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, release, and defend (even if the allegations are false, fraudulent, or groundless) to the maximum extent allowed by law, the city manager, community development director, the city, its city council, and each member thereof, and its officers, employees, advisory board members and representatives, from and against all liability, loss, suits, claims, damages, costs, judgments, and expenses (including attorneys' fees and costs of litigation) which in whole or in part result from arise out of, or are claimed to result from or arise out of, any acts, negligence, errors or omissions of approved applicant, its employees, representatives, contractors, subcontractors, or agents by reason of or arising out of, or in any matter connected with, any and all acts, operations, privileges authorized, allowed, or undertaken pursuant to the use approval under their ordinance including, without limitation, any condition or property used in operations. 
d.  Outdoor display of merchandise. 
i.  Limitations on area. In no event shall any encroachment of an outdoor display of merchandise reduce the portion of any public sidewalk customarily used by pedestrians to less than five feet in width. If a display cannot maintain five feet of clearance for pedestrians, then it is not allowed and must be removed. Nothing will be placed within five feet of a fire hydrant, pedestrian crosswalk, or handicapped corner curb cut. You may exhibit merchandise on a temporary installation that is less than five feet high and no more than five feet from the building into the sidewalk. 
ii.  Indoor sales. While you may display merchandise outside, customers must pay for those items inside. Additionally, merchandise may only be displayed that is also sold inside the store. 
iii.  Temporary restrictions. The city may temporarily prohibit displays that encroach on a public sidewalk due to health concerns or unusually high pedestrian or vehicle congestion. 
iv.  Sound. Music, live or recorded, or other amplified sound shall not be allowed within the encroachment area. 
v.  Sanitation. The authorized business shall keep the encroachment area clean, neat, and orderly at all times, and is responsible for removing all debris and trash from the encroachment area at all times. 
vi.  Americans with Disabilities Act. Any person encroaching agrees to fully comply with all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act as currently existing or as may be hereafter amended. 
vii.  No property right. The provisions of this section shall not be construed or interpreted to convey any property rights or any estate in land to any person or business. 
viii.  Compliance with regulations. The applicant must sign a copy of this section, acknowledging and agreeing to comply with these regulations. 
e.  Stoop line stand. 
i.  Limitations on area. In no event shall any encroachment of a stoop line stand reduce the portion of any public sidewalk customarily used by pedestrians to less than five feet in width. If a display cannot maintain five feet of clearance for pedestrians, then it is not allowed and must be removed. Nothing will be placed within five feet of a fire hydrant, pedestrian crosswalk, or handicapped corner curb cut. You may exhibit merchandise on a temporary installation that is less than five feet high and no more than three feet from the building into the sidewalk. 
ii.  Indoor sales. While you may display merchandise outside, customers must pay for those items inside. Additionally, merchandise may only be displayed that is also sold inside the store. 
iii.  Construction and materials. Stoop line stands must be constructed of wood, metal, or other rigid material. Folding tables or boxes set on crates may not be used. 
iv.  Leasing prohibited. You may not lease the stand to another business or allow others to operate it. 
v.  Temporary restrictions. The city may temporarily prohibit displays that encroach on a public sidewalk due to health concerns or unusually high pedestrian or vehicle congestion. 
vi.  Sound. Music, live or recorded, or other amplified sound shall be allowed within the encroachment area, provided it does not violate the city's ordinances related to noise. 
vii.  Sanitation. The authorized business shall keep the encroachment area clean, neat, and orderly at all times, and is responsible for removing all debris and trash from the encroachment area at all times. 
viii.  Americans with Disabilities Act. Any person encroaching agrees to fully comply with all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act as currently existing or as may be hereafter amended. 
ix.  No property right. The provisions of this section shall not be construed or interpreted to convey any property rights or any estate in land to any person or business. 
x.  Compliance with regulations. The applicant must sign a copy of this section, acknowledging and agreeing to comply with these regulations. 
4.  Suspension. The use of a public sidewalk for encroachment can be suspended by the director of community development at any time for any of the reasons listed below. The director of community development shall issue the suspension in writing to the person violating this section. 
a.  The business license or health permit has been suspended, revoked, or cancelled. 
b.  The authorized business is not in compliance with any of the regulations with respect to the encroachment. 
c.  The authorized business has failed to correct violations of this chapter or any other ordinance within 48 hours of receipt of the notice of same delivered in writing to the authorized business. 
d.  The authorized business has a history of violations of this chapter of three or more within a two-year period, or immediately upon any violation depending upon the severity of the violation. 
e.  The use of the public sidewalk in accordance with this section may be suspended for a period up to 12 months depending upon history and severity of the violation. 
5.  Appeals. A person may appeal a suspension directly to the city manager. The appeal shall be filed within ten days from the receipt of the written suspension from the director of community development. The city manager will adjudicate the appeal within 30 days from receipt, responding to the appellant in writing. Thereafter, the appellant may appeal directly to the city council in accordance with the appeal provisions of this Code. 
6.  Compliance grace period. Upon adoption, a 45-day compliance grace period will commence, where the community development department will contact and educate business owners and property owners on the provisions of this section and no penalty shall be assessed, giving business owners and property owners time to comply. At the expiration of the 45 days, compliance with this section is required and the penalty provision shall take effect. 
7.  Penalty. Any violations of this section will be punished in accordance with section 1-7 of this Code. 
8.  Exemptions. City sanctioned or permitted events are exempt from this section. 
(Ord. No. 5635-2019, 2-25-2019)  
Secs. 82-19—82-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 
 
Sec. 82-51. - Permit required; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break up any street, nor make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose, nor place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing or interfering with the free use of the street without first obtaining a permit. 
(b)  This article shall not be applicable to any excavation work carried out under the direction of competent city authorities by employees of the city. 
(c)  Where a sewer, main, conduit or utility in or under any street breaks, bursts or otherwise is in such condition as to immediately endanger the property owning or controlling such sewer, main, conduit or utility, without first applying for and obtaining an excavation permit, shall immediately take proper emergency measures to cure or remedy the dangerous conditions for the protection of the property, life, health and safety of individuals. However, such person owning or controlling such facility shall apply for an excavation permit not later than the end of the next succeeding day during which the city offices are open for business, and shall not proceed with permanent repairs without first obtaining an excavation permit. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-31)  
Sec. 82-52. - Permit fee. 
A permit fee in an amount to be set from time to time by the city council shall be tendered with an application for an excavation permit. The fee shall be refunded if the application is denied. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-32)  
Sec. 82-53. - Bond required. 
Each applicant for an excavation permit shall be required to file a surety bond with the city planning office in an amount to be set from time to time by the city council. The required surety bond must be: 
(1)  With good and sufficient surety approved by the city council; 
(2)  Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance; 
(3)  Conditioned upon the permittee's agreement to hold the city and its officers harmless against any claims, judgments or other costs arising from the negligently performed excavation and related work covered by the permit which injured persons or property; and 
(4)  Conditioned upon the permittee's agreement to fill up and restore, as nearly as possible to its original condition, all openings and excavations made in the streets and to maintain the restoration for 24 months after the completion of the work. Settling of the surface within the 24 months shall be conclusive evidence of defective backfilling. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-33)  
Sec. 82-54. - Recovery on bond. 
Recovery on the bond required by section 82-53 for any injury or accident shall not exhaust the bond; it shall entirely cover any future accidents or injuries resulting from the excavation work for which it is given. If any suit or claim against the city is filed because of the negligence or default of the permittee, upon the city's giving written notice to the permittee of such suit or claim, any final judgment against the city must be paid by the surety. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-34)  
Sec. 82-55. - Protection of traffic. 
(a)  An excavation permittee shall erect such fence, railing or barriers about the site of the excavation work as shall prevent danger to persons using the streets or sidewalks, and such protective barrier shall be maintained until the work shall be completed or the danger removed. At twilight, suitable and sufficient lights shall be kept burning throughout the night and shall be placed upon each excavation site and upon any excavated materials, structures or obstacles for the duration of the work. 
(b)  Any excavations made in or under any sidewalk shall be provided with a substantial and adequate footbridge over the excavation on the line of the sidewalk, which bridge shall be at least three feet wide and securely railed on each side so that pedestrians can pass over safely at all times. 
(c)  An excavation permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe crossings over excavations and across highways under improvement to accommodate. Vehicular crossings shall be constructed and maintained of plank, timbers and blocking of adequate size to accommodate vehicular traffic safely. Pedestrian crossings shall be of adequate thickness, width and length, together with necessary blocking, to ensure safe passage by pedestrians. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-35)  
Sec. 82-56. - Protection of adjoining property. 
(a)  An excavation permittee shall preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking other suitable measures. Where it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain permission from the property owner. 
(b)  An excavation permittee shall, at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure to properly perform the work. 
(c)  Wherever an excavation permittee must trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after ditches have been backfilled. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area clean of earth and debris and in a condition as near as possible to that which existed before such work began. 
(d)  An excavation permittee shall not remove even temporarily any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas or easements across private property without first having notified and obtained the consent of the property owner, or in the case of public property, the planning office. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-36)  
Sec. 82-57. - Routing of traffic around site. 
An excavation permittee shall take appropriate measures to ensure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions shall be maintained as nearly normal as practicable so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general public. The permittee shall route and control traffic, including its own vehicles, as directed by the city police department. Through traffic shall be maintained without the aid of detours, if possible. Where flagmen are deemed necessary by the chief of police, they shall be furnished by the permittee at his own expense. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-37)  
Sec. 82-58. - Closing of roads for excavation. 
(a)  The following steps shall be taken before any street may be closed or restricted to traffic: 
(1)  The excavation permittee must receive the approval of the public works director and the police department. 
(2)  The excavation permittee must notify the chief of the fire department of any street so closed or restricted. 
(b)  Where necessary, the public works director will designate detours. The city shall maintain roadway surfaces of existing highways designated as detours without expense to the permittee, but in case there are no existing highways, the permittee shall construct all detours at its expense and in conformity with the specifications of the public works director. The permittee will be responsible for any damage caused to any streets by the operation of its equipment. 
(c)  Upon completion of construction work, the permittee shall notify the public works director and city police department before traffic is moved back to its normal flow so that any necessary adjustments may be made. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-38; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-59. - Noise, dust, debris. 
Each excavation permittee shall conduct the excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce noise, dust and unsightly debris. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except with the express written permission of the public works director or in case of an emergency, no tool, appliance or equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property shall be used. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-41; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-60. - Backfilling. 
Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation permit issued under this article shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug and in a manner consistent with sound engineering practices generally recognized in the construction industry. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-42)  
Sec. 82-61. - Prompt completion required. 
An excavation permittee shall complete with diligence and expediency all excavation work covered by the excavation permit issued under this article and shall promptly restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, no later than the date specified in the excavation permit. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-43)  
Sec. 82-62. - Cleanup of excavated material. 
(a)  All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled and maintained in such manner as not to endanger workers, pedestrians or users of streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and adjoining property. 
(b)  During excavation, all streets and private properties shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work. All cleanup operations at the excavation site shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of the public works director. From time to time, as may be ordered by the public works director or upon completion of the work, the permittee shall at its own expense clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from the work. Upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been notified to do so by the public works director, the work may be done by the city and the cost thereof charged to the permittee. The permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under his surety bond. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-44; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-63. - Repair of damage to improvements. 
All damage done to existing improvements during the progress of the excavation work shall be repaired by the permittee. Materials for such repair shall conform to the requirements of any applicable code provision or ordinance. If the permittee fails to furnish the necessary labor and materials for such repairs, the public works director shall cause the necessary labor and materials to be furnished by the city and the cost shall be charged against the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable on its bond. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-45; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-64. - Restoration of street surface. 
(a)  An excavation permittee shall restore the surface of all streets broken into or damaged as a result of the excavation work to its original condition in accordance with the specifications of the city and shall maintain the restoration for 24 months. 
(b)  An excavation permittee may be required to place a temporary surface over openings made in paved traffic lanes and shall make and maintain such temporary restorations so as to ensure safe traveling conditions until such time as permanent restorations are made. 
(c)  Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the public works director shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and its surety under the surety bond. 
(d)  If the excavation permittee fails to restore the surface of the street to its original and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by the permit, or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work covered by such permit, the public works director may restore the street and complete the excavation work. The permittee shall be liable for the actual cost thereof and 25 percent of such cost, in addition, for general overhead and administration expenses. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-46; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-65. - Inspection by public works director. 
The public works director shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-47; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Sec. 82-66. - Subsurface improvements: drawings. 
Users of subsurface street space shall maintain accurate drawings, plans and profiles showing the location and character of all underground structures including abandoned installations, and shall provide the public works director and planning office with copies of the same. Corrected maps shall be filed with such officer within 60 days after new installations, changes or replacements are made. 
(Code 1989, § 5-1-48; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004)  
Chapter 86 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(1); any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(11); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(25); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-401 et seq.; alcoholic beverage tax and regulation, § 6-61 et seq.; alcoholic beverage excise taxes, § 6-131 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 86-1—86-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Power of city council to fix property taxes, § 1.13(1); authority and procedures for collection of delinquent taxes, § 6.13. 
State Law reference— Liens for taxes, priority of liens, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-56; grounds and service of garnishment, entries or execution and return, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-360; time, place and manner of sale of real and personal property for taxes due to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359. 
 
Sec. 86-31. - Property tax rate. 
An annual ad valorem property tax is set and levied upon all personal and real property within the city subject to such taxation under state law. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1989, § 3-2-1) 
Charter reference— Tax levy limited to ten mills, § 6.11.  
Sec. 86-32. - Assessment. 
All property subject to municipal ad valorem taxation shall be assessed at 40 percent of its fair market value as established by the county for county ad valorem tax purposes. 
(Code 1989, § 3-2-2) 
Charter reference— Property taxes, § 6.10. 
State Law reference— Determination of fair market value for county and municipal ad valorem taxation purposes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-352 et seq.  
Sec. 86-33. - Date taxes due and payable; interest on delinquent taxes. 
(a)  Ad valorem taxes shall become due and payable annually by December 20 of each year, or 60 days after the date of billing, whichever is later, and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid by such date. Tax bills showing the assessed valuations, amount of taxes due, tax due dates and information as to delinquency dates and penalties shall be sent to all taxpayers at least 30 days prior to the due date, but failure to send a tax bill shall not invalidate any tax. Penalties shall be sent to all taxpayers at least 60 days prior to the due date. 
(b)  Delinquent taxes shall accrue interest at the highest legal rate per annum authorized by state law from the due date to the date payment is made, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-23(e)(3). 
(Code 1989, § 3-2-3; Ord. No. 02-07-09, 7-9-2002) 
Charter reference— Tax due dates, and tax bills, § 6.12. 
State Law reference— Rate of interest is one percent per month on past due taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40.  
Sec. 86-34. - Execution for unpaid taxes; sales. 
(a)  For any and all unpaid taxes during any year, executions shall be issued against the property and the owners thereof on or after the due date of each year for the amount of taxes due, the interest thereon and such fee for the issuance of the execution as provided by law. Such execution shall be issued by the city clerk and bear interest in the name of the mayor and shall be levied by the finance officer or designee. Such execution shall bind all the property, real and personal, of the defendant; and the costs thereof shall be the same as on tax collector's executions by the laws of this state. 
(b)  The execution shall be levied by the finance officer or designee upon such property as in the discretion of the levying officer may be suitable or available for such purposes, and the same shall be advertised once a week for four weeks next preceding the date of sale in the official organ of the county or in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. Sales of such property shall be conducted on the first Tuesday of the month before the door of the city hall, or in the council chambers, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., and the same shall be conducted by the finance officer or designee. All property shall be sold at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash. The proceeds arising from such sale shall first be applied to the payment of the taxes due, including the interest and costs and expenses of sale, and any surplus remaining shall be paid to the owner of such property, provided that the city may buy any property to be sold under and by virtue of such tax executions. 
(Code 1989, § 3-2-4; Ord. No. 5336-B-2018, §§ 1, 2, 8-27-2018) 
Charter reference— Collection of delinquent tax, § 6.13. 
State Law reference— Time, place and manner of sale of property for taxes due municipality, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359; tax executions, O.C.G.A. § 48-3-1 et seq.; tax sales, O.C.G.A. § 48-4-1 et seq.  
Sec. 86-35. - Redemption of property by owner. 
Any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon any real property sold under or by virtue of an execution issued for the collection of taxes may redeem such property within one year of the date of sale as provided by state law. 
(Code 1989, § 3-2-5) 
State Law reference— Redemption of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq.  
Sec. 86-36. - Register of sales. 
The chief of police shall keep a register of all sales of real estate in a book provided by him for that purpose, in which he shall enter each tract, lot or parcel of land exposed to sale, the quantity sold, and the amount of taxes and costs for which the same was sold, and the purchaser's name, leaving at the end of each line three columns in blank leaving a sufficient space to insert the name of the person who may redeem such tract, lot or parcel of land, the date of redemption, and the amount of redemption money paid, which book shall be kept in a neat and legible manner, and shall always be open for the inspection of any and all persons interested who shall apply to the chief of police for any examination of the same. 
(Code 1989, § 3-2-6)  
Sec. 86-37. - Sale of parcels. 
When not impractical, all property sold for municipal taxes shall be so offered for sale such that the smallest amount of the property that will bring the amount of taxes and costs due shall be sold. 
(Code 1989, § 3-2-7)  
Sec. 86-38. - Purchase by city. 
The city clerk shall attend all sales of property for taxes due the city, and in the event no one person bids for the property put up to be sold as much as the tax due thereon, the clerk shall place a bid for such property for the city, and if the bid is accepted, take custody of the deed for the city. No property so purchased by the city shall be sold by the city except at a public sale thereof to the highest bidder. 
(Code 1989, § 3-2-8)  
Sec. 86-39. - Exemptions. 
(a)  House Bill 761 
By: Representatives Scheid of the 17th, Stancil of the 16th and Pinholster of the 15th 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED 
AN ACT 
To provide a homestead exemption from all City of Woodstock ad valorem taxes for city purposes for the full value of the homestead after a two-year phase-in period for certain residents of that city who are 62 years of age or older; to provide for definitions; to specify the terms and conditions of the exemption and the procedures relating thereto; to provide for applicability; to provide for a referendum, effective dates, and automatic repeal; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
SECTION 1. 
(a)  For purposes of this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for city purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for city purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Woodstock, including, but not limited to, taxes to retire bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A. 
(3)  "Senior citizen" means a person who is 62 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under this Act is made. 
(b)  (1)  Each resident of the City of Woodstock who is a senior citizen is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Woodstock ad valorem taxes for city purposes on the homestead owned and occupied by such resident as a residence as follows: 
(A)  For the taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2002, and prior to January 1, 2003, in the amount of one-half of the full value of that homestead; 
(B)  For all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2003, for the full value of that homestead. 
(2)  The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount under subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of this subsection shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (b) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an affidavit with the governing authority of the City of Woodstock or the designee thereof giving the person's age and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the governing authority of the City of Woodstock or the designee thereof to make a determination as to whether such person is entitled to such exemption. The governing authority of the City of Woodstock or the designee thereof shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the applicant for the exemption. 
(d)  The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in Code Section 48-5-50.1 of the O.C.G.A. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the applicant occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper affidavit as provided in subsection (c) of this section, it shall not be necessary to make application and file such affidavit thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act to notify the governing authority of the City of Woodstock or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(e)  The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, county taxes, or county school district taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by this Act shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other homestead exemption applicable to City of Woodstock ad valorem taxes for city purposes. 
(f)  The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2002. 
SECTION 2. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the municipal election superintendent of the City of Woodstock shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of the City of Woodstock for approval or rejection. The municipal election superintendent shall conduct that election on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 2001, and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The municipal election superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Cherokee County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"( ) YES 	Shall the Act be approved which provides a homestead exemption from City of Woodstock ad valorem taxes for city purposes for the full value of the homestead after a two-year phase-in period for residents of that city who are 62 years of age or older?" 
( ) NO 	
 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, then Section 1 of this Act shall become of full force and effect immediately and shall be applicable to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2002. If Section 1 of this Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, Section 1 of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. The expense of such election shall be borne by the City of Woodstock. It shall be the municipal election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
SECTION 3. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
SECTION 4. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
(b)  House Bill 633 (AS PASSED HOUSE AND SENATE) 
By: Representatives Jerguson of the 22nd, Hill of the 21st, Byrd of the 20th, and Hamilton of the 23rd 
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED 
AN ACT 
To provide a homestead exemption from all City of Woodstock ad valorem taxes for city purposes in the amount of $100,000.00 of the assessed value of the homestead for certain residents of that city who are disabled veterans or their unremarried surviving spouses, if deceased, on a current or subsequent homestead; to provide for definitions; to specify the terms and conditions of the exemption and the procedures relating thereto; to provide for applicability; to provide for a referendum, effective dates, and automatic repeal; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
SECTION 1. 
(a)  As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for city purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for city purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Woodstock, including, but not limited to, taxes to retire bonded indebtedness. 
(2)  "Disabled veteran" means: 
(A)  A wartime veteran who was discharged under honorable conditions and who has been adjudicated by the Department of Veterans Affairs of the United States as being totally and permanently disabled and entitled to receive service connected benefits so long as he or she is 100 percent disabled and receiving or entitled to receive benefits for a 100 percent service connected disability; 
(B)  An American veteran of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise, who is disabled due to the loss or loss of use of both lower extremities such as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; due to blindness in both eyes, having only light perception, together with the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity; or due to the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with residuals of organic disease or injury which so affect the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion without resort to a wheelchair; 
(C)  Any disabled veteran who is not entitled to receive benefits from the Department of Veterans Affairs but who qualifies otherwise, as provided for by Article VII, Section I, Paragraph IV of the Constitution of Georgia of 1976; 
(D)  An American veteran of any war or armed conflict who is disabled due to loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with the loss or loss of use of one upper extremity which so affects the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; or 
(E)  A veteran becoming eligible for assistance in acquiring housing under Section 2101 of Title 38 of the United States Code as hereafter amended on or after July 1, 1999. 
(3)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in Code Section 48-5-40 of the O.C.G.A. 
(b)  Any disabled veteran as defined in any subparagraph of paragraph (2) of subsection (a) of this section who is a resident of the City of Woodstock is granted an exemption in the amount of $100,000.00 on the assessed value on his or her homestead which such veteran owns and actually occupies as a residence and homestead, such exemption being from all ad valorem taxation for city purposes. The value of all property in excess of such exemption granted to such veteran shall remain subject to taxation. The unremarried surviving spouse or minor children of any such disabled veteran as defined in this section shall also be entitled to an exemption in the amount of $100,000.00 on the assessed value on his or her homestead which such person owns and actually occupies as a residence and homestead, such exemption being from all ad valorem taxation for city purposes. The value of all property in excess of such exemption granted to such unremarried surviving spouse or minor children shall remain subject to taxation. 
(c)  (1)  Any disabled veteran qualifying pursuant to subparagraph (a)(2)(A) or (a)(2)(B) of this section for the homestead exemption provided for in this section shall file with the city a letter from the Department of Veterans Affairs or the Department of Veterans Service stating the qualifying disability. 
(2)  Any disabled veteran qualifying pursuant to subparagraph (a)(2)(C) of this section for the homestead exemption provided for in this section shall file with the city a copy of his or her DD Form 214 (discharge papers from his or her military records) along with a letter from a doctor who is licensed to practice medicine in this state stating that he or she is disabled due to loss or loss of use of both lower extremities such as to preclude locomotion without the aid of braces, crutches, canes, or a wheelchair; due to blindness in both eyes, having only light perception, together with the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity; or due to the loss or loss of use of one lower extremity together with residuals of organic disease or injury which so affect the functions of balance or propulsion as to preclude locomotion without resort to a wheelchair. Prior to approval of an exemption, a city employee may require the applicant to provide not more than two additional doctors' letters if the board is in doubt as to the applicant's eligibility for the exemption. 
(3)  Any disabled veteran qualifying pursuant to subparagraph (a)(2)(D) of this section for the homestead exemption provided for in this section shall file with the city a letter from a doctor who is licensed to practice medicine in this state stating the qualifying disability. Prior to approval of an exemption, a city employee, may require the applicant to provide not more than two additional doctors' letters if the board is in doubt as to the applicant's eligibility for the exemption. 
(4)  Any disabled veteran qualifying pursuant to subparagraph (a)(2)(E) of this section for the homestead exemption provided for in this section shall file with the city a letter from the Department of Veterans Affairs or Department of Veterans Service stating the eligibility for such housing assistance. 
(d)  Each disabled veteran shall file for the exemption only once in the city. Once filed, the exemption shall automatically be renewed from year to year, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section. Such exemption shall be extended to the unremarried surviving spouse or minor children at the time of his or her death so long as they continue to occupy the home as a residence and homestead. In the event a disabled veteran who would otherwise be entitled to the exemption dies or becomes incapacitated to the extent that he or she cannot personally file for such exemption, the spouse, the unremarried surviving spouse, or the minor children at the time of the disabled veteran's death may file for the exemption and such exemption may be granted as if the disabled veteran had made personal application therefor. 
(e)  Not more often than once every three years, a city employee may require the holder of an exemption granted pursuant to this section to substantiate his or her continuing eligibility for the exemption. In no event may the city require more than three doctors' letters to substantiate eligibility. 
(f)  The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, county taxes, or county school district taxes for educational purposes. The homestead exemption granted by this Act shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other homestead exemption applicable to City of Woodstock ad valorem taxes for city purposes except that for disabled veterans it shall be the sole homestead exemption applicable to City of Woodstock ad valorem taxes for city purposes. 
(g)  The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2008. 
SECTION 2. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the municipal election superintendent of the City of Woodstock shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this Act to the electors of the City of Woodstock for approval or rejection. The municipal election superintendent shall conduct that election on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 2007, and shall issue the call and conduct that election as provided by general law. The municipal election superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Cherokee County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 
"( ) YES 	Shall the Act be approved which provides a homestead exemption from City of Woodstock ad valorem taxes for city purposes in the amount of $250,000.00 of the appraised value of the homestead for residents of that city for disabled veterans or their unremarried surviving spouses, if deceased, on a current or subsequent homestead?" 
( ) NO 	
 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and all persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, Section 1 of this Act shall become of full force and effect on January 1, 2008. If the Act is not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, Section 1 of this Act shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. The expense of such election shall be borne by the City of Woodstock. It shall be the municipal election superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
SECTION 3. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 2 of this Act, this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
SECTION 4. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
(c)  Resolution 95-08-22 
The governing authority of the City of Woodstock shall exempt from ad valorem taxation, including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes, all or any combination of the following types of tangible personal property: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in this state. The exemption provided for in this paragraph shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered, or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing, or production operations in this state; 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within this state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in this paragraph shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured; or 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside this state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into this state from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for in this paragraph shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. Such period shall be determined based on application of a first-in, first-out method of accounting for the inventory. The official books and records of the warehouse, dock, or wharf where such property is being stored shall contain a full, true and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such property for which a freeport exemption has been claimed shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of this state and of any political subdivision of this state. 
(Res. No. 1520, 4-11-2011)  
Secs. 86-40—86-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Aug. 25, 2014, § 1(Att.), repealed the former Art. III, §§ 86-71—86-105, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1989, §§ 3-3-1—3-3-3, 3-3-5—3-3-16, 3-3-19—3-3-21, 3-3-23—3-3-34, 3-3-37, 3-3-40; Res. No. 96-02-27, adopted Feb. 27, 1996; Ord. No. 1174, adopted Apr. 26, 2010; and an ordinance adopted Sept. 9, 2013. 
Charter reference— Licenses, occupational tax; excise tax, § 6.14. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 86-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business class means the number assigned to a specific business, based on its NAICS code, as prescribed in the fee schedule. 
Citation means written notification to a business or its representative of a violation of this article. 
City means the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
Fee Schedule means the most current Fee Schedule adopted by the Mayor and City Council which may be updated from time to time. 
Gross receipt or gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the calendar year two years previous the current license year, including without limitation the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred. 
b.  Gain from trading stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness. 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services. 
d.  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered. 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
The term gross receipt or gross receipts shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise taxes; 
b.  Sales returns, allowance and discount; 
c.  Inter-organizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent/subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC § 1563 (a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the businesses' gross receipts; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
Home-based business means a business operating from applicant's primary residence. 
Location and office include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
Occupational tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupational tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-7-1-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
Cross reference— Cross reference— Definitions generally. § 1-2.  
Sec. 86-72. - Tax required. 
(a)  Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupational tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the code enforcement officer or his deputies or to any police officer of the city, upon request. 
(b)  There is levied and assessed a license tax for each calendar year on all occupations and businesses in the city which, under the laws of the state, the city has the authority to license and collect a tax therefor. Such license tax shall be determined in accordance with the schedule of taxes that is incorporated by reference into this article. A current copy of the license tax schedule is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it shall be available for public inspection. 
(c)  There is levied and assessed, in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, a business license tax on all depository financial institutions, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, which are located within the city. This business license tax shall not exceed 0.25 percent of the gross receipts, as defined and allocated in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, of such depository financial institutions. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Levy of occupational tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7; local business tax on depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93.  
Sec. 86-73. - Levy of tax. 
An occupational tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the City and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6 based upon the following criteria. The tax rate determined by the annual Gross Receipt amount collected for each business, trade, profession or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city council: An occupational tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6 based upon the following criteria. The tax rate determined by the annual Gross Receipt for each business, trade, profession or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city council pursuant to the City of Woodstock Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
Charter reference— Licenses, occupational tax: excise tax, § 6.14. 
State Law reference— Levy of occupational tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6; determination of amount of occupational tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10.  
Sec. 86-74. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupational tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupational tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations shall be taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-75. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent-current businesses. 
(a)  Each occupational tax shall be for the calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and occupational tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by February 1 of each year, be delinquent and subject to an interest charge of 1.5 percent per month until paid. 
(b)  Should such occupational tax not be paid before April 1, an additional penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee shall also be due. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
Charter reference— Tax due date and tax bills, § 6.12. 
State Law reference— Penalty for failure to pay tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21; issuance of execution against delinquent taxpayer, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26; amount of tax due from business commencing business on or after July 1, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21.  
Sec. 86-76. - Same—New businesses. 
(a)  On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city: 
(1)  The occupational tax is due within 30 days of January 1 of each year or within 30 days following commencement of a new business whichever first occurs. 
(2)  Registration and regulatory fees shall be delinquent if not paid to the city immediately upon beginning business. 
(3)  However, the regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession when: 
a.  The work done or service provided are necessary for the health or safety of one or more individuals; 
b.  The work done or service provided have no adverse effect on any other person; and 
c.  Regulatory fees are tendered within two business days after commencing business or the practice of a profession. 
(b)  If the occupational tax or license fee is not paid, it shall be subject to an interest charge of one and one-half percent per month until paid. Additionally, should such occupational tax not be paid within 90 days of the first date the business transacted business in the city, an additional penalty of ten percent of the tax shall also be due. 
(c)  The granting of a occupational tax license under any provisions of this Code shall be deemed a privilege only, and nothing herein contained shall be construed as granting any person subject to municipal regulation any legal right to engage in that business. 
(d)  An application for an occupational tax license shall be completed and submitted to the city. Once the application is considered complete with the required documentation, the application is reviewed by any necessary city departments for compliance with applicable local, state, or federal requirements or codes. 
(e)  False statements on any applications for occupational tax license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license or denial of the application. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
Charter reference— Tax due date and tax bills, § 6.12. 
State Law reference— Penalty for failure to pay tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21; issuance of execution against delinquent taxpayer, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26; amount of tax due from business commencing business on or after July 1, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21.  
Sec. 86-77. - Collection of occupational tax. 
(a)  An occupational tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Occupational tax (not to include Home-Based Businesses) is determined by annual gross receipt amount, business class number according to NAICS code, and gross receipt brackets, plus a nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee shall be required for initial start-ups and renewals. 
(2)  New businesses applying for an occupational tax license will estimate Gross Receipts for the remainder of the calendar year from the date the business opens in the city. For the second license year, the gross receipt amount for the entire second year will also be estimated. For the third license year renewal, the tax return showing the gross receipts from the portion of the first calendar year of business will be prorated over 12 months for use in calculating the third license year occupational tax. No refunds or credits will be given for overestimations nor will back charges be assessed for underestimations. 
(3)  All occupational tax license renewals will require submittal of the tax return from two years prior to the new license year. 
(4)  All home-based businesses will be assessed a nonprorated non refundable fee along with an administration fee per the City of Woodstock Fee Schedule. No person who is not a resident of the premises shall be employed, with the exceptions stated herein. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
a.  Employees: The occupation shall be conducted by members of the family who are living in the residence and maximum of one additional employee. 
b.  On-site employee: A person employed by the home occupational license holder to perform the business related duties on the same premises/residence for which the occupational license is issued. 
c.  Off-site employee: A person or persons who may or may not be directly employed by the occupational license holder and does not perform duties on the same residence for which the occupational tax license is issued for. 
(b)  The tax registration provided for in this article shall be issued by the tax clerk and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such registration or occupational tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling subject to this article without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to section 1-7. 
(c)  In addition to the other remedies available to the city for the collection of occupational taxes, and regulatory fees due from persons subject to the tax or fee who fail or refuse to pay the tax or fee, the tax clerk shall issue executions against the delinquent taxpayers for any or all of the following: 
(1)  The amount of the taxes or fees due when the taxes or fees become due; 
(2)  Any penalty imposed by subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21; and 
(3)  Any interest imposed by the local ordinance in accordance with subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21. 
(d)  The court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of ordinances of the local government which has levied the tax or imposed the fee may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupational tax or regulatory fee. Such a civil fine shall not exceed $500.00 and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(e)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupational tax for each of its locations. 
(f)  No occupational tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
Charter reference— Tax due date and tax bills, § 6.12; collection of delinquent tax, § 6. 13. 
Cross reference— Inspection of books and records, § 86-94. 
State Law reference— Penalty for failure to pay tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21; issuance of execution against delinquent taxpayer, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-26; amount of tax due from business commencing business on or after July 1, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21.  
Sec. 86-78. - Paying tax of out of state business. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupational tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients. 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Businesses and practitioners subject to this section shall be required to pay an occupational tax to only one local government in this state, the local government for the municipal corporation or county in which the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by the individual business or practitioner. 
(c)  If a business or practitioner subject to this section provides to the local government in this state which is authorized to levy an occupational tax on such business or practitioner proof of payment of a local business or occupational tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, the business or practitioner shall be exempt from local occupational tax in this state. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Levy of occupation tax on business with no location in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7.  
Sec. 86-79. - Dominant line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Classification rules for business, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-12.  
Sec. 86-80. - Multiple businesses separately taxed. 
(a)  Where a business is operated at more than one location or where the business includes more than one line, the gross receipt of each location shall be entered on a separate tax return and each different line of business shall be identified on a separate tax return; with each location holding a separate occupational tax license. 
(b)  The registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without having that line of business registered with the tax clerk and that line of business being noted by the tax clerk upon the occupational tax certificate which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(c)  Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupational tax levied under this article. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-81. - Professionals. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18) shall be assessed a fee per the City of Woodstock's Fee Schedule and fee shall be paid with respect to each practitioner who is licensed. A practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the Gross Receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Amount of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10.  
Sec. 86-82. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupational tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Prohibition on tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13.  
Sec. 86-83. - Regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(b)  A regulatory fee schedule will be adopted by the council and amended from time to time by the council. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Regulatory fee, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9; definition of regulatory fee, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5.  
Sec. 86-84. - Allocation of occupational tax of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city, where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupational tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. In the case where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those business with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-14 (a) (2). 
Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the City one or more of the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the Gross Receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's Gross Receipts by other local governments. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Imposition of fees on business with multiple locations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8.  
Sec. 86-85. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupational tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from such registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to such purpose. Nonprofit organizations, state and local authorities are exempt from payment of occupational taxes and regulatory permits. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Exemption of charity; definition, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5.  
Sec. 86-86. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.) shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Duty to post state license, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-23.  
Sec. 86-87. - Evidence of qualification required. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(b)  Before issuance of a new city business registration, the city building inspector/code enforcement officer shall first inspect the business for safety and certify that it is located within the proper zoning district with the tax clerk. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-88. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupational tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing the business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained such registration, shall be subject to penalties provided for the violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Time for payment of fees and tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20.  
Sec. 86-89. - Building inspector/code enforcement officer's subpoena and arrest powers. 
The city building inspector/code enforcement department and its duly designated officers and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations. ch. 18.  
Sec. 86-90. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupational tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1). 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-80 et seq. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Excluded businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-16.  
Sec. 86-91. - Inapplicable tax. 
An occupational tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by state laws or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Time for payment of fee and tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-20.  
Sec. 86-92. - Payment of occupational tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to an occupational tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupational tax shall estimate the Gross Receipts from the commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid at the time of registration pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-93. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, such business will pay an occupational tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Classification of more than one type service or product, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-12.  
Sec. 86-94. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The tax clerk officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the tax clerk such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the tax clerk at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty for delinquent tax will be assessed or stated in section 86-75. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Levy of occupational tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6.  
Sec. 86-95. - Tax registration not to be issued and to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay an occupational tax or any part of an occupational tax required by this article before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of such returns within the time required in this article, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 86-94, or upon failure of any business to pay any ad valorem tax on property owned by said business, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of such business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupational tax is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the tax clerk or upon failure of any business to pay any ad valorem tax on property owned by said business. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupational tax and for delinquent property tax. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the business has arranged a payment plan for outstanding ad valorem taxes on property owned by said business which is approved by the mayor and council, then said business may obtain a business tax registration. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Levy of tax and penalties authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6.  
Sec. 86-96. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents or employees, who do business in the city, after the registration for such business has been revoked as provided in section 86-95, required to make occupational tax returns, and who fail to make the returns within the time and in the manner provided in this article, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees or representatives of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupational tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-97. - Lien taken for delinquent occupational tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided in this article for the collection of the occupational tax levied in this article, the tax clerk, upon any tax or installment of such tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of the tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for the tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person, partnership or corporation liable for the tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city, the county and the laws of the state. The lien of the occupational tax shall become fixed on and dated from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the code enforcement officer of the city upon the property of the defendant located in such jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in such execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the tax clerk against any person defaulting on the occupational tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of null bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
Charter reference— Collection of delinquent tax, § 6.13. 
State Law reference— Effect of entry of nulla bona on rights of defaulting taxpayer, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-25; interest on judgments, O.C.G.A. § 7-4-12.  
Sec. 86-98. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupational tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupational taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-99. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-100. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is the duty of the tax clerk and building inspections/code enforcement department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupational taxes are observed; and to do the following in the event the provisions of this article are violated in any way: 
(1)  Issue a citation to business owner or representative; and said citation shall be issued according to the following provisions: 
a.  Citation shall be issued in writing. 
b.  Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification. 
c.  Include a description of the business in question sufficient for identification. 
d.  Include statement of violation or violations and why citation is being issued. 
e.  Include a correction order allowing a reasonable amount of time to bring business into compliance with this article. 
f.  Inform the business owner or representative of the right to appeal. 
g.  Delivered personally, sent via certified or first-class mail addressed to the business location or most recent mailing address on file with the business license office or posted in a conspicuous location at the business location. 
(2)  Summon all violators of the same to appear before the court in the event a citation has been issued with no response from the business owner or representative in the amount of time allotted in the citation. 
Any citation issued in accordance with this article shall carry with it a fine of up to $100.00 per violation. Each day which follows the issuance of a citation in which the business is still in violation shall be considered a separate violation and the business owner or representative may be fined up to $100.00 per day the violation continues. 
It is the further duty of the tax clerk and building inspections/code enforcement department and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-101. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax levied by this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-102. - Requirement of public hearing. 
Any local government shall conduct at least one public hearing before adoption of any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupational tax. In any year when revenue from occupational taxes is greater than revenue from occupational taxes for the preceding year for a local government, the local government shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.)) 
State Law reference— Levy of occupational tax; hearing, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-6; disposition of increase in occupational tax revenue, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-28.  
Sec. 86-103. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupational tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupational tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupational tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-104. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention of this section that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-105. - Revocation. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties provided by section 86-75, any person violating the provisions of this article or any ordinance or regulation governing the conduct of his business shall be subject to having his license revoked. No business license may be revoked by the city without first having provided the business owner with written notice stating the grounds on which the council may choose to proceed and providing the business owner with the right to a hearing, provided such right to hearing must be exercised by the business owner, in writing, within five days of receipt of council notice. 
(b)  The city council may, if it finds this article has been violated by the licensee, his agent or employee, instead of revoking a license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the city council may deem necessary. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-106. - Returns confidential. 
Except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-15(c), as amended, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent, or clerk of the City of Woodstock or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of Gross Receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupational tax return required under this chapter. All contents of the return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupational tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors and bookkeepers employed by the City shall be classed as employees. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by City officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia or the United States, and other local governments. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-107. - Change or revision to existing businesses 
(a)  Any person or practitioner of profession or occupation taxable under this Code moving from one location to another shall notify the city of the move and the new address by submitting a completed application and supporting documentation and shall pay a flat revision fee per the City of Woodstock Fee Schedule. 
(b)  Any person, or practitioner of profession or occupation taxable under the Code changing its business name from one name to another shall notify the city of the name change by submitting a completed application and supporting documentation and shall pay a flat revision fee per the City of Woodstock Fee Schedule. 
(c)  The transfer of ownership of an occupational tax license shall be considered in the same manner as the termination of the business and the establishment of a new business. The new business shall notify the city of the change of ownership and apply for a new occupational tax license by submitting a completed application and supporting documentation and shall pay a flat revision fee per the City of Woodstock Fee Schedule. If all occupational taxes have been paid and are current for the license year, the new business shall not be required to pay occupational taxes until the next renewal period. Upon approval of the application, a new license will be issued to the new owner. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Sec. 86-108. - Appeals. 
Any applicant aggrieved shall have the right to appeal any action taken according to this article to the city manager. The appeal shall be submitted by the business owner or representative within five business days after receipt of the notice of any action by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager. The city manager shall meet to hear the appeal within five business days of receipt of notice of such appeal unless circumstances warrant delaying the appeal hearing for a reasonable time thereafter and shall issue a decision on the appeal within 24-hours after said hearing, which requirement may be extended if the city manager requires additional information or needs to seek legal advice, but shall be rendered as soon as practicable thereafter. Any appeal from the decision of the city manager shall be forwarded to Woodstock Municipal Court and shall be filed within 30 days of the date on which the decision is rendered to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 8-25-2014, § 1(Att.))  
Secs. 86-109—86-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INSURERS 
 
Sec. 86-141. - Special tax on insurers. 
(a)  Insurer's license fees. There is levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $75.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b) of this section, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is levied a license fee in the amount of $75.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this section, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $26.25 per location. 
(c)  Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. There is levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) of this section, in the amount of $40.00 for each location within the city. 
(d)  Gross premium tax imposed on life insurers. There is levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums, as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this subsection is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. There is levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than insurers transacting business in the class of insurance defined in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums, as used in this section, shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this subsection is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1989, § 3-3-35; Res. No. 96-02-27, 2-27-1996; Ord. No. 01-10-23, 10-23-2001) 
Charter reference— Licenses, occupational tax, excise tax, § 6.14. 
State Law reference— City authority to impose fee, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; tax on other than insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2.  
Sec. 86-142. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in section 86-141(a) and (b) shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. 
(Ord. No. 01-10-23, 10-23-2001)  
Secs. 86-143—86-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL/MOTEL TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-0006, §§ 1—11, adopted July 13, 2009, repealed Art. V, §§ 86-171—86-175, and supplied provisions for a new Art. V, §§ 86-161—86-175, to read as set out herein. Former Art. V, §§ 86-171—86-175, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1989, §§ 3-5-1—3-5-4; and an ordinance adopted June 13, 2006. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 86-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City. The City of Woodstock and, variously, the incorporated territory of Woodstock, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. 48-13-50, et seq. 
Chief financial officer. The duly appointed chief financial officer of the city or his designee. 
Due date. The twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability. The lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room. Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters for residential use. 
Hotel. Any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truckstop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider. Any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident. Any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax. The tax on occupation imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. 48-13-50, et seq., specifically 48-13-51(b). 
(Ord. No. 2009-0006, § 1, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 86-162. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of eight percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 86-164. 
(Ord. No. 2009-0006, § 2, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 86-163. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 86-164. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable for any amount of tax that he fails to collect appropriately; and must remit to the city any amount of tax collected in excess of that which should have been collected. 
(Ord. No. 2009-0006, § 3, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 86-164. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is not subject to this tax. 
(Ord. No. 2009-0006, § 4, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 86-165. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the chief financial officer of the city on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that this article becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the chief financial officer of the city. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by corporation, by an officer. The chief financial officer of the city shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2009-0006, § 5, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 86-166. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent of $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. Section 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and Section 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as maybe required by the chief financial officer of the city. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater the $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 2009-006, § 6, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 86-167. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 86-166. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The chief financial officer of the city shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by OCGA Section 48-5-380. 
(Ord. of 2009-006, § 7, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 86-168. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return the chief financial officer of the city shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the chief financial officer of the city. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 86-167(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 86-166. 
(Ord. of 2009-006, § 8, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 86-169. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the chief financial officer of the city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the chief financial officer of the city either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more that once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. of 2009-006, § 9, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 86-170. - Administration of article; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of chief financial officer of the city. The chief financial officer of the city shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the chief financial officer of the city may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The chief financial officer of the city or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the chief financial officer of the city shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the chief financial officer of the city may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 2009-006, § 10, 7-13-2009)  
Sec. 86-171. - Violations. 
Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 86-163 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 86-166, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. of 2009-006, § 11, 7-13-2009)  
Secs. 86-172—86-175. - Reserved.  
ARTTICLE VI. - PHONE COMPANIES 
 
Sec. 86-176. - Special tax on phone companies. 
(a)  Each telephone company operating in the city shall pay, on or before August 31 of each year, an occupational license tax for that calendar year in the amount of three percent of recurring local service revenues received by such company from subscribers located within the city. The annual amount due may be computed by annualizing the recurring local service revenues billed during the month of June preceding the date of payment. 
(b)  Recurring local service revenues mean: 
(1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.  Guaranteed portions of the charge for semi-public pay station services; 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local message; and 
d.  Subscriber station revenues for teletypewriter exchange service. 
(2)  Charges for morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)  All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
(Code 1979, § 4-107; Ord. of 9-26-2006(2))  
Secs. 86-177—86-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MOTOR VEHICLE RENTALS TAX 
 
Sec. 86-200. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Month or monthly period shall mean the calendar months of any year. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern from the rental or lease for 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage of collision damage waiver but excluding all changes for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the State of Georgia. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
Tax, excise tax or taxes shall mean the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Sec. 86-201. - Authority; rules and regulations; records required. 
(a)  Authority. The chief financial officer shall administer and enforce this chapter for the levy and collection of tax. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The chief financial officer shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or other laws of the city and the states or the Constitution of the State or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and the collection of the tax under this chapter. 
(c)  Records required. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this chapter shall keep records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the chief financial officer may require. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Sec. 86-202. - Assessment, levy, and collection. 
(a)  Within the corporate limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, there is assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under Article I, Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. The tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be imposed only at the time when and the place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. The customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to the tax levy as provided in this chapter shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts. 
(b)  The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the chief financial officer of the City of Woodstock, Georgia and the tax thus remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to the tax levied by this chapter shall be liable for the tax at the rate of three percent upon the rental charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Sec. 86-203. - Authorized capital outlay projects. 
The following projects and purposes for which the proceeds of the tax levied by this chapter are to be expended are specified as follows: 
(1)  Promoting industry, trade, commerce and tourism. 
(2)  Capital outlay projects consisting of the construction of convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities, or public safety facilities, including the acquiring, constructing, renovating, improving, and equipping of parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, plazas, connections, and other public improvements associated with such convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities or public safety facilities or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects; and 
(3)  Maintenance and operation expenses or security and public safety expenses associated with subsection (2) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Sec. 86-204. - No tax imposed. 
No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter on the rental charge associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the State of Georgia and returns it within the State of Georgia; or 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the State of Georgia and returns it outside the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Sec. 86-205. - Collection allowance. 
Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this chapter shall be allowed to retain three percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting and paying the amount of taxes due, if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Sec. 86-206. - Payment; interest; late charges. 
(a)  On or before the twentieth day of each month following the first full month after the effective date of this ordinance, the rental motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided herein shall transmit to the chief financial officer for the city, a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected by authority of this chapter for each preceding calendar month. Along with said statement the rental motor vehicle concern shall submit to the chief financial officer the net taxes due for that particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax then due and in addition to such penalty, interest thereon on the unpaid principal amount due, computed at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Sec. 86-207. - Records open for inspection. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and to collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are required to keep a record of all rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying by any duly authorized agent of the city during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Sec. 86-208. - Excise tax return and review. 
(a)  If the chief financial officer is not satisfied with the return or returns of the excise tax provided herein, or the amount of tax required to be paid to the city by any rental motor vehicle concern, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the chief financial officer shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found to be due by him. 
(c)  The chief financial officer or his designated representative shall give to the rental motor vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail and if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator or the owner of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the chief financial officer as provided to him by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent of the addressee. 
(d)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Sec. 86-209. - Failure to make a return. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern fails to make a return, the chief financial officer shall make an estimate of the excise tax due. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the rental motor vehicle concern has failed to make the return and shall be based upon such information which is or may come into the possession of the chief financial officer. Written notice shall be given in the manner as prescribed above in section 86-208. 
(b)  The amount of determination shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month or fraction thereof from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount of any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Sec. 86-210. - Audit authority. 
Duly authorized employees of the City of Woodstock upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities, if necessary, of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Sec. 86-211. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this chapter transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this chapter until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the chief financial officer or his designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required herein, such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Sec. 86-212. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this chapter, any person violating any provision of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by the Municipal Court for the City of Woodstock in accordance with the limits established by the City Charter for the City of Woodstock. Such persons shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The tax levied by this chapter shall be effective on the first day of the first month following the adoption of this ordinance and shall continue until its permissible existence shall expire as provided by law, or until otherwise terminated by the Georgia General Assembly or the Woodstock city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0012, 8-12-2008)  
Chapter 90 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 90-1—90-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local Government Cable Fair Competition Act of 1999, O.C.G.A. § 36-90-01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 90-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number includes the singular number; and words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Additional service means any communications service other than basic service provided over its CATV system by a grantee directly or as a carrier for its subsidiaries, affiliates or any other person engaged in communications services including, but not limited to, burglar alarm, data or other electronic intelligence transmission, facsimile reproduction, meter reading and hope shopping. 
Applicant means any person submitting an application to the city for a franchise to operate a CATV system under the terms and conditions set forth by the city council. 
Basic service means the simultaneous delivery by the company to television receivers (or any other suitable types of audio-video communication receivers) of all subscribers in the city of all signals of over-the-air television broadcasters required by the FCC to be carried by a CATV system. Basic service shall also include the grantee channels, city channels, except as may be designated for special purposes by the mayor, public channels and additional channels at the option of the company or as directed by the city council. 
CATV means community antenna television. 
Certificate of compliance means that approval required by the FCC in order for a grantee of a CATV franchise to begin operation within the city. 
Channel means a band of frequencies, six megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum which is capable of carrying either one audio-video television signal and a number of nonvideo signals or several thousand nonvideo signals. 
City channels means channels on the CATV system which are reserved by this article for use by the city. 
Commercial subscriber means a purchaser of any service delivered over the system who or which is not a residential subscriber. 
Community antenna television system (hereafter called CATV system) means any facility which: 
(1)  In whole or in part receives directly or indirectly over the air and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signal transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television and AM and FM radio stations and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such services; 
(2)  Distributes by cable or wire, news, weather and other information including emergency management type information as required as an incidental part of CATV service to all subscribers without additional charge; and 
(3)  Distributes any and all other lawful communications of a specialized nature provided that it shall not mean or include any facility to which is transmitted any special television program or event for which a separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in a manner commonly known and referred to as pay television; except as may be permitted by the federal, state and/or local regulatory agencies. 
Federal Communications Commission and FCC mean that agency presently constituted by the United States Congress or any successor agency. 
Grantee means the person to whom or to which a franchise is granted by the city council under this article or anyone who succeeds the person in accordance with the provisions of the franchise. 
Grantee channels means the channels on the system which are reserved by this article for the carriage of program material originated by a grantee and the retransmission of broadcast signals in accordance with the FCC's cable casting rules and regulations. 
Gross subscriber revenue means all revenue derived from the monthly charges from all subscribers. 
Pay television means the delivery over the CATV system of video signals in intelligible form to residential subscribers for a fee or charge (over and above the charge for basic service) on a per-program, per-channel or other subscription basis. 
Public channels means channels on the CATV system which are reserved for the carriage of program material provided by persons who lease channel time and, if necessary, studio facilities, from a grantee for the presentation of programs. 
Residential subscriber means a purchaser of any service delivered over the system to an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession. 
Street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the city which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the city and/or its grantee to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting CATV system transmissions over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a CATV system. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 90-32. - Grant of authority. 
The city council is authorized to grant the right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the streets of the city for a period of 15 years from and after the passage, acceptance and effective date of this article, subject to the conditions and restrictions as provided in this article; and this right, privilege and franchise shall be offered for bid as a franchise agreement ordinance (agreement), and let to the best qualified bidder after bids have been examined by the city council. The agreement shall contain all standards for performance, engineering and other parameters of public interest and shall be in ordinance form. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-2) 
Charter reference— Specific power to grant franchise, § 1.13.  
Sec. 90-33. - Franchise term. 
The franchise granted in this article shall terminate 15 years from the date of grant, and may be renewed for successive ten-year terms on the same terms or conditions as contained in this article, or such different or additional terms and conditions as may be lawfully specified by the city council, and consistent with the requirements of Rule 76.31(a)(6) of the FCC. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-3)  
Sec. 90-34. - Application for CATV franchises. 
(a)  No CATV franchise or renewal thereof shall be issued except on a written application and upon a form approved by the city council. 
(b)  The form shall set forth such facts in detail as the city council may deem appropriate including: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, partnership or unincorporated association, its statement shall contain the names and addresses of all persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in and to the prospective franchisee's business operation, and in and to the prospective franchise if awarded to the proposer. The term "equitable interest" shall include all assignment for value, as well as all contingent assignments of any right or privilege under the prospective franchise, and shall also include any benefit, payment or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a franchise under this article. 
(2)  If the applicant is a nonpublic corporation, the statement shall furnish, additionally, the names and addresses of the officers, directors and shareholders of the corporation, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(3)  If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, as defined by the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall contain the states in which incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
(4)  A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in rendering the service. 
(5)  The source of funds for operation of the system respecting the installation and maintenance of all CATV facilities; and information demonstrating the financial ability to provide and extend service to proposed subscribers at a reasonable cost. 
(6)  A detailed schedule of the rates to be charged for the services offered, the facilities to be employed and the general routes of the cables used in redistributing signals, the service area or areas, the commencement and completion dates of construction of the CATV system and the proposed dates the service will be available to the area or areas named. 
(7)  A detailed schedule of rates to be applied to residential, apartment, commercial and other users of service. 
(c)  The city council may request such other information as it may deem appropriate. 
(d)  All applications shall be open to public inspection and shall be kept on file a reasonable length of time at the discretion of the city council, and any intentional misrepresentation in an application shall be grounds for its rejection or for termination of the franchise. 
(e)  All applications shall be considered firm offers to the city, shall be signed and verified by the applicants whose relationship to the applicant shall be set forth and shall bind the applicant to the provisions thereof. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-4)  
Sec. 90-35. - Franchise payments. 
(a)  The grantee shall pay to the city, on or before March 31 of each year, a three percent franchise fee based on gross subscriber revenues received for cable television operations in the city for the preceding calendar year. No other fee, charge or consideration shall be imposed, except that the city council may impose a fee in excess of three percent but not more than five percent of gross subscriber revenues received from cable television operations in the city provided that the FCC certifies, after an appropriate showing made by the grantee, that a franchise fee in excess of three percent but no greater than five percent will not interfere with the effectuation of federal regulatory goals in the field of cable television; and after appropriate showings made by the city council that the franchise fee in excess of three percent but no greater than five percent is appropriate in light of the city's planned regulatory program for cable television. A grantee shall file with the city within 30 days after the expiration of each calendar year during the period the franchise is in force a financial statement showing in detail the gross annual subscriber revenues of the grantee during the preceding year. A grantee shall pay to the city at the time for filing such statement the sum prescribed above. A grantee shall also file within 90 days following the conclusion of each fiscal year of a grantee an annual report prepared and audited by an independent and certified public accountant acceptable to the city showing the yearly total gross subscriber revenues and payments to the city and any further relevant financial information in regard to the company as may be required by the city council. 
(b)  If the franchise should be terminated or forfeited prior to the end of the basic 15-year term, a grantee shall immediately submit to the city a financial statement prepared as before required, showing the gross subscriber period for which the grantee paid to the city the required percentage of gross annual subscriber revenues. The grantee shall pay to the city not later than 30 days following the termination of the franchise, a like percentage of such revenues and any other sums legally due and owing the city. 
(c)  In the event that any payment is not made on or before the applicable date fixed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, interest on such payments shall apply for such date at the yearly rate of eight percent. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to inspect a grantee's records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and shall have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under the franchise. No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release of or an accord or satisfaction of any claim the city might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this article or for any other performance for obligation of a grantee under this article. 
(e)  Payments of compensation made by a grantee to the city pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be considered in the nature of a tax but shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or hereafter required to be paid by any law of the United Sates, the state or the city. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-5)  
Sec. 90-36. - Insurance. 
(a)  At all times during the term of the franchise, a grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the city executed duplicate copies and receipts evidencing the payment of premiums for the following: 
(1)  A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees from any and all claims by any person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or persons occasioned by the operations of a grantee under a franchise granted by this article or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $500,000.00 per personal injury or death of any one person and $1,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(2)  Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for property damage occasioned by the operation of a grantee under a franchise granted by this article or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $250,000.00 for property damage to any one person and $500,000.00 for property damage to two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(3)  For all other types of liability, $1,000,000.00. Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect by a grantee during the existence of and until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures, incident to the maintenance and operation of the CATV system as defined in the franchise. 
(b)  All of the foregoing insurance contracts shall be in a form satisfactory to the city and shall be issued and maintained by companies authorized to do business in the state and acceptable to the city and they shall require 30 days' written notice of any cancellation to both the city and the grantee, and a copy of the policy shall be filed with the city. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-6)  
Sec. 90-37. - Surety bond. 
(a)  A grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of the franchise, specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise a faithful performance, license and franchise bond running in favor of the city, written by an approved corporate surety in the penal sum of $50,000.00. The bond shall be conditioned on a grantee well and truly observing, fulfilling and performing each term and condition of the franchise. In case of any breach of condition of the bond, the amount thereof shall be recoverable from the principal and surety for all damages resulting from the failure of a grantee to well and faithfully observe and perform any provision of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee shall pay all premiums chargeable for the bond and shall keep the same in force and effect at all times throughout the term of the franchise including the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the CATV system as defined in the franchise. 
(c)  The bond shall contain a provision that it shall not be terminated or otherwise allowed to expire prior to 30 days after written notice to that effect is given to the city and a grantee. 
(d)  The bond shall be in a form satisfactory to the city and a duplicate copy of it, along with written evidence of payment of the required premiums, shall be filed with the city during the term of the franchise. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-7)  
Sec. 90-38. - Indemnity. 
(a)  A grantee shall at its sole cost and expense fully indemnify, defend and save harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions and employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damage. 
(b)  These damages or penalties shall include, but shall not be limited to, damages arising out of copyright infringement and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV system authorized in this article, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise. 
(c)  A grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of the franchise, specifically agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned above. These expenses shall include, but not be limited to, all out-of-pocket expenses such as attorney fees and all other costs of litigation. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-8)  
Sec. 90-39. - Books and records of grantee. 
(a)  A grantee shall file with the city manager a true and accurate copy of maps and/or plats of all existing and proposed installations upon the streets. These maps and plats shall conform to the requirements of the city manager and shall be kept continuously up to date. 
(b)  A grantee shall continually keep on file with the city a current list of its shareholders holding over three percent of the outstanding stock and officers with their current addresses. 
(c)  All books and records of a grantee concerning its operations within the city shall be made available for inspection and audit by the city council or its designate within 30 days after any request for such inspection or audit shall be made. 
(d)  Copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions established by a grantee for the operation of a CATV under the franchise shall be filed with the city and at the local office of a grantee. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-9) 
State Law reference— Open meetings and records, O.C.G.A. § 36-90-7.  
Sec. 90-40. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the streets. The CATV system shall be constructed and operated in compliance with all adopted city and national construction and electrical codes and shall be kept current with new codes. 
(b)  Only when absolutely necessary to service a subscriber and not simply because it would be more convenient, economical or profitable for a grantee to so operate, and then only when expressly permitted in writing by the city manager, under such conditions as he shall prescribe for the public welfare, may a grantee erect or authorize or permit others to erect any poles or facilities within the streets of the city for the conduct of its CATV system rather than using the existing poles and other equipment of the appropriate electrical power and telephone and other utility companies under such terms and agreements as a grantee negotiates with these companies. The city shall cooperate with a grantee in negotiating and obtaining permission to use such facilities. 
(c)  No poles, cables, equipment or wires for the construction, maintenance and operation of the CATV system shall be installed or the installation thereof commenced on any existing pole within the city until the proposed location, specifications and manner of installation of such cables, equipment and wires shall have been set forth upon a plat or map showing the existing poles, streets, alleys or highways within the city where such installations are proposed and submitted in writing by a grantee to the city manager and approved by that department in writing. 
(d)  Should a grantee be required in the conduct of its business to locate property within the streets of the city other than property which may be attached to utility poles, then in that event, before a grantee shall install or shall permit any other person to install for the grantee any of such property in the street, the nature of such property shall be disclosed to the city manager for his approval as to the need thereof and as to the location within the street and only installed under such conditions as he shall prescribe concerning such location or installation. 
(e)  Whenever the city or state shall require the relocation or reinstallation of any property of a grantee in any of the streets of the city, a grantee shall, upon notice of such requirement, immediately remove and relocate or reinstall such property as may be reasonably necessary to meet the requirements of the city or state. Such relocation, removal or reinstallation by a grantee shall be at the sole cost of a grantee. 
(f)  Whenever in any place within the city, all the electric and telephone utilities shall be located underground, a grantee shall locate or cause its property to be located underground within such places. If the electric utilities or telephone utilities shall be located underground in any place within the city after a grantee shall have previously installed its property, a grantee shall at the same time or immediately thereafter remove and relocate its property also underground in such places. Facilities of a grantee placed underground at the property owner's request in an area where electric utilities or telephone utilities are aerial shall be installed with the additional expense paid by the property owner. 
(g)  A grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging the streets of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with a grantee's wires and cables. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of a grantee. 
(h)  In the case of a disturbance of any street caused by a grantee, a grantee shall at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city manager, replace and restore such street in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. Provided, that where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut, a grantee shall replace the full width of the existing walk and length of the section or sections cut, a section being determined as that area marked by expansion joints or scoring. 
(i)  A grantee shall maintain, repair and keep in good condition for a period of one year following such disturbance all portions of a sidewalk or street disturbed by it or its agents provided such maintenance and repairs shall be made necessary because of defective workmanship or materials supplied by a grantee. 
(j)  A grantee shall on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same and a grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. In the event of a disagreement between a grantee and a holder of a permit, such disagreement will be resolved by the city manager. 
(k)  If, at any time in case of fire or disaster, it shall become necessary in the judgment of the mayor or the fire chief to cut or move any of the wire cables, amplifiers, appliances or other fixtures of a grantee, this may be done and the repairs thereby rendered necessary shall be made by a grantee, at its own cost and expense and without charge against the city. 
(l)  A grantee's work, while in progress, shall be properly executed at all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices as are reasonably required to protect all members of the public having occasion to use the portion of the streets involved, or adjacent property. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-10)  
Sec. 90-41. - Initial system installation schedule. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the acceptance of the franchise, a grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
(b)  The grantee shall, within one year from the date the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) certifies a grantee's compliance with its rules and regulations governing cable television operations in and for the city, extend energized trunk cable to 20 percent of the city and extend energized trunk cable to the remaining portions of the city within four years thereafter unless additional time is granted by the city council upon request by a grantee for good cause shown. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-11)  
Sec. 90-42. - System extension to new subscribers. 
(a)  A grantee, whenever it shall receive a request for service from at least five subscribers within 660 feet of its system, shall extend such system to such subscribers at no cost to the subscribers for system extension other than the usual connect fees for all subscribers. The 660 feet shall be measured in an extension length of a grantee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall not include the length of a necessary service drop to the subscriber's home or premises. 
(b)  In addition, the city manager may, upon complaint from any potential subscriber residing in the city, order the extension of the system to such subscriber after an opportunity for a hearing and notice to a grantee. In such cases, the manager, in his discretion, may order such extension to any subscriber only upon reasonable contribution from the subscriber to the cost of the extension. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-12)  
Sec. 90-43. - Type and capacity of equipment to be installed. 
The applicant shall specify in its proposal the type and capacity of the equipment to be installed and a grantee shall be required by the city manager to update this section of its proposal in keeping with the advances in the state of the art of CATV systems design. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-13)  
Sec. 90-44. - Operational standards. 
(a)  The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest accepted standards of the industry to the end that the subscriber may receive the highest and most desirable form of service. 
(b)  In determining satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this article, the following, among other things, shall be considered: 
(1)  The CATV system is installed and remains capable of using all band equipment and of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum and that it shall have the further capability of converting UHF for the distribution to subscribers on the VHF band. 
(2)  The CATV system as installed is capable of transmitting and passing the entire color television signals without the introduction of material degradation of color fidelity and intelligence. 
(3)  The CATV system is designed and capable of 24-hour-a-day continuous operation. 
(4)  The CATV system is capable of and will produce a picture upon any subscriber's television screen in black and white or color (provided the subscriber's television set is capable of producing a color picture) that is undistorted and free from ghost images and accompanied by proper sound assuming the technical, standard production television set is in good repair and that the television broadcast signal transmission is satisfactory. In any event, the picture produced shall be as good as the state of the art allows. 
(5)  The CATV system shall transmit or distribute signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures with good sound in all television receivers of all subscribers without causing cross modulation in the cables or interference with other electrical or electronic systems. 
(6)  The CATV system as installed has a minimum capacity of 20 channels. 
(7)  A grantee shall provide without charge one outlet to each public office building, fire station, police station and public and private school that is passed by its cable. If more than one outlet is required at any of these locations, a grantee shall install at the cost of time and material only and in no event will there be a monthly service charge at these locations. 
(8)  A grantee shall make its studio facilities, including color cameras and other equipment, available for use by public and private schools for local origination programs and for closed-circuit educational films subject to reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to such use by a grantee and in such manner as to not duly interfere with the cable television operations of a grantee. Services rendered to all users by a grantee under the terms of the franchise shall at all times be as good as the state of the art allows. 
(9)  A grantee shall provide at least one free dedicated noncommercial public access channel to be available on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
(10)  A grantee shall reserve at least one channel solely for educational use on a developmental basis, and that upon completion of the basic trunk line, for the first five years thereafter, at least one channel will be made available free. 
(11)  A grantee shall reserve at least one channel solely for use by state and local governments on a developmental basis and that, upon completion of the basic trunk line, for the first five years thereafter, at least one channel will remain free. 
(12)  The CATV system shall be installed with the capacity for two-way communication in accordance with the regulations of the FCC now in effect or which may be promulgated. 
(c)  A grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for such good cause and of the shortest time possible. Such interruptions insofar as possible shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during a period of the minimum use of the system. 
(d)  A grantee shall maintain an office in the city which shall be open during all usual business hours, have necessary listed telephones, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-14)  
Sec. 90-45. - Supervision by city. 
(a)  A grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the CATV system subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the city who have jurisdiction in such matters and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances and departmental rules and regulations. 
(b)  The CATV system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the city. 
(c)  The city manager may from time to time issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the CATV system as are consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  If at any time the powers of the city council or any agency or official of the city are transferred by law to any other board, authority, agency or official the transferee shall have the powers, rights and duties previously vested under this article or by law in the city council or any agency or official of the city. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-15)  
Sec. 90-46. - Grantee's duty to remove its properties from the public streets. 
(a)  Following a grantee's commencement of service through and over its CATV system, a grantee shall promptly remove from the public streets where its properties are located all or any part of the facilities so located when one or more of the following enumerated conditions occur: 
(1)  A grantee ceases to operate the CATV system for a continuous period of six months from the date of the commencement of service. 
(2)  A grantee fails to construct the system as provided in this article. 
(3)  The franchise is terminated or revoked pursuant to notice as provided in this article. 
(b)  A grantee shall be entitled to receive notice in writing from the city setting forth one or more of the occurrences enumerated in subsection (a) of this section or such other occurrence provided in this article and shall have 90 days from the date upon which notice is received to remove such properties as required. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-16)  
Sec. 90-47. - Operational report. 
(a)  Within six months from the acceptance date of the franchise, a grantee shall submit to the city manager and the mayor an installation plan for the entire city, indicating the date on which a grantee expects the installation of the CATV system to be completed and available for service to subscribers in the various areas of the city. 
(b)  A grantee shall furnish the city manager with progress reports indicating in detail the area of construction of the CATV system. Such periodic reports shall be furnished at three-month intervals, the first report to be made three months after the construction commencement date. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-17)  
Sec. 90-48. - Cable casting of city and public channels. 
For the presentation of programming on public channels, a grantee shall make available free time and, if necessary, adequate studio facilities to members of the public at rates filed with the city council and subject to the city council's review. Appropriate technical assistance shall also be furnished by a grantee. Time shall be provided on a first come, first served basis, except that a grantee shall endeavor to grant such channel time to as many different persons as is practical, it being the intention of the city council that such public channels serve as a significant source of diversified expression. In order that there is a maximum opportunity for freedom of expression by members of the public, such programming shall be free from any control by a grantee as to program content, except as is required to protect a grantee from liability under applicable law. The council may direct that a grantee discontinue, or not deliver, a program on the public channels which it finds to be essentially promotional or otherwise related primarily to the conduct of a business, trade, or profession; however, this provision shall not be construed as a prohibition of advertiser-supported programming on public channels. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-18)  
Sec. 90-49. - Removal of facilities upon request. 
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his written request. Such removal shall be at no cost to the subscriber. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-19)  
Sec. 90-50. - Emergency use of facilities. 
(a)  In the event of any emergency or disaster, a grantee shall, upon request of the mayor, make available its facilities to the city at no cost for emergency use during the period of such emergency or disaster and shall provide such personnel as necessary to properly operate under the circumstances. 
(b)  A grantee shall incorporate into its facilities the capability for an emergency override alert whereby the city in times of crisis may be able to introduce a bulletin on all channels simultaneously. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-20)  
Sec. 90-51. - Compliance with state and federal laws. 
A grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal governments or any administrative agency thereof. If any state or federal law or regulations require a grantee to perform any service or prohibit a grantee from performing any service or permit a grantee to perform any service in conflict with the terms of the franchise or of any law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, a grantee shall notify the mayor of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the city or the franchise. A grantee shall be governed by the advice of the mayor. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-21)  
Sec. 90-52. - Filing communications with regulatory agencies. 
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by a grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matter affecting CATV operation, shall also be submitted simultaneously to the city. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-22)  
Sec. 90-53. - Restrictions against assignment. 
(a)  The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred either in whole or in part or leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest, or property therein, pass to or vest in any person either by the act of a grantee or by law without the consent of the city council. The granting, giving or waiving of any one or more of such consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent or consents. 
(b)  The consent or approval of the city council to any assignment, lease, transfer, sublease or mortgage of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets. 
(c)  Prior approval of the city council shall be required where ownership or control of more than ten percent of the right of control of a grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already owns or controls ten percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively at the date the franchise is granted. By its acceptance of the franchise, a grantee specifically agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the city council shall constitute a violation of this article by a grantee. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or pledge of the CATV system equipment or any part thereof or a leasing by a grantee from another person of the CATV system equipment or part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise. Any such mortgage, pledge or lease shall be made only with the prior approval of the city council and shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the city under this contract or applicable law. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-23)  
Sec. 90-54. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
A grantee shall not as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or any other respect make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person, or subject any person to any undue prejudice or disadvantage. However, connection and service charges may be waived or modified during promotional campaigns of a grantee. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-24)  
Sec. 90-55. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to all of the rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the city, the city reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct power the right to terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee under this article in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A grantee shall by act or omission violate any term or condition of this article, and, within 30 days following written demand by the city, shall fail to effect compliance. 
(2)  Any provision of this article shall be finally adjudged by a court of law invalid or unenforceable and the city council further finds that such provision constitutes at that time a consideration material to the continuance of the franchise granted under this article. 
(3)  A grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged a bankrupt or all or part of a grantee's facilities are to be sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemable by a grantee within 30 days from the sale. 
(4)  A grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under the franchise with the city or subscribers or potential subscribers. 
(b)  A grantee shall not be declared in fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this article in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond its control. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-25)  
Sec. 90-56. - Procedure. 
(a)  Any inquiry, proceeding, investigation or other action to be taken or proposed to be taken by the city council in regard to the operations of a grantee's cable television system other than as provided in subsection (c) of this section shall be taken only after: 
(1)  Thirty days' public notice of such action or proposed action is published in a local daily or weekly newspaper having general circulation in the city; 
(2)  A copy of such action or proposed action is served directly on a grantee; and 
(3)  The grantee has been given an opportunity to respond in writing and/or at a hearing as may be specified by the city council, and general members of the public have been given an opportunity to respond or comment in writing on the action or proposed action. 
(b)  The public notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response and the person or persons in authority to whom such responses should be addressed, and such other procedures as may be specified by the city council. If a hearing is to be held, the public notice shall give the date and time of such hearing, whether public participation will be allowed and the procedures by which such participation may be obtained. The grantee is a necessary party to any hearing conducted in regard to its operations. 
(c)  An informal complaint shall be submitted to the city council in writing and shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the complainant; 
(2)  The name of the cable system against which the complaint is made; and 
(3)  A complete statement of facts upon which the complaint is based. 
(d)  Upon receipt of any informal complaint, the city council will forward a copy to the system complained of or may take the question up by correspondence with the system. Within such time as may be prescribed by the city council, the system will be called upon to satisfy the complaint or advise the city council of its refusal or inability to do so. If the system satisfies the complaint, it shall so notify the city manager in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. The city clerk will forward a copy of the system's notice of satisfaction to the complainant. If the system refuses or is unable to satisfy the complaint, it shall so notify the city clerk and the city clerk will forward a copy of such notice to the complainant, with a statement of the procedure to be followed to further prosecute the complaint. If a system satisfies any complaint brought to its attention by the city council, a statement must be filed with the city council setting forth when and how the complaint has been satisfied. When a complaint has not been satisfied, the complainant may file a formal complaint with the city council in the form and manner to be specified thereby. The complaint to the city council must be filed within six months from the date of the city clerk's statement accompanying a copy of the system's notice of refusal or inability to satisfy the complaint, and the complaint to the city council must make reference to the date of the complaint filed with the city clerk and that is based on the same facts as the complaint filed with the city council. If no complaint is filed with the city council within a six-month period, the complainant will be deemed to have abandoned his complaint, and such complaint will be deemed dismissed. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-26)  
Sec. 90-57. - Grantee to have no recourse. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided in the franchise, a grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost or expenses or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of the franchise or cause of the enforcement thereof by the city nor for the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all or any part of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting a franchise, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city to grant the franchise. 
(c)  A grantee, by acceptance of the franchise, acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the city or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed in this article. 
(d)  A grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and conditions and agrees that in the event of any ambiguity therein or in the event of any other dispute over the meaning thereof, the same shall be construed strictly against a grantee and in favor of the city. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-27)  
Sec. 90-58. - Failure of city to enforce the franchise; no waiver of the terms thereof. 
A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise by any failure of the city upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-28)  
Sec. 90-59. - Time essence of the agreement. 
Whenever the franchise shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of a grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of a grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to revoke the franchise. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-29)  
Sec. 90-60. - Grantee will not contest validity of franchise. 
A grantee agrees by the acceptance of the franchise that it will not at any time set up against the city in any claim or proceeding any condition or term of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void or that the city had no power or authority to make such term or condition, but shall be required to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their entirety. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-30)  
Sec. 90-61. - Rights reserved to city. 
Without limitation upon the rights which the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers and authorities: 
(1)  To exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city; 
(2)  To determine through the city council any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other factors of the franchise; and 
(3)  To grant additional franchises within the city to other persons for the conduct of a CATV under any conditions whatsoever acceptable to the city, notwithstanding the same might be alleged to be more favorable than the rights granted in this article. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-31)  
Sec. 90-62. - Acceptance. 
This article and its terms and provisions shall be accepted by a grantee by a written franchise agreement executed and acknowledged by a grantee and filed with the city clerk. The agreement shall incorporate the grantee's written application to the city for the CATV franchise and shall bind the grantee to the provisions of the application. The city council may require a grantee to clarify any portion of its written application prior to final acceptance. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-32)  
Sec. 90-63. - Extension of city limits. 
Upon the annexation of any territory to the city (other than through a governmental consolidation process, as to which the city makes no agreement), the right and franchise granted by this article shall extend to the territory so annexed to the extent the city has authority; and all facilities owned, maintained or operated by the grantee, located within, under or over streets of the territory so annexed shall thereafter be subject to all terms of this article. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-33)  
Sec. 90-64. - Local office. 
During the term of a franchise granted under this article, and any renewal thereof, the grantee shall maintain within the city a local business office or agent. This section shall be complied with if the grantee maintains a local business headquarters office within ten airline miles of the center of the city; provides the city clerk's office with the name, address and phone number of a resident of the city who will act as the grantee's agent to receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters; and at least once a week informs all subscribers by appropriate announcement (e.g., by a slide card) over the system's origination cable-casting channel of the name, address and phone number of the grantee's registered agent for the city. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-34)  
Sec. 90-65. - Employment regulations. 
A grantee shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of sex, race, creed, color or national origin. A grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their sex, race, creed, color or national origin. This requirement shall apply to, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for training. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-35)  
Sec. 90-66. - Modification of FCC rules. 
Consistent with the requirements of Rule 76.31(a)(6) of the FCC, any modification of Rule 76.31 resulting from amendment thereto by the FCC shall, to the extent applicable, be considered as a part of a franchise granted under this article as of the effective date of the amendment made by the FCC and shall be incorporated in such franchise by specific amendments thereto by the lawful action of the city council within one year from the effective date of the FCC's amendment or at the time of renewal of a franchise, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1989, § 9-2-36)  
Chapter 94 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing traffic or parking regulations for specific locations saved from repeal, § 1-11(13); courts, ch. 26; law enforcement, ch. 54; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 58; motor vehicles in parks, § 62-5; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; alternative penalties, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; municipal home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 94-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
Pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-374, all of O.C.G.A. tit. 40, ch. 6 (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.), known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
State Law reference— Uniform rules of the road; adoption, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-375.  
Sec. 94-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of temporary construction, occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages or conditions which interfere with normal traffic operations or where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police chief may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, who shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of the Code. 
(Code 1989, § 10-1-2; Res. No. 95-09-26, 9-26-1995)  
Sec. 94-3. - Traffic control. 
(a)  The Traffic Safety Committee, as appointed by the City Manager and referenced in Council Policy Manual #400-0001, Article II, Procedures, Section E Traffic Committee is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices for: 
(1)  Crosswalks, by analyzing and determining the appropriate locations for crosswalks and accompanying pedestrian activated equipment which signals that pedestrians are entering the crosswalk for passage across the street. 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; 
(4)  Speed, parking, truck or other traffic-control zones; 
(5)  Stop, yield, one-way and other directional and devices; and 
(6)  Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(b)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the manual on uniform traffic control devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this section for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(c)  No person shall be charged with violating a traffic or parking zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on streets involved. 
(d)  Any violation of any traffic or parking zone, marking sign or other traffic control device established under this section shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1989, § 10-1-3; Ord. of 5-21-2012; Ord. of 12-11-2017, § II)  
Sec. 94-4. - Riding on sidewalks. 
No person shall ride any horse, skateboard or any vehicle on the sidewalks of the city. No horse, bicycle, skates or skateboard will be allowed on the sidewalks of Main Street from Oak Street north to Rope Mill Road; Market Street, East Main Street and Chambers Street. 
(Code 1989, § 10-1-5; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004; Ord. of 4-28-2014) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82.  
Sec. 94-5. - Load limit. 
There shall be a load limit of five tons on the city streets. 
(Code 1989, § 10-1-6)  
Sec. 94-6. - Prohibition against through traffic on certain roads. 
It shall be unlawful for any truck as defined below, to operate or travel upon, over or across the public roadways within the city street system known as Main Street (from Highway 92 to Ridgewalk Parkway), Neese Road (city limits to Arnold Mill Road), Rusk Street (Rope Mill Road to Little John Lane), and Dobbs Road (from Main Street to Arnold Mill Road) unless for the purpose of traveling to a specific place or destination, located on said public roads, to which there is no other alternative route except by said public roads. 
For purposes of this section, the term "truck" shall be defined as any vehicle (1) having more than two axles or (2) having a gross weight in excess of 20,000 pounds or (3) having a total length, exclusive of cab, in excess of 20 feet. The foregoing definition is not intended to include any vehicle which is one ton or less and accompanied by a trailer. 
(Code 1989, § 10-4-1; Ord. No. 03-10-15, 10-15-2003; Ord. of 10-15-2003; Ord. No. 1404, 1-13-2011)  
Secs. 94-7—94-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SPEED ZONES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits authorized, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
 
Sec. 94-41. - Erection of signs. 
(a)  On-system signs shall be erected by the state department of transportation. 
(b)  Off-system signs shall be erected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-02-11, 2-11-1997; Ord. No. 2-25-97, 6-24-1997; Ord. No. 1-8-98, 3-10-1998)  
Sec. 94-42. - On-system. 
STATE 
ROUTE 	WITHIN THE CITY/TOWN LIMITS OF and/or SCHOOL NAME 	FROM 	MILE 
POINT 	TO 	MILE 
POINT 	LENGTH 
IN MILES 	SPEED 
LIMIT 
92 	WOODSTOCK 	0.06 mile east of CR 987 Fitchburg Drive (west Woodstock City Limit) 	7.49 	0.02 mile west of CR 385 Wigley Road (east Woodstock City Limit) 	13.38 	5.89 	45 
417 
I-575 	WOODSTOCK 	Cobb County Line 	6.07 	0.64 mile south of CR 779 Sixes Road (North Woodstock City Limit) 	10.58 	4.51 	65 
 
Signs to be erected by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Interstate 575 (SR 417) that is located within the city limits of Woodstock, shall be zoned for the statutory 65 miles per hour speed limit, but shall not be included under the City of Woodstock's speed detection device permit. Enforcement of the speed control will remain with the Department of Public Safety. 
***SCHOOL ZONE HOURS EFFECTIVE*** 
A.M. from 30 minutes prior to commencement times to 30 minutes after commencement time—School Days Only. 
P.M. from 30 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time— School Days Only. 
(Ord. No. 97-02-11, 2-11-1997; Ord. No. 2-25-97, 6-24-1997; Ord. No. 1-8-98, 3-10-1998; Ord. No. 04-17-12, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 11-02-15, 12-14-2015)  
Sec. 94-43. - Off-system. 
ROAD NAME 	WITHIN THE CITY/TOWN LIMITS OF 
and/or School Name 	FROM 	TO 	LENGTH 
IN MILES 	SPEED 
LIMIT 
Arnold Mill Road 
(CR 777) 	WOODSTOCK 	CR 1061 Main Street 	CS 625 Bentley Parkway 	0.25 	35 
Arnold Mill Road 
(CR 777) 	WOODSTOCK 	CS 625 Bentley Parkway 	0.06 mile east of CS 574 
Brown Lee Drive 	0.33 	40 
Arnold Mill Road 
(CR 777) 	WOODSTOCK 	0.06 mile east of CS 574 
Brown Lee Drive 	CR 378 Neese Road 	0.75 	45 
Dobbs Road 
(CR 392) 	WOODSTOCK 	CR 777 Arnold Mill Road 	CR 1061 Main Street 	0.70 	25 
Dupree Road 
(CR 423) 	WOODSTOCK 	0.09 mile west of State Route 417 (1-575) 	0.09 mile east of Noonday Creek Bridge 	0.35 	40 
Dupree Road 
(CR 423) 	WOODSTOCK 	0.09 mile east of Noonday Creek Bridge 	CR 1061 Main Street 	0.36 	30 
Main Street 
(CR 1061) 	WOODSTOCK 	State Route 92 	CS 560 Serenade Lane 	0.36 	35 
Main Street 
(CR 1061) 	WOODSTOCK 	CS 560 Serenade Lane 	CS 583 Henderson Street 	1.41 	25 
Main Street 
(CR 1061) 	WOODSTOCK 	CS 583 Henderson Street 	CS 698 Ridgewalk Parkway 	0.35 	35 
Ridgewalk Parkway (CS 698) 	WOODSTOCK 	CR 1061 Main Street 	SR 417 (I-575) north bound exit ramp 	0.96 	45 
Rope Mill Road 
(CR 780) 	WOODSTOCK 	CR 1061 Main Street 	CS 700 Woodstock Parkway 	1.42 	40 
Rope Mill Road 
SCHOOL ZONE *** 	WOODSTOCK ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 	0.14 mile north of CS 569 
Rusk Street 	CS 599 Angela Court 	0.32 	25 
Towne Lake Parkway 
(CR 416) 	WOODSTOCK 	0.06 mile east of State Route 417 (1-575) 	CS 700 Woodstock Parkway 	0.30 	45 
Towne Lake Parkway 
(CR 416) 	WOODSTOCK 	CS 700 Woodstock Parkway 	CR 1061 Main Street 	0.48 	35 
Woodstock Parkway 
(CS 700) 	WOODSTOCK 	CR 416 Towne Lake Parkway 	0.60 mile north of CR 416 
Towne Lake Parkway 	0.60 	35 
Woodstock Parkway 
(CS 700) 	WOODSTOCK 	0.60 mile north of CR 416 Towne Lake Parkway 	CS 698 Ridgewalk Parkway 	1.15 	45 
 
(Ord. No. 97-02-11, 2-11-1997; Ord. No. 2-25-97, 6-24-1997; Ord. No. 1-8-98, 3-10-1998; Ord. No. 04-17-12, 5-21-2012; Ord. No. 11-02-15, 12-14-2015)  
Secs. 94-44—94-68. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Specific powers, § 1.13(35) and (36). 
State Law reference— Abandoned Motor Vehicles Act, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; impoundment of illegally parked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 94-69. - General prohibitions. 
In addition to the violation of posted signs upon the city streets and public parking areas, the following shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Parking of a vehicle in a designated space with the front of the vehicle facing the opposite direction from the flow of traffic in the adjacent travel lane. 
(2)  Double parking or parking in traffic lanes. 
(3)  Parking so as to obstruct or intrude into any portion of a crosswalk or driveway. 
(4)  Parking within or obstructing any portion of a designated fire lane. 
(5)  Parking in such a manner that a vehicle is not completely within a parking space designated by painted lines, whether upon city streets or city parking lots. 
(6)  Parking for any time in excess of the posted time limitation for a parking space. A vehicle shall be construed to have remained stationary (continuously parked in a space) if said vehicle has not been moved for a distance of more than one block, or 300 feet, whichever is less, from the space and shall be subject to a ticket for violation of the parking time restriction as if still parked in the original parking space. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Parking upon sidewalks intended for pedestrian travel. 
(9)  Parking within spaces designated as health services parking or loading zones by unauthorized vehicles and for purposes not intended by this division. 
(10)  Parking adjacent to yellow curbs. 
(11)  Unauthorized parking within handicapped spaces. Handicapped spaces may be marked by the recognized symbol for such spaces, blue painted lines or posted signs. Parking within handicapped spaces shall be governed by the provisions of state law as to authorized vehicles, limitations as to use, if any, and penalties for violations. 
(Ord. No. 5448-2018, Exh. A, 11-26-2018)  
Sec. 94-70. - Compliance with no-parking or restricted parking markings or signs. 
No person shall park a motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, modified golf cart, personal transportation vehicle, or an electric personal assistive mobility device on any sidewalk or street within the city in any zone or area posted by a sign as prohibited parking, or in violation of any sign posted within the city that sets forth parking prohibitions or restrictions as listed in section 94-69. 
(Ord. No. 5448-2018, Exh. A, 11-26-2018)  
Sec. 94-71. - Parking time limit. 
(a)  There shall be two-hour parking only, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding recognized city holidays; within the downtown business district, more specifically described as the parking areas on the east and west side of Main Street between Oak Street and Towne Lake Parkway. 
(b)  Time limit restrictions shall be designated by signs posted by the public works director and enforced by the city police department. 
(c)  Persons in violation of this section will be fined according to the approved municipal court bond/fee schedule. 
(Code 1989, § 10-2-1; Ord. No. 97-06-24, 6-24-1997; Ord. No. 5448-2018, Exh. A, 11-26-2018)  
Sec. 94-72. - Loading zone established; time limit for loading. 
Trucks and tractor-trailer units may not block any city street, other than areas designated and properly signed as loading zones in the downtown business district. However, streets shall not be blocked longer than necessary for the unloading or loading of merchandise from the businesses and in no event for a length of time longer than one hour. 
(Code 1989, § 10-2-2; Ord. No. 5448-2018, Exh. A, 11-26-2018)  
Sec. 94-73. - Parking of heavy vehicles. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, the term "heavy vehicle" is defined as any large vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds as shown on the vehicle or manufacturer's specifications or exceeding 24 feet in length (including load), or exceeding 96 inches in height (including racks, and excluding antennas), or semi-truck trailers. Large private recreational vehicles shall only be parked in side or rear yard and shall not exceed 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight. Commercial recreational vehicles shall not be stored on residential parcels. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause any heavy vehicle to be pulled, pushed or in any way moved across any curb in the city without prior permission from the director of public works or his designee. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause any heavy vehicle to be parked or stored on public property or (except as noted above) in a residential area, office and institutional, commercial or agricultural district not zoned for warehousing for a period longer than one hour during the day or night; provided, that the one-hour limitation shall not apply to any vehicle actually engaged in loading or unloading activity where the driver is present and in charge thereof. It shall further be unlawful for parts of these vehicles, and their accessories, including materials hauled by the vehicles, to be stored on residential property or to be serviced on residential property, except emergency service may be rendered upon permission of the chief of police. 
(Code 1989, § 10-2-3; Res. No. 92-03-09, 3-9-1992; Ord. No. 04-03-23, 3-23-2004; Ord. of 7-14-2014, § 1(Att.); Ord. No. 5448-2018, Exh. A, 11-26-2018)  
Sec. 94-74. - Enforcement; fine, impoundment of vehicle. 
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine to be determined by the city council from time to time. All parking enforcement officers and police officers shall enforce the provisions of this article and shall be empowered to issue written citations requiring the accused to appear to answer the charge. In addition, where any vehicle has been left unattended in a restricted zone for 24 hours or more, the parking enforcement officer or police officer is authorized to cause the vehicle to be towed away to the nearest garage or other place of safety, at the expense of the owner of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 5448-2018, Exh. A, 11-26-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 5448-2018, Exh. A, adopted Nov. 26, 2018, repealed the former § 94-74, and enacted a new § 94-74 as set out herein. The former § 94-74 pertained to nonconforming uses and derived from Code 1989, § 10-2-5; and Res. No. 92-03-09, adopted Mar. 9, 1992.  
Secs. 94-75—94-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NON-CONSENSUAL TOWING 
 
Sec. 94-111. - Non-consensual towing. 
The city expressly adopts all rules and regulations promulgated in Chapter 570-6-1 of the Georgia Administrative Code, except as modified herein. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2017)  
Sec. 94-112. - Fees charged for non-consensual towing. 
(a)  Any wrecker service engaged in the business of providing non-consensual towing services shall not charge the owner or operator of any towed vehicle in excess of: 
(1)  Towing rates and charges: 
a.  Removal fee for vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating ("GVWR") of 10,000 pounds or less: Not to exceed $150.00. 
b.  Removal fee for vehicles with a GVWR of 10,001 pounds to 20,000 pounds: Not to exceed $250.00. 
c.  Removal fee for vehicles with a GVWR of 20,001 pounds or greater—per unit charge: Not to exceed $400.00. 
d.  Removal fee for vehicles with a GVWR of 20,001 pounds or greater—combination unit: Not to exceed $750.00. 
(2)  Storage rates and charges: 
a.  Storage for the first 24 hours, beginning at the time the vehicle is removed from the property: No charge. 
b.  Storage for any day or days the impoundment facility is closed and the vehicle's owner is unable to claim the vehicle: No charge. 
c.  Daily storage fee for vehicles with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less: Not to exceed $15.00. 
d.  Daily storage fee for vehicles with a GVWR of 10,001 pounds to 20,000 pounds: Not to exceed $20.00. 
e.  Daily storage fee for vehicles with a GVWR of 20,001 pounds or greater—per unit charge: Not to exceed $25.00. 
f.  Daily storage fee for vehicles with a GVWR of 20,001 pounds or greater—combination unit: Not to exceed $50.00. 
In the event the maximum fees listed above exceed the maximum fees allowed in the schedule of fees published in the state department of public safety statewide maximum rate tariff intrastate rates and charges, the state department of public safety statewide maximum rate tariff intrastate rates and charges shall control. 
No storage fees shall be charged for the first 24-hour period from the time the motor vehicle is removed from the property. The fees stated in the maximum rate tariff shall be all inclusive. No additional fees may be charged for the use of dollies, trailers, lifts, slim jims, or any other equipment or service. Only approved charges for the storage and removal shall be billed or collected by the wrecker service for towing or storage services; it is a violation of this article for any wrecker service to bill or collect fees or charges which are not expressly permitted. 
(b)  Non-consensual towing and storage fees shall be established annually by the city council after receiving recommendations from the city manager based on financial information submitted by the non-consensual towing firms as to their costs for removal and storage of vehicles and on other information. Such financial information shall be submitted by December 31 of each year. 
(c)  Any wrecker service engaged in the business of providing non-consensual towing services shall accept payment of fees in each of the following ways: by cash, commonly-recognized travelers checks, money orders, certified checks, cashier's checks, personal checks if proper identification is provided, and at least two major credit cards. An additional fee may not be charged for the use of debit or credit cards. Major credit cards shall include Master Card, Visa, American Express and Discover Card. A proper identification shall consist of a valid driver's license, government issued photo ID or a college photo ID. 
(d)  No fee of any kind shall be charged if the operator of the vehicle returns prior to the wrecker having been hooked with hoisting apparatus or loaded by the wrecker service and the vehicle has not left the premises and the owner or operator produced the ignition key and removes the vehicle immediately. If the vehicle has been hooked with hoisting apparatus or loaded by the wrecker service and the vehicle has not left the premises and the owner or operator produces the ignition key and removes the vehicle immediately an operator fee may be charged not to exceed $75.00 for vehicles with a GVWR of 19,999 pounds or less or with a GVWR of 20,000 pounds or more. 
No additional charges shall be assessed for storage of the vehicle once the vehicle has been claimed and payment is tendered to the towing company in the amount specified on the receipt and the vehicle has been removed from the impoundment facility. The receipt issued by the wrecker or towing service to the customer, and such service's office copy of such receipt, must reflect all fees collected for the redemption of the vehicle. 
(e)  No storage fees may be charged or collected by any wrecker service or tow truck operator for days on which the impound lot where a towed vehicle is stored is closed or otherwise unavailable to the vehicle owner for redemption. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2017)  
Sec. 94-113. - Use of mechanical locking device or boot for automobiles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except law enforcement personnel, to affix mechanical locking devices, including those commonly referred to as "boots," to any automobile parked on private property. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2017)  
Sec. 94-114. - No towing if operator appears and removes vehicle. 
The operator of any wrecker service vehicle summoned to tow any vehicle, whether on public or private property, shall not tow the vehicle away and shall not charge any fee, unless such charge is allowed by this division, if the operator of the vehicle returns prior to the wrecker vehicle having left the location to which it was summoned. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2017)  
Sec. 94-115. - Sign specifications. 
(a)  Owners of private property shall be required to place signs at each designated entrance to a parking lot or parking area where parking prohibitions apply. Where there is no designated entrance, such signs shall be posted so as to be clearly visible from each and every parking space. Such signs shall be a minimum of 12 inches by 18 inches with a minimum of ¾ inch lettering. The words "Private Parking" shall be printed in bold with a minimum of 1 ½ inch lettering. 
(b)  Such signs located at a designated entrance to a parking lot shall be at least four feet above the site grade. Where there is no designated entrance, such signs shall be six feet above the site grade. Posted signs must be free of any natural or man-made interference and be clearly visible. 
(c)  Such signs shall also include the following: 
(1)  A warning that unauthorized vehicles will be towed; 
(2)  Towing company name, address, and telephone number and the impound lot location where towed vehicles may be retrieved; 
(3)  Towing fees and daily storage fees; 
(4)  Hours of operation; and 
(5)  Method of payment. 
(d)  No vehicle shall be relocated from private property which does not, at the time of the tow and for at least 24 hours prior thereto, have signs posted which are in substantial compliance with the provisions of paragraphs (a) through (c) above. The provisions of this section shall not apply to owner(s) of private residential property containing four or fewer residential units. 
(e)  All signs must be removed from private property within 15 days after the termination of the contract or authorization from the property owner or agent is withdrawn. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2017)  
Sec. 94-116. - Location of secure impoundment facility. 
A wrecker service with a contract to conduct non-consensual towing from private parking areas within the city must maintain a secure impoundment facility as defined in Georgia Administrative Code Chapter 570-6-1 within five miles of the city limits. 
(Ord. of 7-10-2017)  
Chapter 98 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-0005, adopted May 12, 2008, deleted Ch. 98 in its entirety and enacted a new ch. 98 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 98 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1989, §§ 6-1-1—6-5-2-20; Ord. No. 95-05-09, adopted May 9, 1995; and and ordinance adopted May 9, 2006. 
Charter reference— Authority of city to build and operate municipal utilities, § 7.11. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 38; health and sanitation, ch. 46; land development code, ch. 50; planning, ch. 74; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; telecommunications, ch. 90. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 98-1—98-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-0005, adopted May 12, 2008, deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following the former Arts. II, III, and enacted a new Arts. II, III as set out herein. The former Arts. II, III pertained to similar subject matter. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
 
Sec. 98-31. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate fees and charges for water and sewer utility services, connection to the municipal water system, issuance of water revenue bonds and provide penalties for violations of this article in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-32. - Violation of article; penalty. 
(a)  Any user violating this article may have the water turned off from his premises after notice and the city shall incur no liability whatever for turning off the water under such circumstances. 
(b)  Any person tampering with water services discontinued for violation will be subject to a fine of $500.00 and/or permanent discontinuance of water service. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-33. - Charges and fees. 
The schedule of charges, fees, rates and deposits for all utility services, including water and sewer, shall be as fixed from time to time by the city council and kept on file in the offices of the city clerk and the city water and sewer department. 
(1)  Bills for city utility services shall be due and payable on the day following the day bills are mailed. 
(2)  If a bill remains unpaid on the 30th day following the initial billing, a notice of termination of water service will be mailed or distributed to the current billing address. This notice will state the amount past due, the due date and that the water service will be disconnected if the amount due is not paid in full, including all late fees. 
(3)  A late charge will be added to any bill not paid on or before the due date. The amount of any such late charge shall be fixed from time to time by the city council. Payment must be received by the city on or before the due date to avoid late fees. 
(4)  Water service may be reconnected between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays observed by city employees. A charge for reconnection of water service shall be made. The amount of such charges shall be fixed from time to time by the city council. 
(5)  Delinquent bills and reconnection fees must be paid in person at the city offices in cash or by money order, certified check or by credit card. 
(6)  Any other provision of this section notwithstanding, any customer submitting a check in payment for water service which is returned to the city as nonnegotiable or as having insufficient funds, will incur a charge, which charge shall be fixed from time to time by the city council. 
(7)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city will not refuse to supply water to any single or multifamily residential property to which water has been furnished through the use of a separate meter because of the indebtedness of a prior owner, prior occupant, or prior lessee to the city for water previously furnished to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008) 
Charter reference— Fees for municipal utility service, § 7.11.  
Sec. 98-34. - Collection of unpaid utility bills. 
(a)  Whenever utility bills shall be delinquent and remain unpaid on demand by the city water and sewer department, it shall be lawful for the city clerk to issue an execution against the owner of the property responsible for such bill, for the amount due including any late fees, as in the case of taxes due to the city. 
(b)  The city manager or his designated representative shall be authorized to engage the services of any reputable commercial collection agency to collect unpaid utility service accounts compensating the agency or agencies as is customary in the trade. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing an execution shall not be issued to secure unpaid charges for water or sewer furnished unless the owner of such real property is the person who incurred the charges. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008) 
Charter reference— Unpaid utility charges constitute liens on property which is enforceable in the same manner as lien for property taxes, § 6.15.  
Sec. 98-35. - Refunds. 
Refunds of utility fees, charges and deposits shall be made in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code and regulations promulgated by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-36. - Separate connections. 
(a)  Each resident and user of the city water and sewerage system shall be required to have a separate and individual connection to the system. 
(1)  No water or sewer connection shall be extended to any other residence or user; however, apartment houses, roominghouses and similar multiple dwellings may have a common connection, with the permission of the city manager or his designated representative. 
(2)  Any person or property owner who shall extend lines to any resident, tenant or user other than the principal or original tenant, user or resident, shall be deemed to be personally liable for the payment of all costs incurred by all tenants, users or residents served through the same meter, and the city shall have the right to discontinue water service until the connection shall comply with the intent of this article, or until the owner pays all costs as set forth in this article. 
(b)  If, as of May 9, 1995, more than one structure is served by only one meter, each such situation will not be subject to the provisions of this section. However, such situation shall be considered as a nonconforming use and be bound by the limitations of chapter VII, article VIII, section 10 (§ 7.810) of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-37. - Control of water and sewer facilities. 
(a)  Within the corporate limits of the city, authorized employees of the city shall exercise control and supervision over the installation and maintenance of all water and sewer facilities, tap-ons, connections and disposal facilities, now or in the future maintained by the city. 
(b)  No plumber or other person shall make connection with any service pipe until application shall have been made for the same and permit granted, at which time all bills chargeable against such connection must be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-38. - Application for connection; deposits for water service. 
(a)  All persons desiring a supply of water from the city's mains must make application at the office of the water and sewer department for service pipe and connection with the city's mains. 
(1)  This application shall be in writing upon forms furnished by the city giving the property address and exact location at which water service shall be connected. 
(2)  The application shall set forth the purposes for which water is to be used and shall include personal and credit information from the owner or tenant of the property applying for water service. 
(3)  The application shall be signed by the owner or tenant of the property or his authorized agent and shall signify his agreement to comply with all rules and regulations of the water and sewer department of the city. 
(b)  The water and sewer department shall collect security deposits for water service and shall maintain accurate records of each such deposit collected. 
(1)  Funds collected as security deposits shall be utilized for capital expenditures to maintain and upgrade the city water system. 
(2)  When a person discontinues city water service and is otherwise entitled to a refund of a security deposit, the city shall pay over to such person the appropriate refund within 20 days of the date that the final bill has been settled by the water service user. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-39. - Connection to water system. 
(a)  The city, through the water and sewer department, will furnish all material and make all connections to the water mains and install all water service pipes from the mains to the inside of the property line of the sidewalk, including installation of two-inch meters. Any meter greater than two inches shall be installed by the property owner under the direction and supervision of the city. 
(b)  Any connections for fire protection shall be made by the property owner under the direction and supervision of the water and sewer department. All plans for private fire protection shall be submitted to and a permit obtained from the water and sewer department before installation or extensions to existing installations are made. A single sidewalk stop shall supply only one user. 
(c)  The pipe and connections in the street will be cared for by the water and sewer department without expense to the user or owner of the property. 
(1)  All fixtures within the premises must be kept in repair by the property owner or user. 
(2)  The owner must have his water line installed by a state licensed plumber with materials approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-40. - Cross connections to water system. 
(a)  No person shall be allowed to make a cross connection between the water and sewer department's supply and a private well, spring or other source. Where the user has another source of water in addition to that of the department, there shall be no physical connection between the two supplies. 
(b)  There shall be no cross connection between the city water lines and air lines used for washing automobiles or any other purpose. Where water passes through recirculating systems such as cooling towers, there shall be no physical connection between the waterworks system and the pressure lines from the recirculating system. 
(c)  The city, through the water and sewer department, reserves the right to require all hotels, office buildings, factories and other buildings which require continuity of service to have at least two separate sources of supply. 
(d)  No user shall install a bypass to a meter to provide continuity of service. In case such continuity is required, a duplicate meter installation shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-41. - Stopcock and waste cock required. 
A stopcock and waste cock for the control of the water service by the property owner, or his agent, or tenant, shall be installed at a convenient place on each water line. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-42. - Water meters. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to meter any existing unmetered connection, and to charge the standing prices to install the meter. 
(b)  Users with meters must have their entire water supply to the premises on which they are set, metered, and they will be charged for all water that passes through the meter, whether used or wasted. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-43. - Inspection of water system. 
(a)  The water will not be turned on to any premises until plumbing and fixtures have been inspected and approved by a city inspector who shall notify the water and sewer department when water may be turned on. 
(b)  An authorized employee of the city water and sewer department may enter the premises of any consumer between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, to examine the pipes and fixtures, the quantity of water used, and the manner of its use; provided, however, that entry into residential property shall be done with the permission of the owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-44. - Resale of water prohibited. 
No user will be allowed to supply or sell water, either before or after using, to other persons or families, nor shall any person take away or carry water from any hydrant or public fountain, without the prior written consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-45. - Swimming pools. 
Once a year, an adjustment may be made in the sewer portion of a user's bill for filling a swimming pool. Customer must notify the city water department prior to filling pool and when the pool filling is completed shall receive a credit on the sewer portion of their bill for only the amount of water used to fill pool. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-46. - Interruption of service, accidents. 
No person shall be entitled to damages nor to have any portion of a payment refunded for any stoppage of water for purposes of additions, accidents or repairs, or for any other necessary stoppage. However, an abnormal bill caused by unavoidable circumstances may be adjusted at the discretion of the city manager or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-47. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  The fire hydrants are for the use of the fire department and are not to be used by any other person for any purpose without permission from the fire chief. If any hydrant is damaged, notice must be sent at once to the public works department. 
(b)  Fire hydrants shall conform to the standards provided in chapter 50, pertaining to the land development ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-48. - Water revenue bonds. 
Since the issuance and sale of the city's water revenue bonds is predicated upon a covenant by the city to maintain rates for the services provided by the water system, produce income and revenues sufficient to pay the cost of the operation and maintenance of the system, pay the principal of and interest on the bonds as they become due, and maintain a reasonable reserve, the rates in this article shall not be changed to the extent that the covenants of this section will be impaired or adversely affected. However, the water system rates may be adjusted by the city whenever the payments required to be made into the respective funds called for under the bond ordinance are being made as required and upon certification to the city by a recognized firm of certified public accountants that the city is complying with the requirements of the bond ordinance and that the net earnings of the water system for a period of 24 months immediately preceding the adoption of proceedings for the revision of rates have been equal to at least 1½ times the highest combined principal and interest requirements for any succeeding 24-month period on all obligations secured by revenues from the water system then outstanding. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008) 
Charter reference— Revenue bonds authorized, § 6.21. 
State Law reference— Revenue Bond Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-20 et seq.  
Sec. 98-49. - Utility bill adjustment. 
If a user experiences abnormally high water usage, due to a leak or other accidental causes, the city may adjust the excessive utility bill as follows: 
(1)  Any adjustment will be at the discretion of the city manager or his/her designee, and only after verification of repair or correction of the problem, which verification shall be made by an authorized city employee. Customer should submit copies of repair material invoices and, when appropriate, invoices from a certified plumber detailing the repairs. 
(2)  Upon such verification, the user will receive a credit for the sewer portion of the bill. These credits will only be issued one per 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Secs. 98-50—98-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE 
 
Sec. 98-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under EPA approved, laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, which begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection. 
City means the City of Woodstock, Cherokee County, Georgia, or the city's authorized deputy agent or representative. 
Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Customer means every person who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the sewer system of the city and in obtaining, having or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through such system. The terms shall include the occupants of each unit of a multiple family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. A sewer easement shall be a minimum of ten feet in width. No structure may be constructed over any part of an easement. 
Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater in a gravity separation test under laboratory conditions. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it never contained floatable fat or if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
Health officer means the director of the county board of health or other person designated by the county board of commissioners and their duly appointed assistants. 
Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Infiltration/inflow means wastewater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes or other openings. 
May is permissive. See Shall. 
Municipality means the governmental body having jurisdiction over the maintenance and operations of the water and sanitary sewer system within the city and adjacent areas of the county. 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
Normal wastewater means wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 350 milligrams per liter (mg/l), BOD is not more than 300 mg/l, total phosphorous is not more than 15 mg/l, total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 20 mg/l, and the total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration. 
Pit privy means a shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a flytight slab on which is securely located a flytight riser covered with hinged flytight seat and lid. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface waters that are not intentionally admitted. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out. 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Sewage means the spent water of a community. The equivalent term is "wastewater." 
Sewage works (sewerage) means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
Shall is mandatory. See May. 
Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
Storm drain and storm sewer mean a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source and excluding sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Superintendent means the utilities superintendent or the city's authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtration as approved by EPA and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
Unpolluted water means water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid-carried and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwaters, stormwaters and surface waters that are not intentionally admitted. 
Wastewater facilities, wastewater treatment works and water pollution control facility mean the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastewater and dispose of the effluent. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 98-82. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide an ordinance regulating the use of public and private sewers and drains, private wastewater disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers and the discharge of waters and waste into the public sewer system and providing penalties for violations of this article in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008) 
Charter reference— Sewers and drains, § 7.12.  
Sec. 98-83. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable under the laws of the state. Fines may be levied up to $1,000.00 per day with each day of continuing violation being considered a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of violation. 
(b)  In the event of violation of this article, the health officer or authorized employees may verbally instruct the owner as to the necessary corrective action. If the owner fails to carry out verbal instructions in a timely manner or if a serious violation or hazard to public health exists, the health officer or city may issue to the owner a written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective action and the time limit for completing the corrective action. The record of the mailing of such notice or order shall be prima facie evidence thereof and failure of the owner or owners to receive same shall in no way affect the validity of any proceedings conducted pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Failure to comply with any written order duly issued by the health officer or city pursuant to this article will constitute a separate misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided by the laws of the state. Provided further, that compliance with this article is required notwithstanding the fact that a written order might not have been issued. 
(d)  The violation of any provisions of this article, as now existing or as may be hereafter amended, may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Any public nuisance which is injurious to the public health, safety or comfort may be abated by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the court of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding the fact that such violation also constitutes a crime, and notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city. 
(e)  Upon the receipt of a notice of a violation of this article and/or an order of the city requiring an act or thing to be done or to cease, the owner or owners of any premises then in question may, in writing, demand a hearing before the city to present the evidence challenging the validity of the city's order. The owner may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. The demand must be filed with the clerk of the city and be made within five days from the receipt of the order being challenged. Upon receipt of a demand for a hearing, the city will set a date, time and place for the hearing to be not less than 21 days from the date of filing of the demand. The hearing shall apply to any customer's complaint, dispute or challenge of the city's rules, regulations, resolutions, ordinances or policies. Upon the customer's written complaint filed with the clerk, the city shall set a hearing as provided in this subsection or at a time agreed upon by the parties. 
(f)  Evidence before the city of any hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (e) of this section shall be admitted in accordance with the rules of evidence of the superior courts of the state; however, the city may take official notice of any order, rule, regulation or any other document, record or entry contained in its official record or minutes for evidentiary purposes. 
(g)  For the purposes of this article, the decisions of the city will prevail in any instance in which there is a conflict between it and the health officer on any issue of sanitation, or the lack of it, and its effect on human health or well-being. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-84. - Use of public sewer required. 
(a)  All premises shall be provided with at least one toilet, at the expense of the property owner. All toilets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(d)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater or dry waste. 
(e)  The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city's jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities herein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 120 days after the date of official notice to do so, unless an agreement to defer connection has been reached, provided that the public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line and is accessible by a gravity service line. 
(f)  All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer; provided that where no sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health officer may be used. 
(g)  An owner who has received official notice to connect to the public sewer, as provided in subsection (e) of this section, and who is already connected to the city water system, will be billed for sewer service in conjunction with the water billing, whether or not the sewer connection is made and utilized. 
(h)  It is not the policy of the city to provide sewer facilities or service to unincorporated areas, even if such areas are adjacent to city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-85. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 98-84, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of the state department of human resources, environmental protection division, the city and the county health department. 
(b)  Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health officer. Septic tanks shall be maintained in a sanitary working order. 
(c)  No person shall construct, repair, alter or enlarge any septic tank unless he shall hold a valid permit for such work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of such a permit pending the inspection and approval by the health officer of the site and location of the proposed work. Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of human resources, environmental protection division, the city and the county health department. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 15,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved, nor in any place where the health officer deems the use of same to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(f)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 120 days after notice, unless an agreement between the city and the resident to defer connection has been reached. Any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(g)  The owners shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(h)  No subsurface disposal facilities shall be installed in any place where the health officer deems the use of such facilities to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(i)  Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer where available or to a septic tank. Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(j)  No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved; 
(2)  In areas where the health officer deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; 
(3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or 
(4)  Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge, into any manhole, catchbasin or other opening into the city sewer system, or any system connected with and discharging into the sewer system, the contents of any septic tank, sludge, sewage or other similar matter or material. 
(l)  Any premises that has a septic tank, privy or any other sewage, industrial waste or liquid waste disposal system, located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within 30 days from the receipt of written notification from the health officer that the system is not functioning in a sanitary manner, and order that the system be corrected. 
(m)  Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. 
(n)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-86. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the city. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer; however, the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test, to meet all requirements of this article. The owner shall provide information to the city as the city deems required or adequate. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in construction shall all conform to the requirements of the building code, the Southern Standard Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city's supervision: 
(1)  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe, ASTM Specification D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical joints may be required by the city where the sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the city. 
(2)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the city, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) shall be followed. 
(3)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipes and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(4)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(5)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C-564. 
(6)  Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(7)  PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber "O"-ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including oils), and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. Installation of the gasket shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the necessary materials, lubricants and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. 
(8)  Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the city. 
(9)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45-degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the city. 
(h)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the lowest occupiable floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(i)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the inspection of the city's representative. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(l)  The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(m)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation. 
(n)  If any house sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the house sewer. 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property. 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-87. - Restricted use of the public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into a storm sewer system. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or greater than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  Any cooling or condensing waters, unless a NPDES permit is obtained from the environmental protection division (EPD). 
(d)  The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities that will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment; will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; and will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewater discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or wastewater which will elevate the temperature of the influent to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) to 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius) or higher. 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Wastewater containing more than 75 milligrams per liter of oils, fat, grease or wax, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (0 degrees Celsius) and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)  All industrial discharges to the city sewer system must comply with the Federal Industrial Pretreatment Standards (40 CFR 403) and those industrial pretreatment standards developed by the state environmental protection division. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing taste or odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the city. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both, which constitute a slug. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other waters or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(11)  Wastewater containing more than 15 mg/l of total phosphorus. 
(12)  Wastewater containing more than 20 mg/l of total Kjeldahl nitrogen. 
(13)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Any unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual biochemical oxygen demand (BOD above 300 mg/l), total suspended solids load (TSS above 350 mg/l) or chlorine demand in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
(14)  Wastewater which exceeds the mineral limits shown in the table contained in section 98-95. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-88. - Prohibited use of public sewer. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 98-87(d) and which, in the judgement of the city, may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require surcharge payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  Interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All sand interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintenance of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the city. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owners' personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. The administrative and inspection requirements for FOG interceptors are outlined below in section 98-88(c), which will be referred to as the City of Woodstock's FOG Control Program. 
(c)  The purpose of this program is to minimize the introduction of fats, oils and grease (FOG) into the City of Woodstock's wastewater collection system. The main components of the program are proper sizing, installation and maintenance of grease interceptors. The administrative and inspection requirements of establishments that discharge grease, fats, and oils into the sewer system are established herein. 
(1)  Definitions. Unless otherwise states or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this document, be defined as follows: 
a.  Active interior recovery device (AIRD)— An active automatic separator and remover of grease, fats, and oils from effluent discharge that cleans itself of accumulated grease, fats and oils at least once every 24 hours, utilizing an electromechanical apparatus to accomplish removal. 
b.  Clean-out port— A pipe that extends from the ground surface to the interior of the passive exterior device (PED) so as to allow access and inspection of the interior of the PED. 
c.  Effluent T-valve— A T-shaped valve extending from the ground surface below grade into the PED to a depth allowing recovery of water located under the layer of grease, fats, and oils to be discharged. 
d.  Exterior grease trap— A grease trap that contains baffles sufficient to allow a property separation of grease from water and is located outside of the building. 
e.  Fats, oils and grease (FOG) recovery system or FOG recovery system— A system of interceptors, separators, traps, or grease recovery devices, which prevents free floating fats, oils and grease from entering the sewage system by recovering and removing these substances from water. 
f.  Grease-laden waste— Effluent discharge that is produced from food processing, food preparation, or other commercial source where grease, fats, and oils enter the City of Woodstock's wastewater collection. 
g.  (Grease) trap— An interceptor, separator, or recovery vehicle that prevents free-floating grease, fats, and oil from entering the sewage disposal system. Also includes a passive interceptor with a rated flow exceeding 50 gallons per minute or minimum storage capacity of 750 gallons or more and which is located outside the building. 
h.  Grease recovery device— Any separator of grease, fats, or oils, excluding passive interior devices. 
i.  Interior grease trap— A grease trap located inside a food service establishment; may be an active or passive trap. 
j.  Manifest— A log or recording of the volume, date of removal, and disposal destination of pumped materials from a grease trap or other device. 
k.  Passive exterior device (PED)— An oil/water separating container that requires pumping and is housed outside a building or structure. 
l.  Passive interior device (PID)— An oil/water separating container that requires normal manual cleaning, by pumping or bailing, and is housed inside a building or structure. A passive interceptor with no moving parts with a rated flow of 50 gallons per minute or less that serves as a fixture trap and is located inside a building. 
m.  Solids transfer/grease recovery device— An active automatic pretreatment device which macerates coarse solids and separates/recovers free floating grease, fats, and oils from effluent. The device cleans itself of accumulated grease, fats and oils at least once every 24 hours, utilizing electromechanical apparatus to accomplish recovery and removal. 
n.  User— Any establishment that discharges grease, fats or oils into the City of Woodstock's wastewater collection system. The establishment's owners, operators, or their agents that receive city wastewater system service and/or reclamation facility service. 
(2)  General. Users that generate fats, oils or grease, or any combination thereof, and discharge water to the City of Woodstock's wastewater collection system shall be required to install, operate, clean and maintain a grease recovery system of appropriate size and design to achieve compliance with requirements set forth under this section. 
(3)  Administration. 
a.  As a condition of use, each user required to install a FOG recovery system as set forth in subsection (4) shall register its recovery system with the City of Woodstock. Such registration form shall include the name, address, telephone number, and factors indicating the potential for grease-laden waste to be introduced into the wastewater collection system. The City of Woodstock will review the registration form and provide the user with a discharge permit. 
b.  Permits— Discharge permits will include a permit number, pumping frequency requirements, an expiration date, and the design requirements of a compliant FOG removal system. The user shall keep the discharge permit in a conspicuous location where it can be inspected by the health department and City of Woodstock personnel upon request. The city reserves the right to modify and re-issue existing permits at any time. Modifications may include additions or changes to the user's FOG recovery system and/or changes to pumping frequency requirements to ensure compliance with subsection (6)b. of this article. No fee will be charge by the city for the initial discharge permit. 
c.  Annual permit review— The city shall keep a continuous log of all permitted users, including their permit number, address, and the contact information of the user. The city will review discharge permits annually. Those found to be in compliance with existing federal, state and local laws and regulations will be renewed by the city. Any user found to be in noncompliance shall be subject to penalties under subsection (8) herein. Upon the noncompliant user's demonstration of appropriate corrective actions to achieve compliance with all provisions of the city's FOG control program, the city may renew said user's permit. 
d.  Records— All users must keep a record of any cleaning or maintenance of their grease recovery system. These records must include a manifest as listed in in subsections e. and f. below. The manifest must be kept on-site for a period of three years. 
e.  Manifest— All removal of grease traps contents must be tracked by a manifest that confirms pumping, hauling and disposal of wastes whether it is collected by interior or exterior grease traps. 
f.  Information— This manifest shall contain the following information: 
(i)  Generator information, including name, address, volume pumped, date and time of the pumping, and the signature of the generator verifying the information. 
(ii)  Transporter information, including company name, address, license plate number, permit number, the driver's name, and the driver's signature verifying transporter information. 
(iii)  Receiving information, including the facility's name, address, date and time receiving, EPD number, and signature verifying receipt of the waste. 
g.  Reporting— Completed exterior grease trap cleaning manifests must be mailed to the City of Woodstock within 14 days after the trap is cleaned. 
h.  Maintenance log— For all interior grease traps, whether active or passive, each user of a grease recovery system shall maintain a continuous log indicating each cleaning and any maintenance for the previous 12 months. This log shall be kept in a conspicuous location where it can be inspected by the health department and city personnel upon request. 
(4)  FOG recovery systems. 
a.  Where required— FOG recovery systems shall be installed where grease-laden waste from food preparation, food processing or other commercial use will be discharged into the city's wastewater collection system. 
b.  Technology required— An approved FOG recovery system shall be installed consisting of one or a combination of the following methods: 
(i)  Passive technology that is an approved exterior grease trap. 
(ii)  Active technology including: 
(a)  An approved FOG recovery device; or 
(b)  An approved solids transfer/ grease transfer device. 
c.  Prohibited discharge— Waste that does not contain FOG and that otherwise does not require grease separation treatment shall not be discharged into the FOG recovery system. Wastewater from dishwasher machines or wastewater that otherwise exceeds 130 degrees Fahrenheit shall not be introduced into any interior FOG recovery device. Food-waste grinders shall not discharge into the building drainage system through a grease trap of FOG recovery device. 
d.  Dumpster pads— Dumpster pads must connect to the wastewater collection system under the following conditions: 
(i)  The dumpster pad is constructed in such a manner so as to protect the drainage connection from storm water runoff in a method approved by the city. The dumpster pad design must be in compliance with the Cherokee County Water and Sewerage Authority Water and Sewer Specifications Standard No. S728 (Dumpster Pad Detail) which can be found at www.ccwsa.com. 
(ii)  The drain is connected to an exterior grease trap of at least 1,500 gallons which will be maintained by the user in the method prescribed by this section for other exterior grease traps. 
(iii)  If the property where the dumpster pad is located does not require a FOG recovery system based this section, the dumpster pad can be connected to a city-approved smaller exterior grease trap. This trap shall be maintained by the user in the method prescribed by this section for other exterior grease traps. At such time the property is determined to require a FOG recovery system, as per this section, due to a change in use or the presence of grease-laden waste being discharged, the exterior grease trap will need to be brought into compliance with the city's program and the dumpster pad will need to be connected to the new FOG recovery system. 
e.  Passive exterior device (PED) requirements. 
(i)  Each PED design, including size, type, design and location shall be reviewed and approved by the city. 
(ii)  The required size shall be determined using the following guidelines: 
(a)  30—75 seats: 1,500 gallon PED. 
(b)  76—100 seats: 3,000 gallon PED. 
(c)  Less than 30 or more than 100 seats shall be sized and engineered based upon the anticipated load and/or conditions of actual use 
(iii)  Be a minimum of 1.500 gallons in size. Multiple PEDs are allowed. 
(iv)  Be designed in accordance with Cherokee County Water and Sewerage Authority Water and Sewer Specifications Standard No. S727 (Typical Grease Trap Design Specifications) which can be found at www.ccwsa.com. 
(v)  Be constructed of sound durable material, not subject to excessive corrosion or decay, and shall be water and gas tight if the PED is made of pre-cast or poured-in-place concrete. 
(vi)  Be traffic-worthy with at least two manhole openings and one clean-out port or manhole over the discharge T-valve. 
(vii)  Contain baffles sufficient to allow a proper separation of grease from water. 
(viii)  Contain a test manhole on the discharge sewer line to allow observation, sampling, and measurement of grease discharges. Restrooms are to be routed downstream of the test manhole so that they do not flow through the PED. This manhole will serve only the PED and no other sewer lines shall enter this manhole. 
f.  Passive interior devices (PIDs)— There shall be no PIDs installed in any user's premises upon the effective date of this article. 
g.  Active interior recover devices (AIRDs)— AIRDs may be allowed in lieu of PEDs in accordance with the following conditions: 
(i)  The method of food preparation involves and/or creates little or no discharge of grease; or 
(ii)  A technically logistical reason exists as to why an exterior grease trap cannot be installed (i.e., conflicts with existing utilities, elevation disparities, or location on a second floor). 
(iii)  The installation or use of all grease recovery devices must be approved by the city. 
(iv)  They shall receive all grease-laden waste discharge from the major point sources. A floor drain shall not be considered a major point source. 
(v)  They shall be sized based upon the anticipated load and/or conditions of actual use and the manufacturer's recommendation. The city must approve the size of the AIRD. 
(5)  Alternative methods. 
a.  Alternative technology/methods— Engineered alternative technology or methods may be permitted, provided the technology or method is approved by the city. The installation or use of any alternative technology or methods must be approved by the city. 
b.  Biological or chemical treatment agents— The use of biological or chemical treatment agents will not be permitted on any user's premises upon the effective date of this article. 
(6)  User responsibility. 
a.  User responsibility and acknowledgement. 
(i)  Users that are required to install FOG recovery systems shall be responsible for the cleaning and maintenance of said system located on the property. The user shall be responsible for maintaining any FOG recovery system pursuant to subsection b. below and in such a manner that the FOG discharge shall not exceed the city's maximum discharge limits, found in section 98-87 of the city's Municipal Code. 
(ii)  The user shall maintain accurate records (manifests and logs) of the dates of cleaning and the means of disposal of FOGs. These records are subject to inspection and review by the city pursuant to and in accordance with subsection (3)c. above. 
(iii)  Any removal and hauling of FOG shall be performed by a licensed waste disposal or rendering firm. If the FOG recovery system fails to prevent discharge over the city's maximum discharge limits, the city will require the user to repair, replace or upgrade their FOG recovery system, which may include one or more of the user's devices, at the user's expense. 
(iv)  All costs related to the building's sewer installation, FOG recovery system, connection and registration shall be borne by the user. 
b.  Grease trap maintenance. 
(i)  All grease traps shall be maintained by the user at the user's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete recovery of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, bottom sludges and solids. All FOG recovery systems, including passive interior devices, passive exterior devices, and any FOG recovery devices, shall be properly and adequately maintained by the user so as to achieve the intended purpose of the device. 
(ii)  In the maintaining of these FOG recovery systems, the user shall be responsible for proper recovery, removal, and disposal by appropriate, approved means of the captured material by a licensed waste disposal or rendering firm. 
(iii)  Pumping/cleaning frequency—All FOG recovery systems shall be completely pumped out at a minimum of one every three months, or at a frequency determined by the city to comply with this section or the manufacturer's recommendation. The frequency of removal shall be such as to ensure no overflow of FOG into the city's wastewater collection system. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the trap from which the waste was removed or to any other grease trap or sanitary sewer connection for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled is prohibited. 
(7)  Enforcement. 
a.  Monitoring— The user shall install a test manhole on the discharge sewer to allow observation, sampling and measurement of FOG recovery system discharges. This manhole shall be installed so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
b.  Inspection and entry— Any authorized representative of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter and inspect all properties without prior notification. This right of inspection shall include the right to measure, observe, monitor, sample, test, record, review and make copies of all pertinent documents in accordance with this section. 
(8)  Violations and penalties. 
a.  Violations— It shall be unlawful for any user to discharge water to the city in a manner in violation of this section or of any conditions set forth in this article. Violations and penalties will be accessed in accordance with section 98-83 of this city Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008; Ord. No. 2012-2106, § 1, 8-27-2012)  
Sec. 98-89. - Industrial uses; requirements. 
(a)  When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. This requirement will be on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)  The industrial users may be required to provide information needed to determine compliance with this article. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewater; 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the public sewer. 
(c)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-90. - Inspection and testing of discharges. 
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location times, duration and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-91. - Pretreatment of wastes. 
Persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewerage system may be required to pretreat such wastes. Plans for all pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the city or the state environmental protection division prior to construction. At the time written plans are submitted for approval, written maintenance plans shall also be submitted and approved by the city. The facilities shall be allowed to operate only as long as they are maintained in accordance with the approved maintenance plans. Pretreatment requirements shall be determined on a case-by-case basis and shall include the following facilities as a minimum: 
(1)  If plans are submitted for the neutralization of strong acid or alkaline wastes, the plans shall include the necessary instrumentation and controls to ensure compliance with the regulations of this section at all times. 
(2)  Holding tanks or equalization basins shall be required ahead of the receiving manhole of the city sewerage system when deemed necessary by the city to prevent peak flows that exceed the capacity of the system or that result in operational problems. 
(3)  All pretreatment facilities shall be operated and maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-92. - Waiver of requirements. 
(a)  There shall be no provision for the granting of variances for discharge of incompatible wastes. If a user begins to violate any of the provisions of this article, it shall be his responsibility to the city which can issue a temporary permit along with a compliance schedule for planning and construction of necessary treatment or pretreatment works. 
(b)  Each case will be carefully evaluated with respect to its effect on the wastewater treatment system and the environment prior to issuance of a temporary permit and compliance schedule. 
(c)  Any dilution of the wastewater by the user for the purpose of decreasing the concentrations of toxic materials shall be considered as a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-93. - Responsibilities of the person discharging waste. 
It shall be the responsibility of the person discharging industrial waste into the city sewerage system to: 
(1)  Build a control structure in the discharge line from his premises, immediately prior to the entrance of the discharge line into the city sewerage system, suitable for the sampling and measuring of wastes. Plans for this structure must be approved by the city. This requirement may be waived if deemed unnecessary by the city. If no special manhole is required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(2)  Contact the city prior to operation changes which will materially alter the characteristics of the waste from the last prior sampling. 
(3)  Make timely, periodic payments to the city of surcharges for excessive loadings as detailed in the city user charge system. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-94. - Discontinuance of service for failure to comply. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be cause for the discontinuance of sewer or water service to the offending person. The procedure shall be as follows: A written notice, signed by the city, shall be delivered personally to the person then responsible for the offending use, outlining the conditions of the wastes which violate the city ordinances. If the person in charge will not accept the notice, it shall be conveyed by registered mail to the responsible person. The person notified shall have 24 hours from the time of receipt of the notice, either personally delivered or received by registered mail, to correct the offending conditions. If correction is not made or a request for extension is not received by the city within 24 hours, it shall be mandatory that water or sewer service shall be discontinued to the offending person without further notice. If a request for an extension of time is received by the city within 24 hours of the above notice and if circumstances are such that, in the opinion of the city, the best interest of the city would be served by extending the time for correction of the offending condition, then the city may grant an extension of time up to a maximum limit of 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008) 
_____ 
Sec. 98-95. - Maximum allowable mineral presence. 
No discharge into a sanitary sewer system may contain pollutants at concentrations greater than the maximum allowable concentrations listed as follows: 
Concentration (mg/l) Mass (lb./day) 
Description 	(Over 10,000 gpd) 	(Under 10,100 gpd) 
Antimony 	* 	* 
Arsenic 	0.9 	0.075 
Barium 	5.0 	0.42 
Beryllium 	13.0 	1.08 
Bismuth 	* 	* 
Boron 	1.0 	0.083 
Cadmium 	1.0 	0.083 
Chloride 	250. 	21. 
Chromium, total 	6.3 	0.525 
Cobalt 	* 	* 
Copper 	2.4 	0.200 
Lead 	1.0 	0.083 
Manganese 	5.0 	0.47 
Mercury 	0.005 	0.0004 
Molybdenum 	* 	* 
Nickel 	4.0 	0.33 
Rhenium 	* 	* 
Selenium 	1.0 	0.083 
Silver 	0.05 	0.004 
Strontium 	* 	* 
Tellurium 	1.0 	0.083 
Tin 	1.0 	0.083 
Uranyl ion 	* 	* 
Zinc 	1.0 	0.083 
Cyanide, total 	0.7 	0.058 
Phenol 	2.0 	0.167 
Oil and grease (total) 	150. 	12. 
Oil and grease (mineral) 	25. 	2. 
Herbicides, pesticides and fungicides 	* 	* 
Total toxic organics** 	2.13 	0.178 
Surfactants (as MBAS) 	200. 	16.68 
 
 *Shall not exceed background levels naturally present in the surface waters of the area. 
**Total toxic organics is the summation of all quantifiable values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter (mg/l) for the organic compounds listed in 40 CFR 433.11(e). 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008) 
_____ 
Sec. 98-96. - Malicious damage. 
Any person guilty of maliciously, willfully or negligently breaking, damaging, destroying, uncovering, defacing or tampering with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities will be subject to provisions and penalties of O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with public utility property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25.  
Sec. 98-97. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the public sewerage system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this section, the authorized employees or agents of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. 
(c)  Duly authorized employees or agents of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-98. - Compliance with regulatory requirements. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. Specific user charge and industrial cost recovery requirements, promulgated pursuant to Public Law 92-500, shall be considered as a part of this article upon official adoption. All nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in 40 CFR 403. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-99. - Service charges. 
It is determined necessary to fix and collect sewer service charges from customers. Such charges shall be published separate from this article and the revenue received shall be used for operation, maintenance, debt retirement and other authorized expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Sec. 98-100. - Authority to disconnect service. 
The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the public sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater. 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment. 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority; 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process; 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(4)  Notification processes for discontinuance of service are presented in section 98-94. 
(Ord. No. 2008-0005, 5-12-2008)  
Secs. 98-101—98-149. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER UTILITY 
 
Sec. 98-150. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate fees and charges for stormwater utility services, define the scope of responsibility, establishes an enterprise fund, credit and appeal policies, billing and collection policies, and other policies and procedures related to establishing the stormwater utility. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006)  
Sec. 98-151. - Findings. 
The city council makes the following findings: 
(1)  The Federal Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act emphasize the role of local governments in developing, implementing, conducting and funding stormwater management programs which address water quality impacts of storm water runoff. 
(2)  Stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities will assist the city in meeting the regulatory obligations imposed by its national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permits by reducing pollution and increasing water quality within the city. 
(3)  Stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities will assist the city in protecting the public health, safety and welfare and the environment. Providing stormwater management services, systems, and facilities renders both service and benefit to individual parcels, parcel owners, citizens and residents of the city. 
(4)  The area of impervious surface on each parcel is the most important factor influencing the cost of the stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities provided by the city or to be provided by the city in the future, and the area of impervious surfaces on each parcel is therefore the most appropriate parameter for calculating a stormwater service charge. 
(5)  A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within the city and surrounding areas. 
(6)  Stormwater runoff is associated with all developed properties, whether residential or non-residential, and the impacts of runoff from individual properties are directly related to the amount of impervious surface on a property. 
(7)  The professional engineering and financial analyses submitted to the city properly assesses the stormwater management needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the city. 
(8)  The professional engineering and financial analyses identified a need to meet these goals and establish a funding mechanism in the city dedicated specifically for generating consistent, stable and adequate revenue to fund stormwater management services. 
(9)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed through the city limits of Woodstock. While specific service and facility demands vary from location to location, a service area that encompasses all lands and water bodies within the geographic limits of the city is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(10)  The city is responsible for the protection and preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community, and the environment and finds that it is in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city and the community at large and the environment to proceed with the development, implementation, and operation of a utility for stormwater management accounted for in the city budget as a separate enterprise fund dedicated solely to stormwater management and to institute funding methods associated therewith. 
(11)  Considering these findings, the city council finds that a stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities, and the city council finds that a stormwater service fee provides the most practical and appropriate means of funding stormwater management services in the city. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(2))  
Sec. 98-152. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this article. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in the Code of Ordinances shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Creation of impervious surface shall mean activity on land, with or without a certificate of occupancy, creating a slab, roof or paved area in excess of 200 square feet. Creation of impervious surface shall not mean graded parcels with no structures, graded soil, graded parcels containing only a compacted building pad, as examples. 
Credit shall mean a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. The basis of such credits, if granted, will be defined by a specific written agreement at the determination of the stormwater utility manager in accordance with the stormwater utility credit policy. 
Customer shall mean all persons or entities to whom the stormwater service charge is billed. 
Detached dwelling unit shall mean developed land containing one structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, or small storage buildings, or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional impervious areas such as parking spaces, playgrounds, or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar non-residential uses. Detached dwelling unit shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for non-residential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by other than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple dwelling unit residential properties. 
Developed land means real property which has been altered from its "natural" state by addition of any improvements, such as grading, paving, compaction, construction of structures or impervious surfaces greater than 200 square feet, or drainage works so that hydrologic response of the property is changed from that which would occur in the natural undeveloped conditions. For new construction, property shall be considered developed pursuant to this article upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon creation of impervious surface or final inspection if no such certificate is issued. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means the statistical average impervious surface area of a detached single-family residential property within the city. An ERU will be determined through engineering and analysis and will be documented in the Stormwater Utility Implementation Guidebook. This unit may be used in the rate study evaluation to determine and compute the service charge for all developed land served by the Woodstock Stormwater Utility. An alternative unit of measure for impervious surface may be used for the rate structure. The methodology and basis for the stormwater service charge will be defined in the Stormwater Utility Implementation Guidebook. 
Hydrologic response of a property is the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area; the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property; antecedent moisture conditions; and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious surfaces shall mean those areas, which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. The following types of surfaces will be considered "impervious surfaces" for purposes of the stormwater utility: the projected area of buildings; asphalt-, concrete-, brick-, or stone-paved areas; improved vehicular drives and parking areas; gravel surfaces; fabric or plastic coverings; and other surfaces that prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff or that change the hydrologic response of the property that existed prior to development. 
Parcel shall mean a designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Private stormwater management system shall mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainageways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality which are not public. 
Public stormwater management system shall mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm drains, public streets, curbs and gutters, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence either the movement of stormwater runoff or water quality, which are either owned by the city or over which the city has accepted an offer of dedication of an easement or other legally binding permanent right of use for stormwater drainage, and for which the city has the obligation of maintenance for stormwater drainage purposes. 
Service charges shall mean the stormwater management service charges applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by the city. The charge shall be used to fund the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and systems. Stormwater service charges shall be based on the relative contribution of each parcel to the demand for stormwater management services, shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable and shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services and stormwater management systems and facilities. The cost of operating expenses, capital investments and reserve accounts may be included in the stormwater service charges. Service charges are based on measurable parameters that influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to the owners of particular properties for services or facilities uniquely related to stormwater management of that property, including but not limited to charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced level of stormwater services above those normally provided by the city. 
Single-family residential shall mean a developed lot containing one dwelling structure with its principal use being a residential dwelling. 
Stormwater management system means any one or more of the various devices used in the collection, treatment, or conveyance of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including all manmade structures or natural watercourse for the conveyance or transportation of runoff, such as: detention areas, lakes, berms, swales, improved watercourses, open channels, streams, culverts, pipes, catch basins inlets; collection, or drainage. 
Stormwater utility guidebook shall mean the document that defines the basis for the stormwater utility, policies and procedures for operating the utility, and other necessary information determined to help document how the utility was developed and how it is operated. 
Stormwater utility manager means the city manager or his/her appointee that has direct responsibility for the management of the city stormwater utility. The stormwater utility manager will report to the public works director. 
Undeveloped land is land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or gravel surfaces or structures in excess of 200 square feet which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(2); Ord. No. 1296, 9-13-2010)  
Sec. 98-153. - Establishment of a stormwater utility and enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility within the city which shall be responsible for providing stormwater management services throughout the city limits. 
(b)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility enterprise fund in the city budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the Woodstock Stormwater Utility, including, but not limited to, rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses, as may be established by the city council from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the Woodstock Stormwater Utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater utility enterprise fund, and all expenses and capital investments of the stormwater utility shall be paid from the stormwater utility enterprise fund; provided, however, that other revenues, receipts and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund (i.e. from state and federal grants, bonds, revenue bonds, etc) may be applied to stormwater management services as deemed appropriate by the city council. 
(c)  The city may pledge all or any portion of all income and revenue of any nature derived from the operation of the stormwater management systems and facilities owned by the city or owned by another political subdivision of the State of Georgia and leased to the city, including periodic stormwater service charges and other charges for stormwater service, to the payment of principal of premium, if any, and interest on any revenue bonds or other obligations lawfully issued or otherwise contracted for by the city for stormwater management services, systems, and facilities as may be provided in any resolution authorizing such bonds or obligations or in any trust instrument relating to such bonds or obligations. 
(d)  An annual audit of the stormwater enterprise fund will be conducted to ensure that funds are properly accounted for and spent on all stormwater, operational, administrative, and capital expenses as specified in subsections 98-153(a), (b) and (c) and section 98-154. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(2))  
Sec. 98-154. - Scope of responsibility. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall monitor the design, operation, maintenance, inspection, construction, and use of all stormwater management systems in the city. The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the design and construction of public stormwater facilities owned by the city and shall inspect, operate, and maintain them as prescribed herein. The stormwater utility shall provide services which relate to the: 
• Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through Woodstock; 
• Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing city owned stormwater management systems; 
• Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
• Maintenance and/or improvement of water quality in waterways throughout Woodstock; 
• Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems; 
• Complying with the federal and state regulations related to stormwater management including the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District (MNGWPD) watershed management requirements; and 
• Education of the public regarding stormwater issues. 
(b)  The stormwater utility shall be responsible for plan approval and construction inspection of both private stormwater systems and public stormwater systems not owned by the city. Design and construction of public or private stormwater management facilities will be governed by the criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. Additionally, the stormwater utility may accept the responsibility for the operation and maintenance of private stormwater systems only when such services have been agreed to, contracted for, and approved by city council. 
(c)  The stormwater utility shall provide for inspection of private stormwater systems to ascertain that the stormwater systems are functioning as designed and approved. The MNGWPD post-development stormwater ordinance has been adopted by the city. Property owners who fail to maintain their stormwater systems will be notified of the violation. If within 30 days (or 24 hours if there is an immediate danger to public safety), no actions are taken, the city may enter the property and correct the failure. The cost for the repair work may be billed to the owner. 
(d)  The city owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  Within public road rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)  On public land which is owned by the city, or other governmental entity, and to which the city has agreements for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system; 
(3)  On private property but within easements granted to and accepted by the city, or are otherwise permitted to be located on such private property by written agreements for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions; 
(4)  Operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of stormwater management systems which are located on private or public property not owned by the city, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the city for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management systems, shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the laws of the state and the United States; and 
(5)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the city. The city has expressly reserved the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its directors, and employees arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(e)  The stormwater utility shall provide for effective management of a uniform stormwater plan and program throughout Woodstock and provide compliance with the municipal separate storm sewer NPDES permit issued to Woodstock including but not limited to the following components: 
• Public education and outreach on stormwater issues; 
• Public involvement and participation; 
• Illicit discharge detection and elimination; 
• Post-construction stormwater management; 
• Pollution prevention; 
• Floodplain management; 
(f)  A comprehensive listing and description of services the stormwater utility will provide will be detailed in the Stormwater Utility Implementation Guidebook. This guidebook will be completed prior to the first billing of the stormwater utility fees. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(2))  
Sec. 98-155. - User fee charges. 
It shall be the policy of the city that funding for the stormwater utility be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater systems and programs and/or the level of service provided as a result of the provision of stormwater programs, services and facilities. Service charges for stormwater management shall be fair and reasonable and shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing programs, services and facilities and acquiring property. The cost of stormwater programs, services and facilities may include operating, capital investment, and reserve expenses, and may consider stormwater quality as well as stormwater quantity management requirements. Similarly situated properties shall be charged similar rentals, rates, charges, fees, tolls, or licenses. 
Service charge rates shall be designed to be consistent and coordinated with the use of other funding methods employed for stormwater management by the city, whether within or outside the stormwater utility, including but not limited to plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in-lieu of regulatory requirements, impact fees, system development charges, and special assessments. 
The rate structure will be developed by October 2006 and will be documented in the Stormwater Utility Implementation Guidebook. In order to fully recover the cost of providing stormwater management services and systems while fairly and reasonably apportioning the cost among developed properties throughout the city, the city will conduct an evaluation of rates. 
The service charge will be based on the amount of impervious surfaces on a particular property that is developed, while undeveloped properties will not be assessed a stormwater utility fee. Stormwater utility rates will be reviewed on an annual basis and any rate changes will be approved by the city council. While the rate structure has not yet been determined but will be documented in the Stormwater Utility Guidebook, the option for non-residential properties to be billed on a quarterly basis will be offered. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(2))  
Sec. 98-156. - Stormwater user fee charge exemptions. 
Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no public or private property located in Woodstock shall be exempt from the stormwater user fee charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in the stormwater user fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. 
Exemptions to the stormwater user fee charges are as follows: 
(1)  Parcels upon which the creation of impervious surfaces has not occurred; 
(2)  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks). However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges; 
(3)  All public road rights-of-way; and 
(4)  Cemeteries. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(2); Ord. No. 1296, 9-13-2010)  
Sec. 98-157. - Effective date of stormwater service charges. 
The stormwater service fee shall accrue beginning October, 2006, and shall be billed annually thereafter. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(2))  
Sec. 98-158. - Credits. 
(a)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to Woodstock's standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities or to private stormwater management systems which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems. 
(b)  Property owners of developed land may receive a stormwater service charge credit. The specific credits will be determined based on the guidelines in the Stormwater Utility Implementation Guidebook. Credits for structural controls will be based on best management practices performance as defined by the design criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, First Edition, August 2001. 
(c)  Credits may be partial or full credits and property owners can receive a maximum 40 percent credit. 
(d)  Property owners seeking stormwater service charge credits must apply for stormwater service charge credits through completion and submittal to the Woodstock of a stormwater service charge credit application. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a completed application, Woodstock shall review the application and make a determination as to whether the applicable criteria for a credit have been met. All decisions regarding the approval or disapproval of a stormwater credit shall be made within 45 days of the date the completed application was received by Woodstock. 
(f)  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on (1) continuing compliance with Woodstock's design and performance standards as may be updated or amended from time to time; and (2) upon continuing provision of the systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. The city may revoke any credit at any time for non-compliance with this article. 
(g)  Stormwater utility fees may be adjusted retroactively to the date that Woodstock received the completed application. 
(h)  Applicants receiving credit for a structural control as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual must have an approved maintenance plan on file with the city and the applicant's property must have on-site stormwater management and treatment facilities. 
(i)  A customer shall reapply every three years for the credit granted, however, Woodstock may terminate the credit if Woodstock finds the facility does not comply with the original approved credit application. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(2))  
Sec. 98-159. - Stormwater service fee, billing, delinquencies and collections. 
(a)  The stormwater service fee may be billed separately, or on a customer statement and collected along with other fees for services, at the city's sole discretion. Unpaid stormwater service fees may subject the customer to lawsuit. 
(b)  A stormwater service fee bill may be sent through the United States mail or by alternative means notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for non-payment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent for developed land, Woodstock may backbill for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency due to the failure to send a bill or an under billing. 
(c)  Unpaid stormwater service fees shall be collected by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account and by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained thereby, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. Unless reduced to a judgment and a writ of fiery facias issued, the unpaid user fee charge shall not constitute a direct lien against the property. However, the owner shall be personally responsible for the fees. 
(d)  A late charge of ten percent of the amount due per year shall be assessed against the customer for the unpaid balance of any stormwater service fee that becomes delinquent. In addition, the city shall assess all costs of collection, including attorney's fees and court costs, against the property owner. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(2); Ord. of 9-9-2013)  
Sec. 98-160. - Stormwater utility inspections and enforcement. 
(a)  Every owner of developed real property located in the city, and every person who serves as a contractor or developer for the purpose of developing real property located in the city shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, treat, control and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all city ordinances and development regulations, and the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. 
(b)  When the stormwater utility manager determines that a public nuisance exists, the stormwater utility manager shall send a notice of maintenance requirements by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or owners of the property described, as their name and address are shown on the latest ad valorem tax records of the county property appraiser. This notice shall be deemed complete and sufficient when so addressed and deposited in the United States mail with proper postage prepaid. The notice of maintenance requirements shall inform the property owner that a violation of this article exists on the identified property with the description of the public nuisance, that the property owner is responsible for maintaining the identified private storm water system, that the property owner may allow the city access to the property to abate the nuisance at the expense of the property owner, and that formal enforcement action will be taken if the violation is not corrected within the time period indicated on the notice. The stormwater utility manager shall determine a reasonable period of time for correction of the nuisance. In determining a reasonable period of time, the stormwater utility manager shall consider the following: practicality and ease of correction; the owner's ability to correct the violation; the severity of the violation; the nature, extent, and probability of danger to the public, and other relevant factors. 
Notice, as required under this provision, shall not be required: (a) when the stormwater utility manager determines that the public nuisance presents an imminent endangerment to persons or property; (b) when a notice of maintenance requirements has been sent to the same property owner or owners for the same violation within the previous three months; or (c) when notice by certified mail cannot be effected on the owners of record. 
The notice of maintenance requirements shall contain substantially the following information and may be in the following form or other appropriate form: notice of maintenance requirements: name of owner; address of owner; description of property; inspection date; determination made by the stormwater utility manager that the condition on the property is creating adverse conditions so as to constitute a violation of the this article; describe the conditions that caused the property to be in violation and any recommended actions that may be necessary to remedy the nuisance; specify a reasonable time period to proceed and remedy the nuisance; or provide written permission to the city to enter the site and abate the nuisance at owner's expense. 
Within the reasonable period of time for compliance specified in the notice of maintenance requirements, the property owner shall either abate the nuisance or file a written request with the city for a hearing before the stormwater utility manager to show that the condition alleged in the notice does not exist or that such condition does not constitute a public nuisance in violation of the ordinance. 
(c)  Any failure to meet the obligation set forth in this section shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by any damaged party or the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the city may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner or developer, if any, on a joint and several basis. From the date of the filing of such action, the city shall have lien rights, which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of city court. The city shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(2))  
Sec. 98-161. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the stormwater utility manager within 30 days of the decision that is appealed. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  Woodstock shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal Woodstock may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(4)  The appeal will be presented to the city council and all decisions by the city council shall be final. 
(b)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the city may be appealed by application for writ of certiorari in the city court, filed within 30 days of the date of service of the decision of the chief executive officer. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2006(2)) 


LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE of the CITY OF WOODSTOCK, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted: January 25, 2010 
Effective: January 25, 2010 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
WOODSTOCK, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Donnie Henriques 
Mayor 
____________ 
Council, Ward 1 - Warren Johnson 
Council, Ward 2 - Chris Casdia 
Council, Ward 3 - Bob Mueller 
Council, Ward 4 - Liz Baxter 
Council, Ward 5 - Bud Leonard 
Council, Ward 6 - Rob Usher 
Councilmembers 
____________ 
Jeffrey S. Moon 
City Manager 
____________ 
Eldon Basham 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Rhonda Pezzello 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This volume constitutes the Land Development Code of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, adopted January 24, 1995 and revised through September 24, 2009. 
Section Numbering System 
    The section numbering system used in this publication is the same as that originally adopted in the City of Woodstock, Georgia Land Development Code. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this publication is a prefix system. The numbers and letters to the left of the colon represent the chapters of the Land Development Code. The number to the right of the colon represents the sequence of the page within that chapter; thus, page 3 of chapter IV of the Land Development Code would appear as LDC-IV:3. 
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of A. Lawton Langford, President, and Becky Moore, Supplement Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Rhonda Pezzello, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a publication of the city's Land Development Code which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodstock, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 2009. 
ORDINANCE 
CODIFICATION OF THE LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE FOR THE CITY OF WOODSTOCK, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN: PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Land Development Code of the City of Woodstock, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapter I through Chapter XVII, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 24, 2009, not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, and as an alternative to fine or imprisonment, to sentence any offender upon the conviction to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares or other public works for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city staff is authorized, upon the finding of any violation of this ordinance or any other ordinance of the city, to withhold all permits or certificates of occupancy and, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 24, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This Land Development Code is incorporated into the City Code of Ordinances by reference in Chapter 50 and is hereby codified separately. 
Section 8. This ordinance, This ordinance, together with the ordinance attached hereto as "Exhibit A" and incorporated herein by reference, shall be effective upon the 2 nd and final reading. 
Passed and adopted by the Mayor and Council of the City of Woodstock, Georgia on the 25 th day of January, 2010. 
1 st Reading: 1/11/2010 
2 nd Reading: 1/25/2010 
/s/ DONNIE HENRIQUES, MAYOR 
      CITY OF WOODSTOCK, 
      GEORGIA   /s/ RHONDA L. PEZZELLO, CLERK 
      CITY OF WOODSTOCK   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Land Development Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Adoption Date Include/Omit Supp. No. 1 (Ord. of)  1-25-2010 Include (Ord. of)  7-12-2010(1) Include (Ord. of)  7-12-2010(2) Include (Ord. of)  7-12-2010(3) Include (Ord. of) 10-25-2010 Include Supp. No. 2 (Ord. of)  8-22-2011 Include (Ord. of)  9-12-2011(1) Include (Ord. of)  9-12-2011(2) Include Supp. No. 3 (Ord. of)  4- 9-2012 Include 1989  5-14-2012 Include Supp. No. 4 (Ord. of)  9-24-2012 Include (Ord. of) 12-10-2012 Include (Ord. of)  2-11-2013 Include Supp. No. 5 (Ord. of)  6-17-2013 Include (Ord. of)  7- 8-2013 Include (Ord. of) 10-28-2013(1) Include (Ord. of) 10-28-2013(2) Include (Ord. of) 10-28-2013(3) Include Supp. No. 6 (Ord. of)  2-24-2014(1) Include (Ord. of)  3-24-2014(1) Include (Ord. of)  4-28-2014(1) Include (Ord. of)  4-28-2014(2) Include (Ord. of)  6- 9-2014(1) Omit (Ord. of)  7-28-2014(1) Include (Ord. of)  7-28-2014(2) Include (Ord. of)  7-28-2014(3) Include (Ord. of)  9-22-2014(1) Include (Ord. of) 10-13-2014(1) Include (Ord. of) 11-17-2014(1) Include (Ord. of) 12- 8-2014(1) Include (Ord. of)  1-12-2015(1) Include (Ord. of)  1-12-2015(2) Include Supp. No. 7 (Ord. of)  3-23-2015(1) Include (Ord. of)  3-23-2015(2) Include (Ord. of)  5-18-2015(1) Include (Ord. of)  5-18-2015(2) Include (Ord. of)  5-18-2015(3) Include (Ord. of)  5-18-2015(4) Include (Ord. of)  6- 8-2015(1) Include (Ord. of)  6- 8-2015(2) Include (Ord. of)  6- 8-2015(3) Include (Ord. of)  7-27-2015(1) Include (Ord. of)  7-27-2015(2) Include (Ord. of) 12-14-2015(1) Include (Ord. of) 12-14-2015(2) Include (Ord. of)  1-11-2016(1) Include (Ord. of)  1-11-2016(2) Include (Ord. of)  1-25-2016(1) Include (Ord. of)  2- 8-2016(1) Include Supp. No. 8 (Ord. of)  6- 8-2015(4) Include (Ord. of)  2-22-2016(1) Include 3927  5-23-2016 Include 3928  5-23-2016 Include 3998  7-11-2016 Include 4010  7-11-2016 Include (Ord. of)  9-12-2016(1) Include (Ord. of)  9-12-2016(2) Include (Ord. of)  9-12-2016(3) Include (Ord. of)  9-12-2016(4) Include (Ord. of)  9-12-2016(5) Include (Ord. of) 11-14-2016(1) Include (Ord. of) 11-14-2016(2) Include (Ord. of) 11-14-2016(3) Include (Ord. of) 11-14-2016(4) Include (Ord. of) 12-12-2016(1) Include Supp. No. 9 (Ord. of)  1-23-2017(1) Include (Ord. of)  2-13-2017(1) Include (Ord. of)  2-13-2017(2) Include (Ord. of)  3-13-2017(1) Include (Ord. of)  3-13-2017(2) Include (Ord. of)  5- 8-2017(1) Include (Ord. of)  5- 8-2017(2) Include (Ord. of)  5- 8-2017(3) Include 003-2017  7-10-17 Include (Ord. of)  9-25-2017(1) Include (Ord. of) 10- 9-2017(1) Include (Ord. of) 11-13-2017(1) Include (Ord. of) 12-11-2017(1) Include (Ord. of) 12-15-2017(1) Include 4958-2018  2-12-2018 Include Supp. No. 10 5202-A-2018  7- 9-18 Include 5202-B-2018  7- 9-18 Include 5202-C-2018  7- 9-18 Include 5305-2018  8-27-18 Include 5359-2018  9-10-18 Include 5360-2018  9-10-18 Include 5503-2018 11-26-18 Include 5642-2019  2-25-19 Include 5697-2019  3-25-19 Include  
Chapter I - INTRODUCTION 
ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY 
    This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Article IX, Section IV of the Georgia Constitution. (O.C.G.A. § 32-6102) 
ARTICLE II. - JURISDICTION 
    This Ordinance shall apply only in the incorporated area of the City of Woodstock. 
ARTICLE III. - SHORT TITLE 
    This Ordinance shall be known as cited as "The City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance". 
ARTICLE IV. - PURPOSE 
    An Ordinance regulating the subdivision of land in a manner which will encourage the development of economically sound and stable communities, assure the provision of required public improvements, assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, and assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the reservation of land. 
    This Ordinance sets forth standards which apply to any person undertaking any land-disturbing activities which have a potential of causing soil erosion. 
    Standards are set forth in this Ordinance which regulate the location, type and structural requirements of outdoor advertising displays in order to insure compatible land uses and to protect public safety. 
    The Ordinance establishes minimum standards regarding the development of and placement of mobile homes in mobile home parks for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City. 
    The Ordinance further regulates the size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot that may be occupied; the size of yards and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; the location and use of buildings and other structures; and the use, conditions of use or occupancy of land for trade, industry, housing, recreation, transportation, agriculture or for the other purposes; creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof. 
    The Ordinance establishes definitions of certain terms used herein; provides for the method of administration, enforcement and amendment; creates an appeals process; provides for violation, and repeals conflicting Ordinances and resolutions. 
ARTICLE V. - APPLICATION OF ORDINANCE 
    The requirements of this Ordinance are declared to be minimum requirements and shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul, or otherwise affect in any manner any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. However, whenever the provisions of this Ordinance impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings than the provisions of the Ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. 
ARTICLE VI. - SEPARABILITY 
    Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the part as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
Chapter II - DEFINITIONS[1] 
    For the purpose of this Ordinance and in order to carry out the provisions and intentions as set forth herein, certain words, terms, and phrases are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular; the word "person" includes a firm, partnership, association, governmental body, corporation and all other legal entities. The term "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or Building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. Where requirements are set based on number of days, days are computed based on the calendar, except that when the final date falls on a weekend or holiday, the day due shall continue until the next regular working day. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby defined as follows and shall be interpreted as such throughout the Ordinance. Terms not herein defined shall be as defined elsewhere in the Ordinance, or as defined in Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language-Second College Edition and shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
    Access: The right to cross between public and private property, thereby permitting pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property. 
    Accessory Building: A subordinate Building, the use of which is incidental to that of a main Building and is located on the same Lot therewith. 
    Accessory Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit not greater than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet or forty (40) percent of the floor area of the primary dwelling unit, whichever is greater, located in an Outbuilding and located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling. 
    Accessory Use: A use customarily incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of land or Building and located upon the same Lot therewith. 
    Accidental Discharge: A discharge prohibited by this article into the MS4 which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
    Addition (to an Existing Building): Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a Building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is New Construction. 
    Administrative Floodplain: Means any land area susceptible to Flooding, which would have one (1) percent probability of Flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the projected future land use map. 
    Advertising: Includes any writing, printing, painting, display, emblem, drawing, sign, or other device designed, used or intended for advertising, whether placed on the ground, rocks, trees, tree stumps, or other natural Structures or on buildings, Structures, milestones, signboards, billboards, wallboard, roofboard, frames, supports, fences, or other man-made Structure, and any such advertising is a Structure within the meaning of the word "Structure" as utilized in the Ordinance. 
    Advertising Sign or Structure: See Sign. 
    Affordable Unit: Units are defined as affordable when the total housing cost does not exceed thirty (30) percent of a household's income. Housing costs include rental expenditures or mortgage expenses. For the purposes of the density bonus units are defined as affordable when they are affordable to a household whose income is at or below fifty (50) percent of Cherokee County's median income as reported by the most recent survey provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. The affordable housing income threshold and associated housing cost shall be updated annually by the City based on U.S. Census Bureau data, U.S. Housing and Urban Development (HUD) data and existing mortgage financing conditions. Affordable units must be restricted as such for the lifetime of the unit and are available for sale or rent only to households whose income is at or below fifty (50) percent of Cherokee County's median income as reported by the most recent survey provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. 
    Aggregate Sign Area. The combined Sign Area of all Signs of a particular category on a single parcel. For example, the Aggregate Sign Area of all Freestanding Signs on a parcel is the sum total of the sign areas of all Freestanding Signs on such Parcel. 
    Aging in Place: The opportunity to live in a specific community for as long as possible. Aging in Place is facilitated by the presence of housing which meets the changing needs of an aging adult, provides transportation alternatives, opportunities for exercise and physical activity and a vibrant community life which engages older residents with the community as a whole. 
    Alley: A service way providing a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alteration of Building: Any change in the supporting members of a Building except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; or any change in use from that of one (1) district classification to another or of a Building from one (1) location to another. 
    Animal Clinic: A place where dogs, cats, birds or other animals normally kept as household pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use. 
    Animated Sign. Any Sign that uses movement or change of lighting, either natural or artificial, to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
    Apartment Building: A Structure containing three (3) or more Dwelling Units. 
    Appeal: Means a request for a review by the Woodstock City Council of an interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance or a request for a variance. 
    Applicant: Any person making a request to the City for any approval, permit or authorization under the procedures contained in this Ordinance. 
    Area of Shallow Flooding: Means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with Base Flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of Flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area(s) of Special Flood Hazard(s), or Special Flood Hazard Area(s) (SFHA) or Special Flood Hazard(s): Means the land subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of Flooding in any given year. This includes all Floodplain and Flood prone areas at or below the Base Flood Elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all Floodplain and Flood prone areas at or below the Future Conditions Flood Elevation, and all other Flood prone areas as referenced in Chapter XIII of this Ordinance. All Streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater shall have the Area of Special Flood Hazard delineated. 
    Areas adjacent to the Future-Conditions Floodplain: Means those areas that are at or below either three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc. with no fill or other manmade barriers creating the separation). 
    Assisted Living: Multi-family housing including congregate and/or personal care services licensed by the State of Georgia as a long-term care provider and commonly referred to as "assisted living community". Assisted living goes by many names including nursing homes, personal care, residential care, or congregate care. The services offered vary widely, but frequently include core services, meals, housekeeping and transportation and often some assistance with laundry, grooming, medication management and other functions of daily living. 
    Attraction Device. An object made to conspicuously draw attention to something or someone that may also revolve, rotate, move or simulate movement or action. 
    Automobile Filling Station: A Building or Lot having pumps and storage tanks at which fuels, oils or accessories for the use of motor vehicles are dispersed, sold or offered for retail sale and where repair service is incidental. (Gasoline service station.) 
    Automotive Repair Facility-Major: A facility performing major repair services for motor vehicles which require substantial replacement and/or repair of major components. Examples of major repair services include, but are not limited to, transmission repair/replacement, engine overhaul and radiator repair, along with body and paint repair. Any repair services to construction equipment, agricultural equipment, commercial highway tractors, or dump trucks shall be considered major automotive repair. 
    Automotive Repair Facility-Minor: A facility performing minor repair services for motor vehicles which require only brief adjustment and replacement of minor components. Examples of minor automotive repair services include, but are not limited to, tune-up, oil change, lubrication, brake repair, air conditioning system service, muffler replacement, tire repair and replacement, alignment, emissions testing, audio and alarm installation, custom accessories, minor scratch and dent repair, and glass repair or replacement. 
    Awning Sign. See Canopy Sign. 
    Balloon. A flexible bag designed to be inflated with hot air or with a gas, such as helium, that is lighter than the surrounding air, causing it to rise and float in the atmosphere. 
    Bandit Sign. Any Sign that is temporary in nature located to attract attention of passing traffic. These Signs can be made in a variety of sizes, but are most common in an eighteen inches by twenty-four inches (18" × 24") size. These Signs may also be known as "Roadside Signs," "Yard Signs" and "Street Signs." 
    Banner. Any Sign of fabric, thin plastic or similar lightweight material that is mounted to a pole or a building at one (1) or more edges. Flags shall not be considered banners. 
    Base Flood: The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year as established in the most recent FEMA Flood Insurance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
    Base Flood Elevation: Means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the Base Flood. 
    Basement: Means that portion of a Building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Beacon. A stationary or evolving light which flashes or projects illumination, single color or multi-colored, in any manner which is intended to attract or divert attention; except, however, this term is not intended to include any kind of lighting device which is required or necessary under the safety regulations described by the Federal Aviation Administration or similar agencies. 
    Best Management Practices (BMPs), Erosion Control: Erosion BMPs refer to sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize Erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the Land-Disturbing Activity was permitted. 
    Best Management Practices (BMPs), Stormwater: Stormwater BMPs refer to a wide range of management procedures, activities, and prohibitions or practices which control the quality and/or quantity of Stormwater Runoff and which are compatible with the planned land use. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the specifications contained in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
    Billboard. A Freestanding Sign with a Sign Area of more than two hundred ten (210) square feet. 
    Block: A land area, which may consist of contiguous Lots, established by a recorded plat, and usually bordered by ways or spaces for public or common use. 
    Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
    Boarding House: A Dwelling Unit other than a Hotel/Motel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals, are provided for five (5) or more persons who are not blood related. 
    Bond: A legal instrument with clause, which establishes a sum or money, fixed as a penalty, binding the parties to pay the same; conditioned, however, that the payment of penalty may be avoided by the performance by the part of certain acts. 
    Breakaway Wall: Means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the Building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the Building or the supporting foundation system. 
    Buffer, Erosion: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of State Waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Buffer, Stream (see also Stream Buffer): The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of State Waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Buffer Area(s): A Buffer Area is a land area reserved to provide a visual and noise barrier, which is created by the use of planted or natural existing materials, alone or in combination with berms, fencing or walls. A Buffer Area shall be located on the outer perimeter of a Lot or parcel, extending from the Lot or parcel boundary line and shall be established independently of Building Setbacks. Building Setback requirements shall begin at the portion of a Buffer Area furthest from the property line such that the Buffer Area is not included within any area required for a Building Setback. 
    Building: Any permanent Structure attached to the ground, which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing, or enclosure or persons, animals, or property of any kind. However, for use in Chapter 13, see "Structure." 
    Building Inspector: The legally designated Building Code and Inspection Official of the City of Woodstock, or his authorized representatives. 
    Building, Main or Principal: A Building in which is conducted the principal use of the Lot on which it is situated. In any resident district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main Building of the Lot on which it is located. 
    Building Marker: Any Sign made of bronze, stone or other permanent material and permanently installed as a portion of the exterior wall of the building in such manner it cannot be removed or replaced without substantial damage to the building surface. 
    Building Sign: Any Sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a Freestanding Sign. For the purpose of this Chapter, any Sign Face that is affixed flat against the sloping surface of a mansard roof shall be considered a Wall Sign. Any Sign that is affixed to the building marquee, building awning, a building canopy or a fence shall be considered a Wall Sign. 
    Build-To Line: The Build-To Line is the line along which the building Street Facade is permitted to be located. The distance between the Build-To Line and the nearest street curb is equal to the Sidewalk Area width requirements, except where Public or Private Open Space is adjacent to the Sidewalk Area, the Build-To Line shall extend around the perimeter of such Open Space Requirements include the minimum Street Facade Frontage of principal structures. 
    Campground: A parcel of land used or intended to be used, let or rented for occupancy by campers or for occupancy by camping trailers, tents, or movable or temporary dwellings, rooms, or sleeping quarters of any kind. 
    Canopy Sign: Any Sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. Canopy Signs are considered Building Signs. 
    Certified Personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate erosion and sedimentation control certification course approved by the Commission. 
    Changeable Copy Sign/Reader Board: A Sign that is capable of changing the position or format of word messages or other displays on the Sign Face or change the visible display of words, numbers, symbols and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods, provided these changes are actuated by either a control mechanism or manually on the face of the Sign. 
    Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    City of Woodstock Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or MS4: Any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying Stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, City streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural Stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage Structures. 
    Clean Water Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Clinic-Medical: A Building or portion of a Building where patients are not lodged overnight, but are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians or dentists practicing together. 
    Cluster Development: A residential Development which allows the Developer to develop Lots smaller than those specified in the zoning ordinance, provided the overall density and use is maintained. A variety of housing types may be utilized in a cluster Development (may utilize PUD zoning). 
    Club, Lodge: Buildings and facilities owned or operated by an association or persons for a social or recreational purpose. 
    Common Entrance Sign: A Sign located at the entrance or entrances to a group of structures or a single structure that is situated on a minimum site of five (5) acres, such as a residential subdivision, apartment complex, industrial park, or shopping center. 
    Common Open Space: An area of land and/or water within a Subdivision or Development, which is designed and intended primarily for the use or enjoyment of residents, occupants and Owners within the project. 
    Commission: The State Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
    Community Development Department: The City of Woodstock's Community Development Department (formerly known as the Planning and Economic Development Department). 
    Community Development Director: An agent of the City authorized to permit, inspect, approve or deny construction within the City and designated as the enforcement authority for this Chapter. 
    Conditional Use: A use that generally would not be appropriate throughout a zoning district but which, if controlled as to visual appearance, number, area, height, location, or relation to abutting or nearby uses, would not be injurious to the public, health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted only in zoning districts specified in this Ordinance and are subject to conditions and approval by the Mayor and Council. 
    Condominium: A form of Ownership of less than the whole of a Building or system of Buildings under a statute, which provides the mechanics and facilities for formal filing, and recording of divided interests in real property, whether the division is vertical or horizontal. 
    Conservation Easement: An agreement between a land Owner and the City of Woodstock or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects Open Space or Greenspace on the Owner's land by limiting the amount and type of Development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private Ownership. 
    Construction Activity: Activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in Land Disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Conveyance: Stormwater features designed for the movement of Stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, catch basins, curbs, gutters, storm drains, etc. 
    CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
    Crosswalk: A right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily for pedestrian use, and designed to provide access to adjacent roads and Lots. 
    Customary Home Occupation: An occupation, profession or trade customarily carried on by an occupant in a Dwelling Unit as a secondary use which is clearly incidental to the Dwelling Unit for residential purposes. 
    Cut: A portion of and surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
    Cutoff: A luminaire light distribution where the emission does not exceed two and one-half (2.5) percent of the lamp lumens at an angle of ninety (90) degrees above nadir, and does not exceed ten (10) percent at a vertical angle of eighty (80) degrees above nadir. These emission values apply to all lateral angles around the installed luminaire. 
    Cutting: The removal of any soil or other solid material either organic or inorganic from the natural ground surface. Also known as excavating. 
    Day Care Center: Any establishment operated by an individual, partnership, society, agency, corporation, institution or group, and licensed by or registered with the State of Georgia as a group day care home or day care center, which enrolls therein for pay, for supervision and care, seven (7) or more children or adults. Such facility may provide supervision, care, education, recreation and specialized programming but does not provide overnight accommodations. 
    Density: The number of Dwelling Units per acre of land. Gross density refers to the number of units per acre of the total land area to be developed. Net density refers to the number of units per acre of land devoted to residential use. In no case shall the maximum density for the Development exceed the density permitted in the zoning district. 
    Department: The Department of Natural Resources. 
    Design Manual, Stormwater Management: The current version of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) will provide the primary guidance for the design and evaluation of Stormwater Management Facilities in the City of Woodstock. A copy of the GSMM can be viewed in the Department of Public Works or can be accessed at www.georgiastormwater.com. 
    Design Professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a CPESC with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia Law governing professional licensure. 
    Design Standards: The specifications to land Owners or subdividers for the preparation of Plats, both preliminary and final indicating among other things, the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such items as Right-Of-Way, Blocks, Easements, and Lots. 
    Designated Hazardous Waste: Any solid waste identified as such in regulations promulgated by Georgia Department of Natural Resources Board. The Board may identify as designated hazardous waste any solid waste which the Board concludes is capable of posing a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise managed, based on the factors set forth in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act which are codified as 40 C.F.R. Section 261.11(a)(3), in force and effect on February 1, 1996, if such solid waste contains any substance which is listed on any one (1) or more of the following lists: 
1.  List of Hazardous Constituents, codified as 40 C.F.R. Part 261, Appendix VIII, in force and effect on February 1, 1996; 
2.  Ground-water Monitoring List, codified as 40 C.F.R. Part 264, Appendix IX, in force and effect on February 1, 1996; 
3.  List of Hazardous Substances and Reportable Quantities, codified as 40 C.F.R. Table 302.4, and all appendices thereto, in force and effect on February 1, 1996; 
4.  List of Regulated Pesticides, codified as 40 C.F.R. Part 180, in force and effect on February 1, 1996; 
5.  List of Extremely Hazardous Substances and Their Threshold Planning Quantities, codified as 40 C.F.R. Part 355, Appendix A, in force and effect on February 1, 1996; or 
6.  List of Chemicals and Chemical Categories, codified as 40 C.F.R. Part 372.65 in force and effect on February 1, 1996. 
    Designated Recycling Collection Location: Metal or heavy-duty plastic containers, bins or dumpsters designed for short-term holding of recyclable items such as tin, aluminum, glass and paper (no perishable or food items allowed) for scheduled minimum monthly pickup with no on-premise sorting. The center must be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary fashion and shall be visually screened and maintained and shall be within the Building Setbacks. 
    Detention: The temporary storage of Stormwater Runoff in a Stormwater Management Facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
    Detention Facility: A detention basin or Structure designed for the detention of Stormwater Runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
    Developer: A person who undertakes Land Development Activities. 
    Development: Means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, Buildings or other Structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of Impervious Cover, excavation or drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
    Development Activity: Man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, Buildings or other Structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
    Development Plats-Preliminary and Final Preliminary: A tentative drawing or map of a proposed Subdivision meeting requirements herein enumerated and showing the proposed layout in sufficient detail, although not completely computed, to indicate unquestionably its workability. 
    Development Process Committee: Means the committee composed of those staff members responsible for Development within the City. Specifics of this committee are located in Chapter X of this Ordinance. 
    Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
    Discharge: The release of treated or untreated Stormwater Runoff or other material to the City of Woodstock MS4. 
    Display Surface Area: See Sign Face. 
    District: The Limestone Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    District or Zoning District: A section or sections of the incorporated area of the City for which the then effective zoning ordinance governing the use of buildings and land is uniform for each class of use permitted therein. 
    District Zoning: A section or sections of the City of Woodstock for which the zoning regulations governing the use of Buildings and premises, the size of Yards, and the intensity of use are uniform. 
    Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
    Downtown District: The area approved on the Downtown District Map, found on the Official Woodstock Zoning Map. 
    Downtown District Regulating Plan: The Downtown District Regulating Plan is a supplement to the Official Zoning Map and shall only apply to the Downtown District and identifies street types for the purposes of regulating street and Sidewalk Area requirements. 
    DPW: The City of Woodstock Department of Public Works. 
    Drainage Easement: An Easement appurtenant or attached to a Tract or Parcel of land allowing the Owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge Stormwater Runoff onto the Tract or Parcel of land subject to the Drainage Easement. 
    Drainage Structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one (1) place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for Stormwater Management, drainage control, or Flood control purposes. 
    Drainage System: A conveyance or system of conveyances designed and used for collecting or conveying Stormwater Runoff. 
    Dwelling Unit: One (1) or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for residential purposes. 
    Easements: A grant by a property Owner for the use of a strip of land by an individual, company or agency for a specified purpose. 
    Easy Living Standards: Building guidelines developed by the Easy Living Home Coalition to insure that a house can remain accessible to a homeowner should they ever face a short or long term disability. These standards include: 
a.  A step free entrance into the main floor at either the front or side of the structure, or through the garage; 
b.  A bedroom, kitchen, wheelchair friendly bathroom, and entertaining area all on the main floor; 
c.  Every interior door on the main floor provides a minimum thirty-two (32) inches of clear passage; 
d.  Blocking installed in the bathroom(s) on the main floor to facilitate the future addition of handrails or similar accessibility features. 
    Electronic Sign: A Sign whose message may be changed at intervals by computer controller, microprocessor controller or remote control, and whose message is displayed through the use of LED, LCD, plasma or other similar type of panels or screens, including devices known as commercial electronic message signs and similar devices. 
    Elevated Building: Means a non-Basement Building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls anchored so as not to impair the integrity of the Building during a Base Flood event. 
    Enforcement Officer: The City of Woodstock Building Inspector or such person designated by the City Council to be responsible for enforcing the provisions of the Ordinance. 
    Erect: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix, and shall also include the painting of Wall and Window Signs. 
    Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, BMPs, and requirements in Chapter IV, Section 4.400, paragraph 3 of this Ordinance. 
    Existing Construction: Any Structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 17, 1988, the date of the first floodplain management regulation adopted by the City of Woodstock. 
    Existing Grade: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to Cutting or Filling. 
    Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Means a Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the Lots on which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before September 17, 1988, the date of the first floodplain management regulation adopted by the City of Woodstock. 
    Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the Lots on which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Extended Detention: The detention of Stormwater Runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater. 
    Extreme Flood Protection: Measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from infrequent storm events with a return period of one hundred (100) years or more. 
    Family Care Facility: A facility, which provides resident service in a private residence to six (6) or fewer individuals who are not related to the resident household. These individuals are handicapped, aged, disabled or in need of adult supervision and are provided service and supervision with their individual needs. This category includes foster or boarding homes for children, group homes, and family homes. 
    Farmlands: Land areas of at least five (5) acres in size on which Land-Disturbing Activities are not undertaken for the purpose of raising crops or livestock. The purpose of this definition is not to include home gardens. 
    Fee Simple: Absolute title to land, free of any other claims against the title, which one can sell or pass to another by will or inheritance. 
    FEMA: Means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
    Filling: The placement of any soil or other solid material either organic or inorganic on a natural ground surface or an excavation. 
    Final Stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that have been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or landscaped according to the Plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of a target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
    Finished Grade: The final grade or elevation of the ground after Cutting or Filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    Flag: Flag means any fabric, banner or bunting attached at one (1) or more points such that it hangs loosely containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols and which is used as an official symbol of any government, business, institution or organization. All Flags shall be flown in accordance with United States Code Title 4, Chapter 1, Section 7 (Position and Manner of Display). 
    Flashing Sign: An Illuminated Sign on which artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when lighting is in use. 
    Flood or Flooding: Means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from either the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): Means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of Special Flood Hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): Means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of Special Flood Hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. This definition also includes Digital Flood Insurance Rate Maps (DFIRMs). 
    Flood Insurance Study (FIS): Is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the Base Flood. 
    Floodplain: Any land areas susceptible to Flooding, which would have at least a one (1) percent probability of Flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown in the current land use plan. 
    Floodplain, Administrative: Means any land area susceptible to Flooding, which would have at least a one (1) percent probability of Flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan. 
    Floodplain Management Plan: As specified in Chapter XIII, a Floodplain Management Plan (FMP) must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a Professional Engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who will verify that all designs are consistent with the requirements of Chapter XIII. The FMP shall generally include, but not be limited to, the following: plans drawn to scale of the site in question and the nature, location, and dimensions of existing or proposed Structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage and Stormwater Management Facilities. 
    Floodproofing: Means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to Structures which reduce or eliminate Flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, Structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or Regulatory Floodway: Means the channel of a Stream or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas of the Floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the Base Flood flow without cumulatively increasing the Base Flood Elevation more than one (1) foot. 
    Floor: Means the top surface of an enclosed area in a Building (including Basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
    Footcandle: A unit of measure for illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot from a point source of light of one candle, and equal to one lumen per square foot of area. 
    Freestanding Sign: A Sign which is attached to or part of a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure, whether portable or stationary. Freestanding Signs must meet the standards of either Pole Signs (where allowed) or Monument Signs. 
    Frontage: All the property on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of a street, or if the street is deadended then all the property abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
    Full Care Facility: Any facility that admits patients on medical referral only for continuous medical supervision and for skilled nursing care and rehabilitative care. 
    Full Cutoff: A luminaire light distribution where zero emission occurs at all angles of ninety (90) degrees or greater above nadir, and the emission does not exceed ten (10) percent of total lamp lumens at a vertical angle or eighty (80) degrees above nadir. These emission values apply to all lateral angles around the installed luminaire. 
    Functionally Dependent Facility: Means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
    Future Conditions Flood: Means the Flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on Future Conditions Hydrology. Also known as the one hundred-year Future Conditions Flood. 
    Future Conditions Flood Elevation: Means the Flood standard equal to or higher than the Base Flood Elevation. The Future Conditions Flood Elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the Future Conditions Flood. 
    Future Conditions Floodplain: Means any land area susceptible to Flooding by the Future Conditions Flood. 
    Future Conditions Hydrology: The hydrologic response of a basin in terms of peak flows, hydrographs, and runoff volumes based on the basin being fully developed (full build-out) as shown on the current version of the City of Woodstock future land use map. 
    Give-Way Street: A narrow residential street that has two (2) travel lanes and allows on-street parking such that vehicles must yield to oncoming traffic. 
    Glare: The sensation produced within the visual field by luminance that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted, causing annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility. 
    Grading: Altering surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions, and/or slopes; this includes stripping, Cutting, Filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its Cut or Filled condition. 
    Greenspace (also see "Open Space"): Permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
    Greenway Trail: A concrete or asphalt trail with a width capable of accommodating pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles. The minimum width required is ten (10) feet, unless otherwise determined by the City Engineer. Boardwalks, bridges, and pervious concrete are permitted within the floodplain and stream buffers. 
    Ground Elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to Cutting or Filling. 
    Group Care Facility: A facility, which provides resident services to seven (7) or more individuals for whom one (1) or more are unrelated. These individuals are handicapped, aged, or disabled, are undergoing rehabilitation, or in need of adult supervision and are provided service in accordance with their individual needs. This category includes uses, licensed or supervised by the Federal, State, or County health/welfare agency, such as group homes (all ages), halfway houses, resident facilities, and foster or boarding homes. 
    Group Home: A dwelling shared by four (4) or fewer persons, excluding resident owner, (or no more than six (6) persons including the resident owner), who live together as a single housekeeping unit and in a long term, family like environment in which the resident owner, serving as the primary caregiver to the residents, provides care, education and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential, 
1.  No group home shall be located within two thousand (2,000) feet of another group home as measured at the property line. 
2.  A group home shall be limited to one (1) structure and multiple structures located near one (1) another shall not be considered components of one (1) group home. Each structure shall meet distance requirements. 
    The term "group home" shall not include a halfway house, a treatment center for alcoholism or drug abuse, a work release facility for convicts or ex-convicts, a home for detention and/or rehabilitation of juveniles adjudged delinquent or unruly and placed in custody of the state, or other housing facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration. The term group home shall also not allow the use of a dwelling as an apartment or duplex. A group home shall not allow use of the dwelling as a home for individuals on parole, probation, or convicted and released from incarceration, for any crimes including child molestation, aggravated child molestation, or child sexual abuse, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-4 or individuals required to register as sex offenders pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12. A group home may include a home for the handicapped. As used in this subsection, the term "handicapped" shall mean: 
1.  Having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one (1) or more of such person's major life activities so that such person is incapable of living independently; 
2.  Having a record of having such an impairment; or 
3.  Being regarded as having impairment. 
    However, the term handicapped shall not include current illegal use of or addition to a controlled substance, nor shall it include any person whose residency in the home would constitute a direct threat to the health and safety of other individuals. 
    Habitable Space: Covered and conditioned building floor area utilized for any principal permitted use except parking, storage, digital industry switchboards, power generators, and other relay equipment. 
    Health Inspector: The legally designated County Health Sanitarian of the Cherokee County Health Department, or his authorized representatives. 
    Height of Building: The vertical distance measured from the mean finished ground level adjoining the Building to the highest point of the roof. 
    Highest Adjacent Grade: Means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, nest to the proposed walls of a Building. 
    Historic Structure: Means any Structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing of the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminary determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic places in States with Historic Preservation Programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior, or; 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic Preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved State Program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved programs. 
    Historic Zone: An area shown on the Downtown District Subareas Map, which has specific requirements that supersede certain other requirements of the Downtown District as amended. 
    Hotel/Motel: A Building in which lodging, or food and lodging, are provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby and office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. A hotel is open to the transient public and is thus differentiated from a boarding house or a rooming house which are herein separately defined. 
    Hotspot: An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in Stormwater. Examples of Stormwater hotspots include: gas/fueling stations, vehicle maintenance areas, vehicle washing/steam cleaning, auto recycling facilities, outdoor material storage areas, loading and transfer areas, landfills, Construction sites, Industrial sites, and Industrial rooftops. 
    Human Billboard: Shall include a person or persons who wear or physically hold, move, or spin a sign(s) so as to attract attention or convey information. Also known as human directionals, sign walkers, sign waivers, sign spinners, or sign twirlers. Shall also include costumes intended to attractive attention or convey information. 
    Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG): A Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four (4) runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
    Illegal Connection: Means either of the following: 
1.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-Stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the DPW; or 
2.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the City MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the DPW. 
    Illicit Discharge: Any direct or indirect non-Stormwater discharge to the City of Woodstock MS4 except as exempted in this Ordinance. 
    Illuminated, External: Illumination so arranged that the light source is external to the Sign and directed toward the Sign. 
    Illuminated, Internal: Illumination so arranged that the light is contained behind the face of the Sign and no lighting source is directly visible exterior to the Sign. 
    Impervious Cover: A surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and most concrete or asphalt surfaces. 
    Incidental Sign: A Sign of no more than two (2) square feet that serves the purpose of guiding safe traffic movements onto, from or on property, and without which there is an increased risk of incompatible traffic movements or obstructions. Examples of Incidental Signs include but are not limited to "stop," "no parking," "entrance," "loading zone" and other similar traffic related directives. 
    Independent Retirement Living: Senior adult housing which consists of attached independent living developments which is composed of individual apartments or condominiums for lease or purchase, with a bedroom, bath, living area and kitchenette, including retirement communities, age restricted housing, and active adult communities. These developments may include limited social or recreational services, but generally lack centralized dining and on site medical facilities or services. 
    Individual Sewage Disposal System: A septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device other than a public treatment system approved by the Cherokee County Health Department. 
    Industrial Stormwater Permit: A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries as defined in 40 C.F.R. Section 122.26(b)(14) which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
    Infiltration: The process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
    Inflatable Device: An air or gas filled object which may be of various shapes, made of flexible material, resting on the ground or structure. 
    Innovator Space: Space in an existing or new building that is designed to support innovative design, fabrication and wholesale or retail sales of small articles that are unique in design and employ methods of low volume, high value-added production that employ innovative technology and/or artistic skill or meet the definition of Limited Manufacturing that are not hazardous or noxious. 
    Inspection and Maintenance Agreement: A written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land Development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land Development project. 
    Interior Island: A minimum one hundred sixty-two (162) square foot curbed area that includes a canopy tree and no impervious surface. 
    Issuing Authority: The Woodstock Community Development Department and the Public Works Department are a joint issuing authority and are certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
    Joint Sign: A Sign which serves as a common or collective Sign for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same Parcel (e.g., shopping center, office complex, etc.). 
    Junk Yard: Any use involving the storage or disassembly of wrecked automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles or the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof; the keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of junk including scrap metal, used paper, or other scrap material, salvaged house, wrecked and structural steel materials and equipment; storage, baling or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, used cloth or rags, used plumbing fixtures, appliances, furniture, and used brick, wood or other building. 
    Jurisdictional Wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
    Land Development: Any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land Development Activity: Those actions or activities which comprise facilitate or result in Land Development. 
    Land Disturbance: Any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filing of land, that does not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land-Disturbing Activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into State Water or onto lands within the State, including but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading excavating, transporting and Filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in Chapter IV, Section 4.300, paragraph 5, of this Ordinance. 
    Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of Development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, Lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
    Lease: An agreement by which a property owner conveys, usually for a specified rent, to other persons, permission to erect and maintain a Sign upon his property. 
    Light Trespass: Unwanted light emitted beyond the boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is located, detrimentally affecting residents, vehicle operators and pedestrians, the natural environment, and astronomical observations. 
    Limited Use: Principal permitted uses subject to the following additional requirements: 
1.  The floor area of an individual tenant or business shall be located at street intersections and not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet and shall have a minimum of twenty (20) feet of Street Facade along both Build-To Lines. 
2.  Uses are limited to bakery-no distribution, barber and beauty shop, coffee shop/cafe, deli, dry cleaning-pick-up/drop-off, grocery with general merchandise store combination, ice cream and yogurt, library branch, newsstand, restaurant/cafe-no alcohol except beer and wine sales, shoe repair, and tailor. 
3.  Limited Uses are restricted to the sidewalk level of a building, and are only permitted when said building includes two (2) or more stories of dwelling units directly above said use. 
    A Live/Work Unit , also known as "residential over commercial," is defined as the use of a structure consisting of both a commercial/office and a residential component that is occupied by the same resident. 
    Loading Space: A space within the main Building or on the same Lot therewith, providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of a vehicle. 
    Local Issuing Authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
    Local Planning Commission: The Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission. 
    Lot. See "Parcel". 
    Lot Area: The total surface area of land included within Lot lines. 
    Lot-Corner: A Lot of which at least two (2) adjoining sides abut their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of two (2) such sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    Lot Depth: The average distance from the street line of the Lot to its rear line, measured in their general direction of the side lines of the Lot. 
    Lot-Double Frontage: A Lot other than a corner Lot abutting two (2) streets. 
    Lot Frontage: That dimension of a Lot or portion of a Lot abutting on a public street. 
    Lot-Interior: A Lot other than a corner Lot. 
    Lot Lines: The boundary dividing a given Lot from the street, an alley, or adjacent Lots. 
    Lot of Record: A Lot which is part of a Subdivision recorded in the Superior Court Clerk's Office, or a Lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the Superior Court Clerk's Office prior to the date of passage of the Ordinance. 
    Lot Width: The width of a Lot at the Building Setback line measured at right angles to the centerline of its depth. 
    Lowest Floor: Means the lowest floor of the lowest area, including Basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, Building access, or storage, in an area other than a Basement, is not considered a Building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the Structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
    Lumen: A Lumen (lm) is the amount of light falling on a one (1) square ft area one (1) foot away from a standard candle, or the quantity of light that leaves a lamp in all directions. 
    Luminaire (Light Fixture): A complete fixed or movable lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps and ballasting (when applicable) together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply. 
    Maintenance: Any action necessary to preserve stormwater management facilities in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this article or to prevent structural failure of such facilities. 
    Mall. Any concentration of retail stores and/or service establishments which share customer parking areas and are located within an enclosure having public walkways whereby a customer in one (1) store or establishment may walk to another store or establishment without leaving the enclosure. 
    Mansard Roof. Any roof that has an angle greater than forty-five (45) degrees and which derives part of its support from the building wall and is attached to (but not necessarily a part of) a low slope roof and which extends along the full length of the front building wall or three-quarters (3/4) of the length of a side building wall. For purposes of this Chapter, a low slope roof shall mean any roof with a pitch less than three (3) inches rise per twelve (12) inches horizontal. 
    Manufactured Home: Means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable Structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Marquee. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
    Marquee Sign. Any Sign attached in any manner to or made a part of a Marquee. Marquee Signs are considered Building Signs. 
    Mean Sea Level: Means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the Floodplain. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
    Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
    Mini-Warehouse: A Building in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access stalls or lockers for storing the excess personal property of an individual or family when such is not with their residence, such as a passenger motor vehicle, house trailer, motorcycle, boat, camper, furniture, limited commercial storage (items of local retail merchants, small contractors, and professionals), and other items of personal property generally stored in residential accessory Structures. No business activities other than the rental of storage units shall be conducted on the premises. 
    Minimum Floor Elevation: The lowest elevation permissible for the construction, erection, or other placement of any floor including a Basement floor. 
    Mobile Home Park: A plot of ground upon which two (2) or more mobile homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
    Mobile Home Space: A plot of ground within a Mobile Home Park designated for the accommodation of not more than one (1) mobile home of single-family occupancy. 
    Modular Home: A factory fabricated dwelling over thirty-two (32) feet in length and at least twenty-four (24) feet wide designed and constructed without carriage or hitch collar as stationary house construction for placement upon permanent foundation, to be permanently connected to utilities, for year-round occupancy. It can consist of two (2) or more components that can be separated when transported by designed to be joined into one (1) integral unit. Modular homes shall meet the minimum standards for house construction as specified in the Southern Standard Building Code, the FHA-Minimum Property Standards, the State Factory Built Housing Rules, and have a roof with at least a 3/12 pitch. 
    Monument Sign: A Freestanding Sign which forms a solid structure from the ground to the top of the Sign. 
    Multifamily: A building containing more than one (1) residential unit, excluding townhouses. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): As corrected in 1929, National Geodetic Vertical Datum refers to a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the Floodplain. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit: A permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area wide basis. 
    Natural Ground Surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or Filling. 
    Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
    New Construction: Any Structure for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 17, 1988, the date of the first floodplain management regulation adopted by the City of Woodstock. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such Structures. 
    New Development: A Land Development Activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
    New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Means a Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the Lots on which the Manufactured Homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after September 17, 1988, the date of the first floodplain management regulation adopted by the City of Woodstock. 
    NOI: Notice of Intent form provided by the Division for coverage under the State General Permit. 
    Non-conforming Sign: A Sign legally existing at the time of erection that could not be built under the terms of this Chapter. 
    NOT: Notice of Termination form provided by the Division to terminate coverage under the State General Permit. 
    Non-Conforming Use: The use of a Building, or land existing at the time of enactment of this Ordinance or subsequent amendment which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
    Non-Point Source Pollution: A form of water Pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of Pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, Stormwater Runoff, and leaching. Non-Point Source Pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
    Non-Stormwater Discharge: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of Stormwater. 
    Non-structural Stormwater Management Practice, or Nonstructural Practice: Any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the Stormwater management report that provides for or enhances Stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other Stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, preservation and enhancement of riparian buffers, open and Greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988: Means the vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the Floodplain. 
    Noxious Matter: Material (in gaseous, liquid, solid, particulate, or any other form) which is capable of causing injury to living organisms, chemical reactions, or detrimental effects on the social, economic, or psychological well-being of individuals. 
    Off-Site Stormwater Facility: A Stormwater Management Facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
    Off-Street Loading Space: The area required to load or unload goods or other material plus the necessary driveways and maneuvering area. 
    On-Site Stormwater Facility: A Stormwater Management Facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
    Open Space: Private Open Space and Public Open Space appropriately improved for pedestrian use and amenity not including detention ponds and stream buffers without Greenway Trails or areas used for vehicles, except for incidental service, maintenance or emergency actions only. Open Space shall be exterior and computed as the total square footage of said spaces. 
1.  Private Open Space: Open Space that is private courtyards, lawns, gardens, terraces, or balconies, which restrict access to residents of adjacent development. 
2.  Public Open Space : Park, Plaza, or Greenway Trail that is open to the public during normal city park hours and Sidewalk Area requirements. 
3.  Park: A Public Open Space that provides recreation amenities and gathering places. A Park shall have streets along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of its perimeter and shall have no more than twenty (20) percent of its area covered with impervious surfaces, with the exception of Greenway Trails. 
4.  Plaza: A Public Open Space that is available for civic and commercial activities, but may have access limited for the purposes of providing outdoor dining areas. A Plaza shall have streets along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of its perimeter and a landscape consisting of durable pavement, trees and other plant materials. 
    Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day to day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
    Outbuilding: An ancillary building located towards the rear of the same lot containing a single-family dwelling or Townhouse. It may be connected to such dwelling by an unheated walkway or breezeway. Outbuildings shall not exceed eight hundred fifty (850) square feet of habitable space, excluding garages, nor shall they exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less. 
    Outfall: The location where stormwater, in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility (or site) or, if there is receiving water on site, where stormwater becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
    Overbank Flood Protection: Measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank Flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the Floodplain). These measures need to provide peak discharge control of the two (2) through a twenty-five-year storm event such that the Post-Development peak rate does not exceed the Pre-Development rate to reduce overbank Flooding. 
    Owner: Means the legal or beneficial Owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, leasee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
    Owner(s) of Record: The Owner(s) of property as specified on the deed of the Lot of record. 
    Parcel: Any piece or parcel of land, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record, which is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership, is separately taxable and of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use, and that can provide such yards and other space as required by the zoning regulations. 
    Parking, Commercial: An area or structure dedicated to the temporary storage of automobiles or other vehicles for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours for a fee, operated as the principal use of the property or structure. 
    Parking Lot: An off-street facility including parking spaces along with adequate provisions for drives and aisles for maneuvering and getting access, and for entrance and exit designed so as to be usable. 
    Parking Space: An off-street space available for parking one (1) motor vehicle and having an area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet exclusive of passageways and driveways giving access thereto, and having direct access to a street or alley. 
    Patio House: A single-family dwelling in which most, or all, of a Lot is used with yard space combined instead of divided. Front, rear, and side yards are consolidated into one (1) garden area, either partially or completely bordered by rooms or enclosed by walls. 
    Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
    Percentage or Grade: On street center line, means the distance vertically (up and down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for each one hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance. 
    Permit: The Permit, issued by the Development Process Committee required for undertaking any Land Development and/or Land-Disturbing Activity in the City. 
    Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Pervious Material: Any material allowing the passage of water from the surface into the water table. Pervious materials can be concrete pavers or a variety of commercially available products. Gravel shall not be counted as a pervious material. 
    Phase or Phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
    Place of Assembly: Auditoriums, assembly halls, places of worship, movie and live theaters, event facilities, banquet halls, recreation or amusement centers with stadium seating or a spectator area, funeral homes. 
    Planned Street: Proposed new streets as indicated on the Downtown District Regulating Plan. 
    Plat-Final: The final map or drawing and accompanying materials, described in this Ordinance, on which the subdivider's plan of the Subdivision is presented to the Planning Commission for approval and which, if approved by the Commission is recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court. 
    Pole Sign: A Freestanding Sign that is mounted on a pole or other vertical support such that the bottom of the Sign Face is more than six (6) feet above the ground and there is no visual obstruction other than the vertical support between the ground and the bottom of the Sign Face. 
    Pollutant: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animals wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or Structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Pollution: The contamination or other significant alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
    Portable Sign: Any Sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a Sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, Signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, Signs posted on the roofs or trucks beds of vehicles, Signs converted to A- or T-frames; balloons used as Signs, and Signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operation of the business for purposes other than signage. For the purpose of this Chapter, Sandwich Signs are excluded from the definition of Portable Signs. 
    Portable Swinger Sign and "A" Frame or Sandwich Signs: A Sign which is ordinarily in the shape of an "A" or some variation thereof, located on the ground, easily moveable, not permanently attached to the ground and which is usually two-sided. 
    Post-Development: The time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the Land Development Activity on a site as the context may require. 
    Pre-Application Review: An initial and informal stage of Subdivision review at which the Developer may make known preliminary plan proposals and the City Planning staff or the Planning Commission may respond and/or advise the Developer concerning the Subdivision regulations. 
    Pre-Development: The time period, or the conditions that existed, on a site prior to any Land Development and equivalent to the original hydrologic conditions (e.g., natural forest in good condition). 
    Premises: Any Building, Lot, Parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Principal Building: The building in which is conducted the principal use of the Parcel on which it is located. Parcels with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
    Principal Use: The specific primary purpose for which land or Building is used. 
    Private: Property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by city, county, state or federal government or any agency or Subdivision thereof. 
    Private Street: A street over which the general public has no right of use. 
    Procedure: A procedure adopted by City of Woodstock to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this article or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of the City. 
    Professional Office: Structure wherein services are performed involving predominately administrative, professional or clerical operations, such as law, doctor, optician, audiologist, accounting, tax preparation, real estate, stock broker, architect, engineer, manufacturer representative, professional counselor, land surveyor, political/campaign, telephone sales, travel bureau, and the like. 
    Project: The entire proposed Development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Projecting Sign: Any Sign that is affixed at an angle or perpendicularly to the wall of any building in such a manner to read perpendicularly or at an angle to the wall on which it is mounted. 
    Properly Designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the Land-Disturbing Activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
    Public Water System: Any water distribution system which has fifteen (15) or more service connections or serves more than twenty-five (25) people. 
    Public Works Department or PWD: The City of Woodstock Public Works Department. 
    Qualified Personnel: Any person who meets or exceeds the certified education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 as referenced in Chapter IV. 
    Recreational Vehicle: Means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and, 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Recycling: Any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw material or products. 
    Recycling Processing Facility: A facility engaged in buying, processing and resale or reuse of recyclable materials. Such term shall not include a solid waste handling facility. Such facility may involve storage, shipping and receiving of recyclable materials. 
    Redevelopment: Any construction, alteration, or improvement exceeding five thousand (5,000) square feet of Land Disturbance on sites where the existing land use is already developed as commercial, industrial, institutional, or multi-family residential. Redevelopment excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing Buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate Stormwater Runoff, or cause additional Nonpoint Source Pollution. 
    Regional Stormwater Management Facility, or Regional Facility: Stormwater Management Facilities, typically Stormwater ponds, designed to control Stormwater Runoff from multiple properties, where the Owners or Developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
    Regulation: Any regulation, rule or requirement adopted by the City Council pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
    Regulatory Flood: Means the Base Flood. 
    Regulatory Flood Elevation: Means the Base Flood Elevation. 
    Regulatory Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one (1) percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the latest FEMA Flood Insurance Study and depicted in the latest Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
    Rehabilitation Homes: A facility for the treatment of individuals with mental or physical disorders who must be housed in the facility during the term of their rehabilitation. The primary function of the facility shall be to provide the proper community environment to restore those residing in the facility to a state of health, efficiency, and useful, constructive activity. This is distinguished from hospitals, clinics, mental hospitals, sanitariums, etc., in that the function is not the treatment of the chronically ill but rather to facilitate the return of patients to a normal life within the community. 
    Rental Unit: A residential use which is contractually conveyed by the owner to a tenant for a specified time and amount of money. 
    Reserve Strip: A strip or Parcel of land along, around, or between properties, the purpose of which is to restrict Access. 
    Residential Board and Care Facility: A commercial facility which provides residential services for compensation for ambulatory elderly persons, including room and board, limited personal services and planned activities. This is a group living environment with private or semi-private bedrooms and bathrooms, requiring a state operating license and providing meals, housekeeping, laundry and personal care services, with twenty-four-hour staff availability. Medical care, similar to that offered in a nursing home, is not provided. 
    Residential Multi-family: A building or portion of a building used or designed to contain two (2) or more Dwelling Units. The terms "multiple-family" and "multi-family" are synonymous. 
    Residential-Multi-Family, Rental: A structure or group of structures within a common development or under common management, containing two or more separate Dwelling Units, constructed with the primary purpose of leasing or renting Dwelling Units. This definition includes, but is not limited to apartment complexes and flats. 
    Residential-Multi-Family, Fee Simple: A structure or group of structures within a common development or under common management, containing two or more separate individually owned Dwelling Units, constructed with the primary purpose of selling each Dwelling Unit. This definition includes, but is not limited to condominium buildings and flats. 
    Residential Single-Family Attached: A building containing a dwelling unit connected along one (1) or more walls to another dwelling unit by a common party wall. 
    Residential Single-Family Detached: A building containing one (1) dwelling unit not attached to any other dwelling unit. 
    Residential Treatment: An architectural treatment that: 
1.  Is provided on the sidewalk level of a Street Facade. 
2.  Provides Habitable Space for a minimum of the first ten (10) feet in depth behind the Street Facade. 
3.  Provides equally sized vertical windows where the top of which and the bottom of which shall be no higher and no lower than to the top of the door frame and the bottom of door frame. 
4.  Provides windows for a minimum of thirty (30) percent and a maximum of sixty (60) percent of the total Street Facade area, with the facade of each unit being calculated independently. 
5.  Provides an entry stoop or porch at a primary pedestrian Street Facade entrance. 
    Re-Subdivision: A change in a map of any approved or recorded Subdivision plat altering the number of Lots incorporated within the confines of the original plat. 
    Retail Store: A commercial use or establishment where at least one-half (1/2) of the sale of goods is made to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and not for resale. 
    Review Agency: Any so designated agency other than the Planning Commission may review appropriate parts of plat submissions by reason of technical capability, authority, or interest. 
    Right-Of-Way: A strip of land designated, reserved, dedicated, or purchased for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access or utility line installation. 
    Riparian: Belonging or related to the bank of a river, Stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
    Roadway: The actual road surface including necessary road shoulders and drainage facilities including ditches and curb and gutters, which is utilized to transport motor vehicles. 
    Roadway Drainage Structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled way consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    Roof Sign: A Sign erected and constructed wholly on or over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
    Rooming House: A Building other than a Hotel/Motel where lodging for five (5) or more persons not of the same family is provided for definite periods and for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods. 
    Runoff: Stormwater Runoff. 
    Sandwich Sign: See Portable Swinger Sign. 
    Sanitary Landfill: An area or site utilized by a public or private entity for disposal of solid waste or refuse in a manner which meets the regulations imposed upon the operation and maintenance of sanitary landfill. 
    Sanitary Sewer: A municipal or community sewage collection, treatment, and disposal system of a type approved by the County Health Department. 
    Sediment: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity; the product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Service Buildings: A Building, housing facilities such as recreational, maintenance, laundry and office Structure necessary to the successful Development and management of a Development. 
    Setback: The distance from the property line to the nearest plane of the applicable building, structure, or Sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line. 
    Setback, Stream: Means, with respect to a Stream, the area established by Chapter XVII, as extending beyond any Buffer applicable to the Stream. 
    Shopping Center: In areas of the City outside the Downtown DT District, two (2) or more retail stores and/or service establishments, or one (1) retail store combined with one (1) or more service establishment, sharing customer parking areas, regardless of whether said stores and/or service establishments occupy separate structures or are under separate ownership. 
    Sidewalk Area: Begins at the street curb and consists of a contiguous Sidewalk Landscape Zone, Sidewalk Clear Zone, and Sidewalk Supplemental Zone including intervening driveways. 
1.  Sidewalk Landscape Zone: The portion of a Sidewalk Area adjacent to the street curb and reserved for the placement of trees, groundcover, and street furniture including utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, traffic control boxes, tree grates, newspaper boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
2.  Sidewalk Clear Zone: The portion of a Sidewalk Area that is reserved for pedestrian passage and is unobstructed by permanent objects to a height of eight (8) feet, including but not limited to, steps and stoops, traffic control boxes, and utility structures. The Sidewalk Clear Zone shall be adjacent and between the Sidewalk Landscape Zone and the Sidewalk Supplemental Zone and shall have a consistent cross-slope not exceeding two (2) percent. 
3.  Sidewalk Supplemental Zone: The area between the back of the Sidewalk Clear Zone and the Build-To Line. Adjacent to Storefront Treatments, Sidewalk Supplemental Zones may be used for pedestrian amenity elements such as benches, merchandise display, potted plants, and decorative fountains. Outdoor dining is permitted only when adjacent to eating and drinking establishments. Elements that are prohibited in the Supplemental Zone include: recreational areas and facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts; fences and walls greater than forty (40) inches in height; service elements such as dumpsters, loading docks and similar elements; mechanical features; and parking. Public access may be restricted only for areas adjacent to Residential Treatment, and for outdoor dining areas when adjacent to Storefront Treatments. No element shall be attached to the Sidewalk Supplemental Zone in any way. 
    Sign: The term "sign" means and includes every device, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, logo, stroke, stripe, trademark or reading matter, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information when the same is placed out of doors in view of the general public. Also, the above, when near the inside surface of a window in such a way as to be in the view of the general public and used or intended to be used to attract attention or convey information to the public. 
    Sign Face: That portion of the surface of a Sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the Sign has been erected or placed. The Sign face may be composed of two (2) or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by portions of a Sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, including but not limited to, channel letters. 
    Sign Height: The vertical distance to the highest point of a Sign structure. The height is measured from the top of the nearest adjacent curb or edge of pavement if a curb does not exist. 
    Site: Means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the Development project is located. 
    Slope: Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree. 
    Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan: An Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan approved in writing by the District. 
    Special Flood Hazard Area(s) (SFHA)/Special Flood Hazard(s) (Also see Area(s) of Special Flood Hazard(s)): Means the land subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of Flooding in any given year. This includes all Floodplain and Flood prone areas at or below the Base Flood Elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all Floodplain and Flood prone areas at or below the Future Conditions Flood Elevation, and all other Flood prone areas as referenced in Chapter XIII of this Ordinance. All Streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater shall have the Area of Special Flood Hazard delineated. 
    Spot Light Illumination: Illumination which comes from lamps, lenses or devices designed to focus or concentrate the light rays of the source. 
    Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation and/or mulch or other ground cover and/or in combination with installing temporary or permanent Structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Start of Construction: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a Building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include excavation for a Basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory Buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as Dwelling Units or not part of the main Building. For a Substantial Improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a Building, whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the Building. 
    State General Permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for Stormwater Runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
    State Waters: Any and all rivers, Streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
    Storage Yard: The keeping, in an unroofed area of any goods, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
    Storefront Treatment: An architectural treatment that: 
1.  Is provided on the sidewalk level of a Street Facade of flat roofed buildings. Buildings with gabled roofs shall use Residential Treatment. 
2.  Provides Habitable Space for a minimum of the first twenty (20) feet in depth behind the Street Facade. 
3.  Provides a street level facade consisting of: 
a.  A non-glass base or knee wall below all windows beginning at grade and extending to a point no less than eight (8) inches but not more than twenty-four (24) inches above the Sidewalk Area at the Build-To Line. Knee wall may be waived when directly abutting a private patio. 
b.  A combination of glass display windows and doors covering a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the length of the built portion of the Build-To Line beginning at the top of the bulkhead or knee wall, to a height not less than ten (10) feet and not more than twelve (12) feet above said Sidewalk Area at the Build-To Line below the base of the window. Such glass shall provide views into display windows that have a minimum depth of two and one-half (2.5) feet into and are accessible from the building interior for retail uses only. 
c.  Primary pedestrian entrances on the Street Facade recessed a maximum of seven (7) feet from the exterior facade, remain unlocked during normal business hours, and have a surface area that is a minimum of seventy (70) percent glass. All other doors located along street frontage shall be of a character that matches with the surrounding downtown area. 
d.  A glass transom located along the Street Facade of a structure above the glass display window and entry door shall have a minimum height of twenty-four (24) inches and a maximum height of thirty-six (36) inches. 
e.  Provides no length of facade exceeding twenty (20) feet without intervening glass display windows or glass doors. 
4.  A non-glass sign band area located above the glass transom having a minimum height of thirty-six (36) inches. The sign band area is the area between the top of the transom window and cornice line. 
5.  A cornice line above the sign band a minimum height of eight (8) inches. 
6.  Street address numbers, a minimum of six (6) inches in height located above the primary pedestrian entrance. 
7.  Sidewalk level drop ceiling, if at a lower elevation than the top of the window, shall recess a minimum of eighteen (18) inches from the window opening for retail uses. 
8.  Finished ceiling height shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet. Exterior height of single story buildings shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet as measured at top of parapet. Parapet must enclose all sides of the roof. 
    Street Facade: The exterior wall of a building, not including extruding structures such as porches, stoops or bay windows, that is located along the Build-To Line or street without an intervening building or Street Wall. 
    Street Facade Frontage: The percent of Street Facade required along the Build-To Line. 
    Streets and Sidewalks: A strip of land or access way subject to vehicular traffic and/or pedestrian traffic that provides direct or indirect access to property including, but not limited to, alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives, highways, lanes, places, roads, sidewalks, terraces, trails or other thoroughfares. 
    Street Wall: A wall no less than seventy-five (75) percent opaque built along the Build-To Line and co-planer with the Street Facade, often for the purpose of masking a parking lot from the street. Street Walls shall be a minimum of three and one-half (31/2) feet in height, and constructed of a material matching the adjacent Street Facade or dense evergreen hedge. Street Walls shall be discontinued no more than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. The Street Wall shall have other individual openings not exceeding four (4) square feet in area at height of less than three and one-half (31/2) feet. 
    Stormwater: Stormwater Runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater Better Site Design: Nonstructural site design approaches and techniques as described in the Stormwater Management Design Manual that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for Nonstructural Stormwater Management. Stormwater Better Site Design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and Greenspace, reducing Impervious Cover and using natural features for Stormwater Management. 
    Stormwater Management: The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of Stormwater Runoff. 
    Stormwater Management Design Manual: The current version of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) will provide the primary guidance for the design and evaluation of Stormwater Management Facilities in the City of Woodstock. A copy of the GSMM can be viewed in the Department of Public Works or can be accessed at www.georgiastormwater.com. 
    Stormwater Management Facility: Means constructed or natural components of a Stormwater drainage system, designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions. 
    Stormwater Management Measure: Means any Stormwater Management Facility or Nonstructural Stormwater Practice. 
    Stormwater Management Report: A document to be prepared for every project and sealed by a Professional Engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia describing the nature of Stormwater issues and management strategies associated with the site. The purpose of the report shall be to formulate a plan to manage Stormwater in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, including but not limited to the requirements set forth in the GSMM, so that Stormwater Runoff hazards are not created, existing runoff-related problems are not exacerbated, and Stormwater quality is not adversely effected, either upstream or downstream from or within the boundaries of the Property being developed. 
    Stormwater Management System: The entire network of natural and constructed facilities and practices for the storage, treatment, and conveyance of Stormwater Runoff. 
    Stormwater Quality Site Development Review Tool: A spreadsheet tool available from the Public Works Department specifically designed to meet the unified sizing and water quality performance criteria outlined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. Use of the tool is one (1) of the pre-construction review requirements for New Development and Redevelopment in the City. 
    Stormwater Retrofit: A Stormwater Management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no Stormwater Management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the Stormwater Management requirements of the site. 
    Stormwater Runoff: The direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff that enters a Stormwater conveyance system or other concentrated flow during and following a precipitation event. 
    Story, Half (1/2): A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and floor surface not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is finished off for use. 
    Story: That portion of a Building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it, provided that a room, suite, or story, with more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade shall not be considered a story for the purposes of height regulations, and provided further, that a room, suite, or story, having part but not more than half of its height below grade shall be considered a story for the purpose of height regulations only if said room, suite, or story shall be subdivided and used for business, or shall be used for dwelling purposes by other than a member of the household or a janitor, servant, or watchman employed on the premises. 
    Stream(s): Any Stream, beginning at: 
1.  The location where the normal Stream flow has wrested the vegetation. The normal Stream flow is any flow that consists solely of base flow or consists of both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. Base flow results from the groundwater that enters the Stream channel through the soil. This includes spring flows into Streams; or, 
2.  A point in the Stream channel with a drainage area of twenty-five (25) acres or more; or, 
3.  Where evidence indicates the presence of a Stream in a drainage area of other than twenty-five (25) acres, the Public Works Department may require field studies to verify the existence of a Stream. 
    Stream Bank(s): The sloping land that contains the Stream channel and the normal flows of the Stream. 
    Stream Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of State Waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Stream Buffer Protection Area: With respect to a Stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and Setbacks applicable to such Stream as designated in Chapter XVII. 
    Stream Channel: The portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the Stream. 
    Streamer. A long narrow strip of material used for ornament or decoration. 
    Stream Protective Covenants: Contracts made between private parties or conditions recorded with an approved Plat or otherwise recorded in the land records of the County in which the property is located and running with the land, specifying the manner in which land may be used, developed, or improved with the view to protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
    Stream Setback: Means, with respect to a Stream, the area established by Chapter XVII, as extending beyond any Buffer applicable to the Stream. 
    Street: A right-of-way for vehicular traffic whether designated as Street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, drive, expressway, boulevard, lane, place, circle, alley, or otherwise. 
1.  Arterials: These roads are designed to carry rapid, continuous traffic to major magnets within the urban area. Routes will usually pass through or near the heart of the city, connecting residential, commercial, industrial and public activity areas. 
2.  By-Pass: A highway designed for fast, continuous movement of all types of traffic between highways and widely separated parts of the urban area. By-passes generally have limited or controlled access and are usually grade-separated at railroads and major crossings. 
3.  Collector Streets: These Streets bring traffic to arterials, or inter-connect arterials. They provide for relatively easy movement at moderate speeds from homes and businesses to arterials. 
4.  Local Streets: These Streets provide direct access to abutting properties. 
5.  Alley or Service Drive: A minor access way used for service access, or property access under specified circumstances, to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a Street. 
6.  Marginal Access Street: A residential Street parallel and adjacent to major thoroughfares or arterial Streets and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
7.  Cul-de-Sac: A local Street or road with only one (1) outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
8.  Half-Street: A Street or road adjacent to a Subdivision tract boundary where only half the required right-of-way and road improvements are provided within the proposed Subdivision and the responsibility for the other half is undecided or is left to the adjacent property Owner. 
    Street Frontage. The distance for which a lot line of a parcel adjoins a public or private street, from one (1) lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street. 
    Streetlight. A light usually mounted on a pole and constituting one (1) of a series spaced at intervals along a public street or highway. 
    Street Line or Right-Of-Way Line: A dividing line between a Lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected which required location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground. The term shall include such things as gasoline pumps, signs, mobile homes, and other portable vehicles or Structures from which products are vended, and similar objects. However, for use in Chapter 13, Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting members of a Building such as bearing walls or bearing partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
    Structural Erosion and Sedimentation Control Practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization Structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Structural Stormwater Control: A Structural Stormwater Management facility or device that controls Stormwater Runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. Criteria for the design and construction of these devices can be found in the Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
    Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more Lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building Development, and includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. For the purpose of this Ordinance the definition of a Subdivision is broken down into three (3) subcategories as follows: 
1.  Exempt Subdivision of Land: Divisions of land which have the following characteristics are exempt from the Subdivision regulations as set forth in this Ordinance: 
a.  Intra-family transfers if no new public streets are involved as long as the Lot is recorded and the deed transferred simultaneously; or 
b.  Sale of property to the, abutting land Owners. 
2.  Minor Subdivisions of Land: Divisions of land containing six (6) or less Lots fronting on an existing road, not involving any new or improved public or private road and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
3.  Major Subdivisions: All Subdivisions not classified as exempt or minor Subdivisions. 
    Substantial Damage: Means damage of any origin sustained by a Structure whereby the cost of restoring the Structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the Structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial Improvement: Means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a Building, taking place during a ten-year period in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the Building prior to the improvement. The market value of the Building should be: a. The appraised market value of the Building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or b. In the case of damage, the value of the Building prior to the damage occurring. This term includes Structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the Building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the Building. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a Building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the City of Woodstock and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
    Substantially Improved Existing Manufactured Home Parks or Subdivisions: Is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of these streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Suspended Signs. A Sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
    Swimming Pools: An outdoor swimming pool shall be any pool or open tank not located within a completely enclosed Building and containing or normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than one and one-half (11/2) feet. 
    Temporary Sign. Any Sign that is used only temporarily and not permanently mounted. 
    Tobacco Specialty Shop: Any premises dedicated to the display, sale, distribution, delivery, offering, furnishing, or marketing of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia including but not limited to the following: pipes, punctured metal bowls, bongs, water bongs, electric pipes, e-cigarettes, e-cigarette juice, buzz bombs, vaporizers, hookahs, and devices for holding burning material. Lighters and matches shall be excluded from the definition of tobacco paraphernalia; provided, however, that any grocery store, supermarket, convenience store or similar retail use that only sells conventional cigars, cigarettes or tobacco as an ancillary sale shall not be defined as a "Tobacco Specialty Shop" and shall not be subject to the restrictions of Chapter VII Performance Zoning Standards. 
    Top of the Stream Bank: Means the point on a Stream's cross-section defined by the bank full elevation or the highest point in elevation immediately adjacent to the Stream channel, whichever is greater. 
    Tourist Courts: Land occupied by one (1) or a group of two (2) or more detached, semidetached or multiple unit Buildings; containing single guest rooms and suites of rooms with or without kitchenettes and equipment, with automobile parking space and incidental utility Structures, which are in connection therewith, all of which is used or designed for, but not necessarily limited to, use primarily by automobile transients, for which daily, weekly, or monthly rates are available. 
    Tourist Court or Motel Apartments: Accommodations within a motel Building or Buildings which feature one (1) or more rooms with cooking facilities designed for, but not necessarily limited to, automobile transients on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis, where everything for the guests' convenience, except food, clothing and medical supplies is furnished as part of the charge. 
    Townhouse: Attached single-family residential structure in which no residential unit is directly above or below another residential unit. 
    Toxic Material: Materials (gaseous, liquid, solid, particulate, or any other form) which are capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction even when present in relatively small amounts. 
    Travel Trailer: A motorized camper, converted bus, tent-trailer or other similar vehicular or portable Structure used or designed for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation, recreation, or other trips and provided with sleeping accommodations. 
    Travel Trailer Park: A parcel or area of land designed and equipped to accommodate travel trailers for short periods of time, not to extend fourteen (14) days. 
    Tri-Vision Sign. A Sign designed with a series of triangular slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three (3) different Sign messages in rotation. For purposes of this Chapter, a trivision Sign is not a Changeable Copy Sign. 
    Trout Streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the Department of Natural Resource's rules for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6, available at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining pollution of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
    Uniformity Ratio: A higher level of illumination in relation to a lower level of illumination within a given target area. A value for either the maximum-to-minimum ratio or the average-to minimum ratio may be required. For example, if the average-to-minimum uniformity ratio is 4:1 for the given target area, the lowest level of illuminance is no less than one (1) divided by four (4) (twenty-five (25) percent) of the average level of illuminance. 
    Usable Floor Space: Floor space used for retail sale or display includes permanent outdoor-sales, but excludes outdoor motor vehicle sales areas. 
    Use, Principal: The primary purpose for which a Lot is occupied and/or used. 
    Variance: A modification of the strict terms of this Ordinance granted by the City Council where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing the conditions peculiar to the property such as irregular Lot size, topographic or other characteristics of the land and not as the result of any action on the part of the property Owner, literal enforcement of this Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. Such modification may not authorize a principal or accessory use of the property, which is not permitted within the Zoning District in which the property is located. 
    Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures: Measures for the Stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
• Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
• Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
• Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
    Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Vehicle for Hire: Any motor vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers for consideration or charges which are determined by agreement, contract, mileage or by the length of time the vehicle is used. Such term does not include vehicles regulated by the state public service commission. For the purposes of this article, vehicles for hire shall mean taxicabs and sedans. 
    Vehicle for Hire Company: An establishment offering to transport passengers for a fee in any motorized or animal drawn vehicle, the charges for which are determined by agreement, mileage or by the length of time for which the vehicle is engaged and also described is a taxi or limousine service. 
    Violation: An act of breaking or disregarding an ordinance or law. However, for use in Chapter 13, a Violation is the failure of a structure to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by the community's floodplain management ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Wall Sign: Any Sign that shall be affixed parallel to the wall or printed on the wall of any building in such a manner as to read parallel to the wall on which it is mounted; provided, however, said Wall Sign shall not project above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the building. 
    Warehouse: A Building provided for the purpose of depository or securing of goods, wares or merchandise. 
    Water Quality: Those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
    Water Quality Protection: Required for all Developments to improve the quality of Storm Runoff from the Development site. Stormwater management systems (which can include both Structural Stormwater Controls and better site design practices) must be designed to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site according to the specifications of the Stormwater Management Design Manual. Additionally, runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the Public Works Department must be adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
    Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, Stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    Watershed: The land area that drains into a particular Stream. 
    Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
    Wholesale Establishment: A use or establishment where at least one-half (1/2) of the goods for sale will not be bought for direct consumption by the buyer, but will be resold. 
    Window Sign: Any Sign placed inside or upon a window. The display of merchandise shall not be construed as a window sign, nor shall any sign located more than 12 inches back from the interior surface of the glass." 
    Yard: An Open Space on the same Lot with a Building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a Structure from the ground upwards, except as otherwise provided herein. 
    Yard, Front: An open, unoccupied space on the same Lot with a principal Building, extending the full width of the Lot and located between the street line and the front line of the most protruding portion of the Building projected to the side lines of the Lot. 
    Yard, Rear: An Open Space on the same Lot with a principal Building, unoccupied except by a permitted accessory Building, extending the full width of the Lot and located between the rear lines of the most protruding portion of the Building projected to the side lines of the Lot. 
    Yard, Side: An open, unoccupied space on the same Lot with a principal Building located between the side of the most protruding portion of the Building and the side line of the Lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Ord. of 10-13-14(1), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. of 3-23-15(1), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. of 5-18-15(1), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. of 7-27-15(1), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. of 1-25-16(1); Ord. of 2-8-16(1); Ord. of 9-12-2016(2), §§ 1-3; Ord. of 9-12-2016(3), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 0003-2017, §§ 1, 2, 7-10-17; Ord. of 10-9-2017(1), § 1; Ord. of 12-15-2017(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 5697-2019, §§ 1, 2, 3-25-2019) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted October 13, 2014, repealed the former Ch. II, and enacted a new Ch. II as set out herein. The former Ch. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 9-12-2011(1), § 1(Exh. A). 

Chapter III - LAND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Sept. 12, 2016(4), § 1(Exh. A), repealed the former Ch. III, §§ 3.100-3.106, 3.200, 3.201, 3.300-3.302, 3.400-3.405, 3.500-3.503, 3.600-3.603, 3.700-3.709, 3.800, 3.801, 3.900-3.905, and enacted a new Ch. III as set out herein. The former Ch. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted June 8, 2015, § 1(Exh. A). 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

3.100. - Administration. 
    This chapter shall be administered by the City Development Process Committee and Community Development Department. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.101. - Purpose, Objective and Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to provide a consistent and orderly process for the development of property within the City, ensuring that both private and public infrastructure are constructed to industry and professional standards, as adopted by the City Council. Additionally, the processes set forth herein seek to minimize the financial and social risk to the City associated with incomplete infrastructure and developments left partially constructed as witnessed through the defaults of the Great Recession. In sum, this chapter seeks to fulfill the plans of the City, set forth by the City Council through comprehensive planning, studies, and policy documents, to ensure the vision is realized in the physical development of the City. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.102. - Recording of Plats. 
    No plat of a subdivision of land within the City shall be recorded by the Clerk of Superior Court of Cherokee County unless the plat has received minor or major plat approval or is an exempt subdivision of land as defined in this Ordinance. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties specified within this chapter of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.103. - Erection of Buildings. 
    No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in the City unless the street giving access thereto has been conditionally accepted as a public street or approved as a private street in accordance with this chapter. This provision excludes model homes permitted for construction through other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.104. - Violations and Remedy. 
    Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable as provided by law. Further, the City shall have the right to withhold building permits and certificate of occupancy wherever there exists a violation of any provision of this Code or any provision of the Code of Woodstock, Georgia, or the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN 

3.200. - Suitability of the Land. 
    Land which the Development Process Committee finds to be unsuitable for development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features which would be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of inhabitants of the land and surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the Development Process Committee, upon recommendation of any staff assistant serving the Development Process Committee and/or other governmental representative, if any, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for such uses as will not involve such a danger. 
    Where the proposed development is in an area designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as a potential flood prone area the developer must comply with all of the provisions of Chapter XIII of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.201. - Conformance to Applicable Rules and Regulations. 
    In addition to the requirements established in this Ordinance, all subdivision plats shall comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, or regulations, including, but not limited to: 
1.  All applicable provisions of Georgia law, regulations, or policy; 
2.  Any adopted plans of the City of Woodstock; 
3.  The rules of the Cherokee County Public Health Department; 
4.  The rules, as applicable, of the Federal Highway Administration or Georgia Department of Transportation, if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a non-local highway; and 
5.  Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with the above rules or with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.202. - Self-Imposed Restrictions. 
    If the developer places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by this chapter, such restrictions or reference thereto shall be recorded, along with the final subdivision plat or at the release of any sureties posted with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.203. - Monuments. 
    The subdivider shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required herein and as approved by a licensed surveyor. Monuments shall be located and set as follows: 
1.  Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines, at street intersections and at the beginning and ending points of curves. 
2.  The external boundaries of the subdivision shall be monumented in the field by monuments of stone or concrete not less than four (4) feet in length; not less than four (4) inches square of five (5) inches in diameter; and marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material securely embedded. These monuments shall be placed not more than two thousand four hundred (2,400) feet apart. 
3.  All lot corners shall be marked by iron rods, pipe, or pins at least eighteen (18) inches long and five-eighths (0.625) inch in diameter. 
4.  The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pins at least eighteen (18) inches long and five-eighths (0.625) inch in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least eighteen (18) inches long. Such pins shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river or stream and lot line, with a meander line established not less than twenty (20) feet back from the bank of the river or stream. 
5.  All monuments and pins shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a surveyor or an engineer engaged in the practice of civil engineering prior to the time the Development Process Committee recommends approval of the final plat or release of the surety where bond is made in lieu of improvements. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.204. - Name of Subdivision. 
    The names of the subdivision must have approval of the Development Process Committee. The names shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision in Cherokee County. 
    Streets or roads that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with, existing named streets, shall bear that name. The names of new streets and roads shall be subject to the approval of the Development Process Committee and shall not duplicate or be similar in sound to existing names used in Cherokee County, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, circle, way, boulevard, drive, place, or court. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.205. - Access. 
    Unless private streets are approved in accordance with the provisions below, access to every major subdivision shall be provided over a public street, including public sidewalks where sidewalks are contemplated or required, dedicated to the City and providing access for ingress and egress and access to all utilities, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, (except in approved septic system developments), stormwater, electricity and, where natural gas is intended to be used, natural gas, to the lots and structures to be located thereon. 
    Private streets and sidewalks may be permitted by the City if an easement plan is submitted to the City and approved granting access to all roads, parking areas, utilities, and any additional infrastructure deemed to be used by the general public or the owners of parcels in the development to the other parcels of the development and the streets and sidewalks unless specifically waived by the Community Development Department as being unnecessary for the reasonable development and use of the property. 
    Access to a subdivision of two (2) parcels or less can be provided by way of an easement provided the conditions outlined below are followed. 
1.  No more than two (2) separate parcels of land may obtain access from an easement. 
2.  The deed of each parcel which is accessed by the easement must contain a clause which states that the access is from an easement that will not be maintained by the City. 
3.  In the event that a third lot is proposed to be developed off of an easement the road must become a public road and developed to the road standards specified in this chapter. 
4.  An access easement must be a minimum of fifty (50) feet in width and have a four (4) inch gravel, or paved surface twelve (12) feet wide. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.206. - Community Assets. 
    In all subdivisions all natural features such as large trees, and water courses, historical spots, and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property should be labeled on any proposed plats and site plans. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.207. - Special Provisions Governing Homeowner Associations. 
    Any development within the City having a homeowners' association should notify the City and register the officers and covenants of the homeowners' association at the time that the homeowners' association is turned over to the neighborhood residents from the project developer. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.208. - Special Provisions Governing Unit Ownership (Condominium) Subdivisions. 
1.  General Provisions. Whenever a developer, the sole owner, or the co-owners of a building or buildings expressly declare through the submission of a master deed, lease, or plat their desire to submit their property to regime wherein there is established a horizontal property regime, each such condominium or property regime created for the purpose of sale or transfer of real property is subject to the provisions of these standards. 
2.  Submission of Plat Required. Prior to the sale of transfer of any property incorporated in the property regime, the developer, sole owner, or co-owners of such property shall submit to the Development Process Committee and obtain their approval of the subdivision plat of such property in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.209. - Multiple/Mixed Use Developments, Industrial and Commercial Land Subdivisions. 
    The platting procedures for these types of development are the same as for other land developments, though the development standards and design may vary. The developers of such proposals are urged to consult early with the staff of the Development Process Committee to coordinate plan and plat preparations properly. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.210. - Stormwater, Utility and Street Improvement Standards. 
    Improvement standards and specifications for all stormwater infrastructure are located in Chapter XIV of this Ordinance. 
    Improvements standards and specifications for all sewer utility infrastructure are located in Chapter VIII of this Ordinance. 
    Improvement standards and specifications for all roadway and street, sidewalks, trails and miscellaneous infrastructure are located in Chapter XV of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE III. - LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 

3.300. - Land Development Permits (LDP). 
    Prior to commencing any site work on a site that has a disturbed area of greater than one-tenth (0.1) of an acre (4,356 square feet). Land development permits (LDP) for such work shall be applied for and obtained from the Community Development Department. Land development permits shall only be issued in conjunction with approved site plans, according to Article VIII of this chapter. 
    Projects that have a disturbed area of less than one-tenth (0.1) of an acre may be required to adhere to the land development process at the discretion of the Community Development Department. 
    A land development permit may include all the work or only a specific phase or phases of the project according to the scope of the permit when issued and the approved site plans on file. 
    An LDP issued by the City may include the following: 
1.  Erosion and Sedimentation Control Permit. An erosion and sedimentation control permit is required for any project which disturbs more than one-tenth (0.1) acre (4,356 square feet). When a notice of intent (NOI) is required by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, the NOI shall be filed no less than fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the issuance of an erosion and sedimentation control permit by the City. A copy of the NOI shall be provided to the City by the permit holder upon request. 
2.  Clearing and Grubbing Permit. A clearing and grubbing permit is required for any project which disturbs more than one-tenth (0.1) acre (4,356 square feet). 
3.  Stormwater Management Facility Permit. A stormwater management facility is required for any project that includes the construction, modification, or alteration of a stormwater management facility. This includes but is not limited to detention ponds, underground vaults and water quality enhancement devices. 
4.  Underground Infrastructure Permit. An underground infrastructure permit is required for any project that includes the construction, modification or alteration of an underground stormwater, water and sanitary sewer system. This includes but is not limited to piping. 
5.  Pump Station Permit. A pump station permit is required for any project that includes the construction, modification or alteration of a sanitary sewer pump station. 
6.  Above-Ground Infrastructure Permit. An above-ground infrastructure permit is required for any project that includes the construction, modification, or alteration of roadways and associated infrastructure. This includes but is not limited to roadway, curb, gutter, catch basins and sidewalks. 
7.  Multi-Use Trail Permit. A multi-use trail permit is required for any project that includes the construction, modification, or alteration of multi-use trails (greenprints) within existing or proposed public right-of-way, or any multi-use trail located within an existing or proposed easement to be maintained by the City. This shall not include any multi-use trail that is located outside existing or proposed public right-of-way, or which is not maintained by the City. 
    The fees for land development permits shall be subject to the most current fee schedule, which is held on record at the Office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1) 
3.301. - Pre-Construction Meeting. 
    Prior to the issuance of land development permits, a pre-construction meeting is required to be held between the City and the contractor for the proposed work. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.302. - Inspections. 
    Inspections for all site work are conducted by the Public Works and the Community Development Departments. Inspections shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the Public Works and the Community Development Departments. Authorized representatives of the City shall have access to the site for inspection at any time. 
    A list of all required inspections is held on file with the Public Works and the Community Development Departments and is available upon request. 
    All work not in accordance with the approved site plans and the ordinance of the City, including but not limited to the City Land Development Ordinance, shall be corrected by the contractor in a timely manner. Corrections not made in a timely manner shall result in charging of violation fines according to the most current fee schedule and a stop work order may be issued by the City. Upon issuance of a stop work order, all work within the scope of the project shall cease until the work has been corrected to the satisfaction of the Public Works Department and Community Development Department. 
    Any violations associated with erosion and sedimentation control measures are specifically addressed in Chapter IV of the City Land Development Ordinance. 
    A final inspection of all construction shall be made before conditional acceptance of the work and before the start of the one (1) year maintenance period. The completed work shall be checked for compliance with the approved site plans and the regulations of the City, including but not limited to the City Land Development Ordinance. All unacceptable work shall be corrected. If the work has been satisfactorily completed and all requirements of this chapter have been completed, a letter of conditional acceptance shall be issued by the Public Works and the Community Development Departments. 
    Within the last thirty (30) days of the maintenance period outlined in Section 3.503, an inspection for final acceptance shall be made. The work shall be corrected and upon acceptance, the Public Works Department shall issue a letter of final acceptance. Any sureties subject to expiration prior to final acceptance must be extended until final acceptance of the site by the City. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.303. - As-Builts Required. 
    Prior to the conditional acceptance of any work, as-builts shall be provided to the City for all improvements which are to become publicly maintained. This includes but is not limited to a stormwater management facility and the design engineer's certification of the facility. Three (3) sets of hard copies shall be provided to the City along with CAD files. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE IV. - SUBDIVISION LOT DESIGN STANDARDS 

3.400. - Previously Approved Subdivisions. 
1.  Unexpired Preliminary Approval. The approval granted on any preliminary plat prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall remain in force and effect for the time period stipulated by the regulations under which the approval was first granted. 
2.  Expired Preliminary Approval. In any instance in which the period of preliminary approval, within a twenty-four (24) month time period, shall have passed with some portion of the subdivision not having received final approval, and the applicant wishes an extension of the preliminary approval, the Development Process Committee may: 
a.  Permit the remaining portion of the subdivision to be constructed and to receive approval under provisions set forth in the regulations whereby preliminary approval was originally granted; or 
b.  Stipulate that the plat is null and void and that a new plat be presented subject to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
    In making this determination, the Development Process Committee shall consider all pertinent facts available to it, including reviewing phases individually. The current state and active pursuit of construction and development activities within the subdivision shall be given due consideration in the course of the Development Process Committee's deliberation of the question. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.401. - Lots. 
    All lots, which shall hereafter be established in connection with the development of a subdivision, or combination of parcels, shall comply with the following design standards unless the zoning standards for the area are more stringent in which case the more stringent standards shall take precedence: 
1.  Lot Lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines. 
2.  Jurisdictional Limits and Lot Lines. Lots shall not be divided by City or County boundary lines. 
3.  Lot Frontage Arrangements. The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot with direct abutting access to an existing public street or to an approved street contained within the proposed subdivision. Each lot must front for at least eighteen (18) feet upon an approved street or road. (See Panhandle or Flag Lots below.) 
4.  Adequate Building Sites. Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements, buffers, or building setback lines required by this Ordinance and any existing ordinance as is appropriate. 
5.  Panhandle or Flag Lots. "Panhandle" or "flag" lots, of required width and area will be allowed where terrain makes standard design or frontage impossible or impractical. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle access shall not be less than twenty (20) feet wide and the panhandle access shall be no more than three hundred (300) feet long. Not more than two (2) such panhandle access points shall abut each other, and if so combined, the width of each panhandle may be reduced to not less than fifteen (15) feet. 
6.  Lot Grade to Street Grade. Any lot whose natural grade at the building line is twelve (12) feet or more above the finished grade of the street on which it fronts, may be required to be provided with an approved access way to the lot from other than the street upon which it fronts. 
7.  Setback Lines. The building setback lines shall conform to the zoning standards for the area as outlined in the Land Development Ordinance. 
8.  Lot Width. The minimum lot width at the building setback line shall be as outlined in the applicable zoning district if specified. 
9.  Lot Area. Subdivision lots which are served by individual water and individual on-site sewage management systems shall have a minimum lot size as outlined in Table I. The lot area of subdivision lots having central water and sewer shall be as established in the appropriate zone district. 
10.  Commercial and Industrial Lots. Except as established in the zoning standards of this Ordinance, size, shape, and arrangement of commercial and industrial lots, where platted and classified as a subdivision as herein defined, shall be subject to the approval of the Development Process Committee. 
11.  Corner Lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently large to permit the location of building so as to conform to the minimum building setback requirement on both streets. 
12.  Lot Remnants. Lot remnants shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
TABLE I 
MINIMUM LOT SIZES FOR SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USE, IN SQUARE FEET, UTILIZING CENTRAL WATER AND SEPTIC TANK SYSTEMS 
Slope Soil Grouping* CLASS Slope % 1 2 3 4 5 AB 0-5 15,000 19,500 24,000 25,500 30,000 C 5-15 16,500 21,000 25,500 27,000 33,000 D 5-25 18,000 22,500 27,000 28,500 N/A E 25-35 19,500 24,000 28,500 30,000 N/A  
*Refer to Appendix II. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.402. - Easements. 
    Easements shall be provided in subdivisions for the following purposes: 
1.  Utility Easements. When it is found to be necessary and desirable to locate public utility lines in areas other than the street right-of-way, or outside any private roadway, easements shall be shown on the plat for such purposes. Such easements shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in width and shall be centered over the primary water and/or sewer lines if applicable. 
2.  Water Course and Drainage Easements. Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, or stream, appropriate provisions shall be made to accommodate storm water and drainage through and from the proposed subdivision. Such easements shall conform substantially to the lines of said water course and be of sufficient width or construction, or both, as to be adequate for the purpose. Easements shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet width centered on the drainage way. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE V. - SURETY FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

3.500. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide surety to the City that required public infrastructure improvements shall be performed and maintained according to the ordinances of the City for future public acceptance and maintenance. An applicant should complete all public infrastructure improvements prior to recording a final plat, however, in lieu of completion a surety may be posted for the following: aboveground infrastructure, sidewalks, landscape, stormwater management facilities, pump station, and erosion control, at the discretion of the Public Works Department and Community Development Department. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.501. - Surety Modification Requirements During National and Local Economic Distress. 
    During any period of national or local economic distress, Mayor and City Council may modify surety requirements, declaring an economic emergency by resolution in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
    Mayor and City Council may choose to declare an economic emergency based on any one (1) of the following indicators: 
1.  The number of permits issued for single family residential units declines by thirty (30) percent or more during two (2) separate and consecutive quarters in a twelve (12) month period; or 
2.  The number of certificates of occupancy issued for single family residential units is thirty (30) percent or higher than the number of permits issued for single family residential units during two (2) separate and consecutive quarters in a twelve (12) month period; or 
3.  Impact fee revenue declines fifteen (15) percent or more during two (2) consecutive quarters or thirty (30) percent or more within a twelve (12) month period; or 
4.  Real and personal property taxes decline twenty (20) percent or more during a twelve (12) month period. 
    By declaring an economic emergency, Mayor and City Council may include the following provisions as circumstances dictate: 
1.  Immediate suspension of the acceptance of bonds as a form of surety for public infrastructure improvements; 
2.  In communication with the applicant, set forth a schedule for the completion of required public infrastructure improvements; 
3.  Authorizing the withholding of certificates of occupancy, building permits, final plat recording, and site plan approval to ensure the timely completion of public infrastructure improvements; 
4.  Any modifications to this chapter necessary to complete the installation of public improvements and minimize the risk of default. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.502. - Guarantee of Improvements, Installation Required. 
    Before approving any subdivision phase or land development plat for recording, the Development Process Committee shall require that the City be assured by means of proper financial security that the improvements required by this chapter will be installed in strict accordance with the standards and specifications of this chapter. 
    Surety required by this chapter shall stand as security for compliance with all City ordinances, other laws, covenants, stipulations, conditions and resolutions applicable to the subdivision or land development for which it is filed. 
    In any case, no construction of buildings or sale of any individual lot or condominium unit within a subdivision or land development shall take place unless: 
1.  There is on file, with the City, current duly executed and approved surety; or 
2.  All rough grading is complete and all required public improvements, utilities, streets, drainage facilities, sewers and any street lights have been completed and accepted by the Development Process Committee. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.503. - Improvements to be Provided by the Applicant. 
    The applicant for a subdivision shall have the primary responsibility to ensure installation of all improvements required by this chapter, unless the Development Process Committee specifically approves certain improvements being made the responsibility of future purchasers of individual lots. 
    The Development Process Committee shall make such inspections of the required improvements at such intervals as may be reasonably necessary to assure compliance with this chapter. The reasonable cost of such inspection shall be borne by the subdivision or land developer. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.504. - Forms of Surety. 
    Surety established for the completion of required public improvements (performance surety) and maintenance of completed public improvements shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Except for roadway infrastructure, including the final topping of asphalt, the surety shall be secured by any of the following: 
a.  A bond which shall be subject to approval and acceptance by the Director of Community Development on forms approved by the City Attorney; or 
b.  An escrow account designated and maintained by the City; or 
2.  All roadway infrastructure improvements, including the final topping of asphalt, shall only be guaranteed with funds provided to an escrow account, designated and maintained by the City. 
3.  Such approved surety shall provide for, and secure to the public, the completion of any improvements which may be required within the date fixed in the development schedule for the completion of such improvements. It is the responsibility of the developer to ensure that such surety remains in effect during the entire time period of construction of improvements. The Development Process Committee may withhold or suspend the issuance of permits if such surety lapses. 
4.  Acceptable bonds shall be rated by standards set forth by Mayor and City Council from time to time and posted with an approved institution or entity authorized to conduct such business within the state of Georgia. 
At any point, the Development Process Committee, the Planning Commission, or City Council, may require that evidence be provided that such institution or entity has adequate and sufficiently secure assets to cover the surety. 
5.  Designated City officials shall be the authorized signatory on any account in which the escrow funds are held. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.505. - Completion of Unapproved Improvements. 
    The developer shall satisfactorily complete any required improvements that the City determines are not satisfactory or complete. Upon completion, the applicant may request approval in conformance with the procedures specified herein. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.506. - Amount of Surety. 
    The amount of the surety to be posted for the completion of the required improvements shall be equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the cost of completion at the time the improvements would otherwise be installed. 
    The cost estimate of the improvements shall be established by engineer's estimate, subject to review and approval by the Director of Public Works and Director of Community Development. 
    Inflation. If the developer posting the surety requires more than one (1) year from the date of posting the surety to complete the required improvements, the amount of the surety may be increased by a maximum of an additional ten (10) percent for each one (1) year period beyond the first anniversary date from the posting of financial security or to an amount not exceeding one hundred ten (110) percent of the cost of completing the required improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one (1) year period by using the above procedure. 
    Inspection Fees. The amount of surety may also be required to include five (5) percent of the estimated cost of completion of the work to guarantee payment of inspection fees and related engineering costs. 
    Multi-Year or Multi-Stage Development. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the Development Process Committee, and/or the City Council may authorize submission of final plans by phases/stages of development subject to such requirements or improvement guarantees concerning future improvements as it finds necessary for the proper functioning of each phase and for the eventual development as a whole. Such phasing may also be approved through an agreement and negotiations with the Development Process Committee. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.507. - Time Limits. 
    All performance sureties submitted according to this chapter shall include at least one (1) of the following: 
1.  Surety documents that lack an expiration date stating that the funds shall be released only upon approval by the City. 
2.  Surety documents that do contain an expiration date include a clause which states that the surety shall automatically renew and funds shall not be released until approval by the City. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.508. - Notice by Developer of Work on Improvements. 
1.  The developer or his/her representative shall provide a minimum of three (3) day notice to the City prior to beginning each major phase of construction, in order to allow the scheduling of inspections. 
2.  When an improvement has been completed, the developer shall notify the City and request release of related surety in writing by certified mail. The developer shall send a copy of the letter to the City Manager and the Director of Community Development at the same time. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.509. - Certificates of Occupancy and Completion of Improvements. 
    A final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued and a structure shall not be occupied unless all principal buildings have been inspected and approved by the building official. No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued until the structure is completed as approved with service by all required utilities and with all access on to a street completed to required standards. 
    In addition, all external projects related to a development must be completed before the final plat is recorded or if phased, the last final plat. This includes, but is not limited to roadway connections, trails, traffic signals, etc. A timeline for the completion of these external projects shall be based on the size of the project and set by the Development Process Committee, and/or the Mayor and City Council. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.510. - Schedule of Improvements, Release of Surety. 
    In a residential subdivision, once eighty-five (85) percent of the fee simple units fronting a street are constructed or once the traffic count on any roadway proposed as a public improvement exceeds five hundred (500) vehicles per day, all incomplete infrastructure improvements shall be installed, including but not limited to asphalt topping, sidewalks, stormwater infrastructure, landscaping, and lighting. 
    Upon completion of improvements, the Public Works Department will inspect and verify the satisfactory completion of each improvement in compliance with approved plans and the Land Development Ordinance. Upon approval by the Public Works Department of the satisfactory completion of the improvement, the applicant will be notified and the 12-month maintenance period will begin, in accordance with Section 3.511. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.511. - Maintenance. 
    A maintenance surety in compliance with Section 3.504 at a minimum amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or any amount equal to at least ten (10) percent of the actual construction improvement total cost, whichever is greater, shall be posted with the City by all subdividers or developers where street or other improvements are made and offered to the City for acceptance and maintenance as detailed in this chapter. 
    Twenty-five (25) percent of the actual construction improvement total cost or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is greater, shall be posted with the City by all subdividers or developers where street or other improvements are made requiring bridges, box culverts, or pipes with diameters equal to or exceeding forty-eight (48) inches, and offered to the City for acceptance and maintenance. 
    Once notified by the Public Works Department of satisfactory completion, the improvements will enter a twelve (12) month maintenance period and the surety will remain posted. 
    Should a subdivider or developer elect to complete and install all public infrastructure improvements and not post a performance surety, a maintenance surety shall be established prior to recording a final plat at a minimum amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or any amount equal to at least ten (10) percent of the actual construction improvement total cost, twenty-five (25) percent of the actual construction improvement total cost or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), whichever is greater, shall be posted with the City by all subdividers or developers where street or other improvements are made requiring bridges, box culverts, or pipes with diameters equal to or exceeding forty-eight (48) inches. The maintenance surety shall guarantee all improvements against defects in design, material and workmanship and further guarantee that all such improvements shall be maintained in first class condition for the required period and faithful performance by the subdivider or other person of all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.512. - Maintenance Term and Procedures. 
    The subdivider or developer shall maintain all improvements in the subdivision to be dedicated to the City for a minimum of twelve (12) months from the date of written notification by the City commencing the twelve (12) month maintenance period of such improvements and inspection and approval by the Public Works Department of the method of installation. No dedication of improvements shall be accepted by the City until the expiration of twelve (12) months from such date and inspection and determination by the Public Works Department at the expiration of such time that all the improvements are in first class condition and meet all specifications and requirements under this chapter and Land Development Ordinance. 
    At the end of the maintenance period, the Public Works Department may inspect the development, and shall inspect at the written request, submitted at the end of the tenth month of the maintenance period or thereafter prior to expiration of the maintenance period, by the subdivider or developer. If the improvements to be dedicated are free from defects and comply with City specifications and requirements under this chapter, dedication of the improvements shall be accepted by the City. The subdivider or developer shall be notified in writing of the acceptance and any surety shall be released. 
    If upon inspection the Public Works Department determines that work or repairs are needed in order for the improvements to meet City specifications or requirements, the subdivider or developer shall be notified in writing by the department of the deficiencies, failure to comply or violations. Thereafter, the subdivider shall have sixty (60) days from receipt of such notification to correct such deficiencies, noncompliance or violations. If the deficiencies, noncompliance or violations are not corrected within such time, then the surety shall be forfeited and called upon up to the cost of the repairs or the total amount of the surety. Should the amount of the surety be inadequate to pay for the cost of correcting the deficiencies, noncompliance or violations, then the subdivider shall pay any and all costs beyond bond coverage. 
    The subdivider shall pay to the City for each inspection, subsequent to the initial inspection provided under this section, a reinspection fee in an amount set from time to time by resolution of the City Council to defray the cost of reinspection. A copy of the schedule of reinspection fees shall be maintained by the Community Development Department. 
    If a period of eighteen (18) months elapses from the commencement of the maintenance period for any subdivision and defects, noncompliance or violations still exist to the extent that the subdivision has not been accepted by the City, the Community Development Department, is authorized to withhold the issuance of any and all permits or to refuse inspection to any subdivider or person on the project in dispute or any other project in which the subdivider or person may have a financial interest, or both, who violates or fails to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.513. - Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements. 
    In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final site plan or final plat, or in the event of the bankruptcy of the owner or developer, the City is hereby granted the power to elect to enforce any surety posted under this chapter by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. This may include taking all actions necessary to obtain money under said surety, including, but not limited to calling bonds, seizure of escrow funds, revocation of building permits and prosecution under this chapter. 
    Rate of Construction. Failure of a developer to construct streets and other public improvements reasonably at the same time or prior to the construction of the buildings served by those streets or public improvements, and at the same rate in time at which buildings are completed, shall be a violation of this Ordinance and a cause for default of the surety. 
    All required public infrastructure improvements shall be completed within two (2) years from the record date of the final plat. The City Council reserves the authority to grant an extension, upon written request by the applicant. At the conclusion of the two (2) year period and any extensions granted by City Council, should public improvements remain incomplete in accordance with the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance, the applicant is in default and all remedies within this section may be exercised. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.514. - Completion by the City. 
    If the proceeds of such security are insufficient to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered by said security, the City may at its option install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the money necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.515. - Proceeds for Installation of Improvements. 
    The proceeds from use of the security and/or from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such security and closely related administrative expenses. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE VI. - PLAT TYPES 

3.600. - Plat Approval for Minor Subdivisions. 
    Minor subdivisions of land, regardless of zoning district, are classified as divisions of and containing six (6) or less lots fronting on an existing road; not involving any proposed public infrastructure improvements, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter. The following procedures are required to secure subdivision approval of minor subdivisions: 
1.  Submit a plat in compliance with the Land Development Ordinance and provisions of this chapter accompanied by a legal description. 
2.  Submit applicable review fees. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.601. - Plat Approval Procedure for Major Subdivision. 
    Major subdivisions of land are classified as all divisions of land not classified in Section 3.600. Such divisions shall include but not be limited to subdivisions of seven (7) or more lots or subdivisions of any size requiring any new or improved road. The subdivider shall follow the procedure described below in order to secure major subdivision plat approval: 
1.  Pre-application conference on the subdivision with the City staff, generally including a sketch plat, and discussion of the proposed area(s) to be subdivided. 
2.  Submit the necessary information to the appropriate departments, authorities or agencies for their review and preliminary approval. 
3.  Submittal of a preliminary plat prepared in accordance with this chapter for Development Process Committee approval. 
4.  Securing the approval of the required public improvements or an acceptable surety. 
5.  Submission of a final plat prepared in accordance with this chapter for Development Process Committee approval. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.602. - Official Submission Date. 
    The subdivider shall submit the major subdivision plat to the Community Development Department a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days prior to the meeting of the Development Process Committee at which the subdivider desires Development Process Committee action. This time is necessary for an administrative review of a plat. The subdivider is encouraged to submit his plat as early as possible so that if during the review process a deficiency is found the subdivider may be notified and can correct the deficiency before the Development Process Committee meeting. 
    The Development Process Committee shall review each plat submitted to it. The Development Process Committee shall, within thirty-one (31) days after submission of the plat by the developer conditionally approve, or disapprove the plat by a vote. The failure of the Development Process Committee to act upon a plat within the prescribed time shall be deemed a denial of the plat. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE VII. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

3.700. - Application Submission Procedure. 
    The purpose of a sketch plat (see illustration number 1) and the pre-application conference with the Community Development Department is to permit the subdivider to discuss the concept and proposed design. The Community Development Department at the time can point out any factors, which may have an impact on the proposed development and to advise the subdivider of various possibilities before substantial amounts of time and money have been invested in a very detailed proposal, which may contain elements contrary to this Land Development Ordinance. 
    The subdivider shall file with the Development Process Committee a preliminary plat. The failure of the subdivider to satisfy the requirements of this section with full and correct information shall be cause for disapproval of a preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with Section 3.702 and: 
1.  Be presented to the staff of the Development Process Committee; 
2.  Be accompanied by a minimum of six (6) copies of the preliminary plat and supporting documentation; and 
3.  In the event that the subdivider plans to secure approval of his subdivision layout by the Federal Housing Administration, it is suggested that such approval be secured prior to the submission of a preliminary plat to the Development Process Committee. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.701. - Preliminary Plat Review Procedure. 
    The subdivider is encouraged to have a pre-application conference with the Community Development Department to understand which departments will need to review and approve various elements of the preliminary plat. The Community Development Department will coordinate the review of the plat along with making their own review. 
    After the preliminary approval comments from the various departments and agencies have been received by the Community Development Department, they shall notify the subdivider not less than five (5) days before the meeting of the time and place where the Development Process Committee shall review the plat and take action thereon. The Development Process Committee may approve, conditionally approve, or deny approval of the plats submitted. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.702. - Specifications for Preliminary Plat. 
    The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor, landscape architect or civil engineer. Depending on the magnitude of the proposed development, it may be necessary to show the required information on more than one (1) sheet. The plat shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one hundred (100) feet to an inch and include where applicable: 
1.  Proposed subdivision and street names; 
2.  Name and address of subdivider; 
3.  Preliminary plat certificates, Section 3.600; 
4.  Graphic scale, north point, date, total acres being subdivided and zoning district; 
5.  A location map including all land which the applicant proposes to subdivide and all land immediately adjacent, extending three hundred (300) feet therefrom, or of that directly opposite thereto, extending three hundred (300) feet from the street frontage of such opposite land. The lot pattern of surrounding development shall be shown within that area located within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed development; 
6.  The location and dimensions of all exterior boundaries lines, existing rights-of-way, easements, streams, drainage structure, buildings, lakes, etc.; 
7.  Topography by contours: 
a.  For land that slopes less than approximately two (2) percent show spot elevations at all breaks in grade along all drainage channels or swales and at selected points not more than one hundred (100) feet apart in all directions; 
b.  For land that slopes more than approximately two (2) percent: 
i.  If the ground slope is regular show contours with an interval of not more than five (5) feet, or 
ii.  If the ground slope is irregular show contours with an interval of not more than two (2) feet, and 
c.  Elevations shall be tied to a bench mark which is approved by the City; and 
8.  The proposed layout and dimensions of lots, street, recreation areas, easements (whether public or private); and 
9.  The calculations used in determining the drainage area and size of each drainage tile shall be submitted as an attachment to the plat. 
10.  Labeling of utilities and all public infrastructure for dedication to the City. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A) 
ARTICLE VIII. - SITE PLAN 

3.800. - Pre-Application Procedure. 
    A pre-application meeting will be required to be held between the applicant and the Community Development Department prior to the submission of any land development plans, including but not limited to preliminary plats and site plans. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.801. - Application Submission Procedure. 
    The applicant shall file with the Community Development Department site plans in accordance with the standards within this chapter and set forth by the Community Development Department. Fees required for submission and resubmission are subject to the most current fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.802. - Site Plan Review Procedure. 
    The failure of the developer to satisfy the requirements of this chapter and the requirements of the Development Process Committee with full and correct information shall be cause for disapproval or refusal to review the site plans. 
    The Development Process Committee shall review the site plan and issue a determination of approval or denial within thirty (30) business days of submittal. If the site plans are denied, the Development Process Committee shall provide a list of comments to be addressed by the applicant upon resubmission of the site plans. The applicant must respond to each comment and specify on which page of the site plans the changes appear. 
    The failure of the City to act on any completed submission of site plans within thirty (30) business days after the City's receipt of the plans shall be deemed a denial of said site plans. 
    The applicant may resubmit a revised site plan in the event that the original document is denied by the Development Process Committee. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. 
    After the site plans have been approved, the applicant shall provide approved hard copies to the Community Development Department upon request. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.803. - Specifications for Site Plans. 
    Unless otherwise instructed by the Community Development Department, six (6) complete sets of site plans shall be submitted for review, accompanied by a complete electronic copy on CD or USB drive. Complete sets means all required sheets, accompanied by other documents including but not limited to hydrological studies, traffic studies, etc., in compliance with this chapter and the Land Development Ordinance. Each resubmittal shall comply with the same requirements. Partial, incomplete or unassembled submittals shall be rejected. 
    Below is a list of the specification requirements that need to be included within every site plan. This checklist should be included in ALL construction plans that will be submitted to the City. 
CHECKLIST FOR CONSTRUCTION PLANS: 
DATE: 
PROJECT NAME: 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION (brief): 
LOCATION: 
DEVELOPER: 
ENGINEER: ______ PHONE #: __________ 
Please return this checklist and red lined copy of plans when revised plans are submitted. Checklist marks to be interpreted as follows: 
__________ O.K. _________ Revision Required __________ Not Applicable 
__________ Additional Information Required 
ALL PLANS MUST INCLUDE: 
A. GENERAL 
? Name of Developer 
? Owner or Developer's: Name, Address, and Phone Number 
? Graphic Scale 
? Scale no less than one (1) inch = one hundred (100) feet 
? North point, identified as magnetic, true or grid 
? Date 
? Location sketch and show land lot lines 
? Acreage to be subdivided 
? Stamped by Surveyor or Engineer-All drawings 
B. EXISTING CONDITIONS 
? Topographic map showing contour interval of no more than two (2) feet. Soil Survey required prior to final submittal for Health Department. 
? Zoning Classification of property to be subdivided and adjoining properties. 
? Deed record names of adjoining property owners or subdivision. 
? If re-subdivision, copy of existing plat with proposed re-subdivision superimposed thereon. 
? Location of: Streams, lakes and swamps. Label with names. 
? Delineate lakes subject to flooding from past history of flooding or by hydrological calculation: One hundred (100) years. 
? Location of adjoining property lines. 
? Location of existing buildings on property to be subdivided. 
? Location and right-of-way of adjoining streets, roads or railroads, on or adjacent to property: pavement width. 
? Location of utility lines and/or adjacent property. Specify if lines are in easement or right-of-way. Show transmission towers. 
? Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts, etc. on or adjacent to property. Grades and inverts of sewers shown. 
? Acreage of each drainage area affecting property: off-site. 
? Elevations based on mean sea level: where public water or sewer to be installed. 
? Source of elevation datum. Show on-site bench mark. 
? Boundary information: Bearing and distances, property tie-down. 
? Hydrology study. 
C. PROPOSED CONDITIONS 
1. STREETS: 
? Detail entrance street with dimensions of the turning radii to be twenty-five (25) foot minimum radius back of curb. 
? Proposed names or designations. 
? Acceleration/deceleration lanes at entrance if applicable. 
? Continuation of existing streets: where possible. 
? Typical road section for proposed roads. 
? Sidewalks are required of developments. 
? No half-streets. 
? No three (3) street intersections. 
? Angle between the centerlines at intersections greater than or equal to seventy-five (75) degrees. 
? Minimum tangent of one hundred (100) feet for curved streets at intersections. 
? Minimum tangent of one hundred (100) feet for reverse curves. 
? Street jogs at intersections offset at least one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
? Curb and gutter shall be required on all paved streets except residential subdivision of five (5) acres or larger. 
? Minimum right-of-way: 
Arterial One hundred (100) feet Major Collector Eighty (80) feet Minor Collector Sixty (60) feet Minor Residential Fifty (50) feet  
? Minimum pavement width: 
Arterial As may be required Major Collector Twelve (12) foot lanes with curb and gutter Minor Collector Twenty-eight (28) foot with curb and gutter Minor Residential Twenty-four (24) foot with curb and gutter  
Or as otherwise determined by the City Engineer and/or the Downtown District Standards 
? Maximum Grades 
Arterials Seven (7) percent Major Collector Twelve (12) percent Minor Collector Twelve (12) percent Minor Residential Sixteen (16) percent  
? Minimum Horizontal Curve Radius 
Major Four hundred seventy-five (475) feet Collector Two hundred fifty (250) feet Local One hundred seventy-five (175) feet  
? Minimum Sight Distances 
Arterial Two hundred seventy-five (275) feet Major Collector Two hundred (200) feet Minor Collector Two hundred (200) feet Minor Residential Two hundred (200) feet  
(Note: Sight distance is measured between points two (2) feet above road centerline). 
? Alley right-of-way twenty (20) feet minimum. 
? Maximum two-to-one (2:1) slope indicates on road cross section. 
? Curb and gutter indicated. 
? Pavement: Plant mix, triple surface treatment or concrete. 
? Profile of proposed street showing existing and finished grades. 
? Minimum ten (10) foot shoulder for utility installation. 
? Street grades and elevation check. 
? Adequate stationing information shown: plan and profile. 
? Street lighting. 
2. LOT LAYOUT: 
? Scaled lot dimensions. 
? Building setback line, or build to line in downtown. 
? No lots fronting major U.S. highways. 
? No lots divided by corporate boundary lines. 
? No double frontage lots. 
? Lot lines at ninety (90) to street or radial. 
? Corner lots large enough to conform to minimum building setback on both streets. 
? All lots front or abut public street, unless the street stays private. 
? Minimum lot width. 
? Minimum lot areas. 
? Block Lengths: one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet maximum, four hundred (400) feet minimum. 
? Minimum block width sufficient for two (2) tiers of lots. 
3. STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: 
? Detail or reference DOT structures. 
? Drainage area and flow indicated to all inlets and cross drains. 
? Design flood frequency and method of calculations of runoff indicated. 
? Inlet and outlet elevations: pipe slope, profiles required. 
? Station: size and length of pipe. 
? Minimum pipe cover. 
? Concrete headwalls or flare sections on smaller diameter pipe on inlet and outlet. 
? Minimum design floods. 
? Catch basins located at low points of streets. 
? Erosion and sediment control measures shown. 
? On-site stormwater detention design. 
? Drainage easement along watercourses and for pipes and ditches out of road right-of-way. Recommended drainage easements on all lot lines. 
? Flood plain reference. 
4. WATER DISTRIBUTION: (NOTE: Moratorium on 1120 and above) 
? Pipe size. 
? Material of construction. 
? Minimum cover: forty-two (42) inches. 
? No lot farther than five hundred (500) feet: measured in the street: from a fire hydrant: residential. 
? Fire hydrant and water service shall be installed within three hundred (300) feet of proposed structures. 
? Meters shown for each lot. 
? Utility easement: minimum twelve (12) feet wide: where waterline located out of road right-of-way. 
? Tie-ins with existing lines indicated. 
? Thrust restraint indicated. 
? Note: Compaction equipment to be used on all pipes and services under pavement. 
? Tape and wire all plastic pipes and services. 
? Provide gate valve and minimum of thirty-six (36) feet of pipe with removable plug at end of line in phased development. 
? Ductile iron pipe over all X-drains, stream crossings and road crossings. 
5. SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM: 
? Minimum diameter of eight (8) inches. 
? Minimum cover: four (4) inches under roadways and three (3) feet off street. 
? Minimum slope in feet for eight (8) main is 0.40%. 
? Drop manholes required if greater than one (1) foot differential in invert and incoming pipe. 
? Manhole spacing normally at three hundred fifty (350) feet, at grade changes, at alignment changes and at all intersections. 
D. URBAN DESIGN PLAN: 
? Building elevations which shall be appropriately scaled and identify materials and color schemes. 
? Lighting plan showing a photometric survey, which conforms to Ch. 15 or Ch. 19 in the LDO, and cut sheets showing proposed fixtures and poles which must be compliant with Ch. 15 and Ch. 19 of the LDO. 
? Tree preservation plan including all requirements from Ch. XII of the City of Woodstock's Land Development Ordinance and be signed/stamped by a registered landscape architect. 
E. ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS: 
? Any and all other requirements as determined by the Community Development Department. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE IX. - FINAL PLAT 

3.900. - Prerequisites to the Submission of a Final Plat. 
    Before a final plat is submitted to the Community Development Department or review one (1) of four (4) criteria must have been met. These criteria are: 
1.  No public improvements are necessary on the part of the subdivider; 
2.  The proposed public improvements which were approved in the preliminary plat have been completed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
3.  A surety has been posted with the Community Development Department; 
4.  All necessary improvements for access, utilities and storm water have been completed for the area defined by the final plat if they are to be maintained in part or total as private. All underground power and gas service (if used) shall be run for a minimum of twenty (20) lots, or the entire phase, whichever is less, prior to plat sign-off by the Development Process Committee. Power and gas are not required to be "active" at time of final plat, but line must be stubbed for each unit/building. Phone and cable are not required to be installed as prerequisite to final plat sign-off. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.901. - Public Road Dedication. 
    In all major subdivisions as defined in this chapter the City shall require that the following items be completed for any and all road dedications to the City: 
1.  All plats shall clearly state that the right-of-way(s) as referenced on the plat are dedicated to the City. 
2.  Performance sureties shall be posted according to this chapter. 
3.  The subdivider, at its sole cost and expense, must provide the City with a road dedication deed as well as a current attorney's certificate of title or current title policy for all roads to be dedicated. Said certificate or title policy shall be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney, and shall show that the property which is the subject of the road dedication deed is free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. 
4.  Upon submittal of these items to the City and approval of the plat, deed(s) and requisite title documents, the Development Process Committee shall review the dedication documents, certify that the requisite dedication process has been satisfied and authorize recording of the plat and applicable dedication deed(s). 
5.  Upon acceptance by the Development Process Committee and subsequent recording of the plat and road dedication deed, the roads as referenced on the plat vest with the City, and the City will be deemed to have accepted the road dedication deed without further action by the Mayor and Council. 
6.  Notwithstanding the foregoing recording of the plat and requisite road dedication deed, the subdivider shall remain responsible for maintenance of all roads until the final road acceptance process has been satisfied according to Section 3.405. 
7.  No dedication of a road may be withdrawn unless the City Council refuses to accept the road for future maintenance after being requested to do so as set forth in Section 3.405. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.902. - Application Procedures, Requirements. 
    The subdivider shall file with the Community Development Department a final plat. The failure of the subdivider to satisfy the requirements of this section with full and correct information shall be cause for disapproval of a final plat. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with this article and: 
1.  Be presented to the staff of the Development Process Committee within two (2) years from the date of the preliminary plat was approved, and meet all of the requirements outlined in this article. 
2.  Be accompanied by a minimum of six (6) complete sets of the final plat and all supporting documentation required in this article. 
3.  Be submitted a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days prior to the meeting of the Development Process Committee at which the subdivider desires Development Process Committee action. 
4.  All private and public infrastructure must be installed as outlined in Article V, or surety posted. The subdivider must contact the Public Works Department for an inspection of the site to evaluate the completion of construction. Subdividers must complete all non-surety bound construction prior to the approval of a final plat. 
5.  All planned open space and common areas with the scope of the final plat area must be completed prior to the approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.903. - Specification for Final Plats, Combination Plats, and Condominium Plats. 
    This section governs all specifications of final plats for property subdivision, including combination plats for assemblages of property, and condominium plats. 
    The final plat shall be prepared by a surveyor, landscape architect or civil engineer who is licensed to practice in Georgia, affixing the respective seal, signed and dated. The plat shall be drawn at a scale no smaller than one hundred (100) feet to an inch and shall include: 
1.  Name of subdivision and street names; 
2.  Name, address and license number of surveyor; 
3.  Be drawn in permanent ink on reproducible material to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet on a sheet or sheets not exceeding seventeen (17) by twenty (20) inches; 
4.  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point, notation as to the reference of bearings and indication whether bearing shown are calculated from angles turned or taken from compass readings; 
5.  Location of tract (land district and land lot) giving total acreage; 
6.  Location sketch; 
7.  Index map where more than one (1) sheet is required to present plat; 
8.  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street intersections or bench marks or other recognized permanent monuments (not less than three (3)) which shall be accurately described on the plat; 
9.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth (0.01) foot and angles to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one (1) to five thousand (5,000). The error of closure shall be stated on the plat; 
10.  City, county or land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse the subdivision; 
11.  Street center lines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data, width of roadway, right-of-way width, and easement width and whether public or private; 
12.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth (0.01) foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners; 
13.  Building setback lines, any zoning buffers, with dimensions, or note indicating none required, as applicable; 
14.  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically; 
15.  Location, dimensions and purpose of all drainage structures and of any easements; including slope easements, and public service utility right-of-way lines, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and limitations; and of any areas to be reserve by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners; 
16.  Accurate location, material description of monuments and markers; 
17.  Places for final plat certificates and statements as specified in Article VI (a separate plat cover sheet for all but the Development Process Committee certificate is recommended); 
18.  Declarations of covenants and restrictions applicable to the subdivision; and 
19.  A copy of the deeds for dedication of public areas to the appropriate public agency(s), if applicable; 
20.  Zoning information including the current zoning district and all applicable zoning conditions, variances, and/or conditional use permits. The adopted ordinance, or final letter in the case of variances, shall be provided on the final plat; 
21.  Certificates for the final plat shall be provided as follows: 
a.  Owner's acknowledgment: 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the City of Woodstock for the use of the public forever, all streets, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements and public places hereon shown for the purpose and consideration herein expressed. 
_____ 
Date _____ 
Owner or Duly Authorized Agent  
b.  Engineer's certificate: 
It is hereby certified that all engineering requirements of the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance have been fully complied with. 
_____ 
Date _____ 
Georgia Professional Civil Engineer No.  
c.  Surveyor's certificate: 
I hereby certify that the plan shown and described hereon is a true and correct survey made on the ground under my supervision, that the monuments have been placed as shown hereon, and is to the accuracy and specifications required by the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance. 
_____ 
Date _____ 
Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No.  
d.  Final Plat approval by the City of Woodstock Development Process Committee: 
This plat having been submitted to the City of Woodstock Development Process Committee and having been found to comply with the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance, including but not limited to Article III Land Development Standards, along with any applicable approved zoning conditions or variances, now therefore is approved for recording in the office of the clerk of superior court of Cherokee County, Georgia. This final plat approval does not constitute the final acceptance by the City of Woodstock of the improvements proposed to be dedicated to the City. 
_____ 
Date _____ 
Chairperson, Development Process Committee  
e.  Certificate of approval of water system: 
I hereby certify that the water system outlined on the final subdivision plat entitled, "___" has been installed in accordance with the requirements of the City of Woodstock, or surety has been filed to guarantee said installation. 
_____ 
Date _____ 
City of Woodstock Public Works Director  
f.  Certificate of approval of sewer system: 
I hereby certify that the sewer system outlined on the final subdivision plat entitled, "___" has been installed in accordance with the requirements of the City of Woodstock, or surety has been filed to guarantee said installation. 
_____ 
Date _____ 
City of Woodstock Public Works Director  
g.  I hereby certify: 
(1)  That all designated streets and drainage structures on this final plat have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to the specifications of the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance, or 
(2)  That surety has been filed to guarantee said installation. 
_____ 
Date _____ 
City of Woodstock Public Works Director  
h.  Certification of county health officers (only on plats to be served by septic tanks): 
This plat has been approved for individual septic tank systems, and individual septic tank permits will be issued on receipt of individual plat plans, showing the septic tank system in a suitable place on the lot. (Not binding after three (3) years.) 
Dated this _______________ day of ________/________/________, 19_________. 
_____ 
Date _____ 
County Health Officer  
i.  Final plat revisions: 
Revisions to the recorded final plat shall be approved by the Chairperson of the Development Process Committee. All changes shall be noted on the recorded plat with a statement of what revisions were made. 
Sample: "This plat supersedes the plat recorded in Plat Book _________, page ________. The revisions made are: ____ 
  
Approved by: _____________________ 
Chairperson, Development Process Committee 
Date  
Revision of an approved plat shall be submitted to the subdivision administrator with a fee in the amount established by the board of commissioners per plat for approval and recording. 
22.  In addition to the above requirements, condominium plats shall also include: 
a.  Limits of ownership; 
b.  Finished floor elevation of each floor in each building; 
c.  Copies of floor plans and elevations with the finished floor elevation labeled to match plat and site plan (as applicable). 
d.  Must contain a verified statement, sealed by a Georgia registered architect or professional engineer, certifying that such plat fully and accurately depicts the layout, location, ceiling and floor elevations, unit numbers and dimensions of the units, as built. 
23.  Three (3) sets of as-builts (full-size sheets), including CAD files provided electronically. 
24.  Any and all other requirements as determined by the Community Development Department. The Community Development Department may waive some of the above requirements wherein public infrastructure is not included as part of the subdivision of property. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.904. - Final Plat Approval. 
    Once the final plat review is complete, having addressed all comments issued by the Development Process Committee departments, the applicant shall submit three (3) final sets for execution. Thereafter, the plat will be placed on the agenda of the Development Process Committee for consideration. Upon approval of the Development Process Committee, the Chairperson of the Development Process Committee and Public Works Director will affix respective signatures on the three (3) final plat sets, enabling recording of the final plat with the Cherokee County Clerk of Courts. 
    Upon recording the final plat, the applicant shall submit no fewer than thirteen (13) copies of the recorded final plat to the Community Development Department, accompanied by electronic copy on CD or USB drive. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.905. - Vacating of Plats. 
    Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premise, at any time before the sale of any lot described therein, by a written instrument, to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the plat or part of the plat to be vacated. The same procedure, which is followed for the approval of a minor subdivision, shall be followed for the vacation of the plat. Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged, or approved, and duly recorded or filed; the instrument shall operate to void the recorded plat and divest all public rights in the public ways and public grounds and all dedications laid out or described in such plat. When any lot or lots have been sold the plat may be vacated in the manner herein provided only if all the owners of lots in such platted area join in the execution of such writing with approval from the City Council required. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
3.906. - Dedication and Acceptance. 
    Once a plat is recorded, any improvements dedicated to the City may not be withdrawn except in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. Upon final acceptance at the end of the maintenance period, all dedicated improvements shall be deemed accepted by the City without further action. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 

(Ord. of 9-12-2016(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter IV - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL STANDARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A), repealed the former Ch. IV, §§ 4.100-4.1000, and enacted a new Ch. IV as set out herein. The former Ch. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 7-12-2010(2). 

4.100. - Title. 
    This Ordinance will be known as "City of Woodstock, Georgia, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.200. - Definitions. 
    All defined terms throughout this chapter are capitalized, and the definitions are contained in Chapter II of this Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.300. - Exemptions. 
    This Ordinance shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
1.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968." 
2.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
3.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work fences, and other related activities which result in soil erosion; 
4.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in Section 4.400 of this Ordinance and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provision of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout Streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such Buffer zone, no Land-Disturbing Activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal Stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the Buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout Stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are Streams into which no other Streams flow except for springs, the Buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a small Buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of Section 4.400 of this Ordinance and the Buffer zones provided by this Section shall be enforced by the Local Issuing Authority. 
5.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to chickens, hens, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
6.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer as established in Section 4.400, paragraph 3, subparagraphs (o) and (p) of this Ordinance, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
7.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
8.  Any project involving less than one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of an acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one-tenth ( 1/10 ) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any State waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent Streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one-tenth ( 1/10 ) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the Local Issuing Authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1 through 7, 9 or 10 of this Section; 
9.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any County or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of Department of Transportation or State Tollway Authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the State General Permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the State General Permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violation shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
10.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the State General Permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
11.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.400. - Minimum Requirements for Erosion and Sedimentation Control Using Best Management Practices. 
1.  Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this Ordinance shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of Sections 4.400.2 and 4.400.3 of this Ordinance. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities, and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES General Permit. Construction site operators must control waste, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality. 
2.  Minimum Requirements/BMPs. 
a.  Best management practices as set forth in Section 4.400, paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Ordinance shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of Best Management Practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (b) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge or stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
b.  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where Best Management Practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local Issuing Authority or of any State General Permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
c.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local Issuing Authority or of any State General Permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
d.  The Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
e.  The Local Issuing Authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in Section 4.400, paragraph 3, subparagraphs (o) and (p), in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
3.  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this Chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the State general permit; and Best Management Practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
a.  Stripping of vegetation, regarding, and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
b.  Cut-fill operation must be kept to a minimum; 
c.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
d.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented; 
e.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
f.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
g.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
h.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
i.  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of Continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
j.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
k.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
l.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
m.  Grading equipment must cross flowing Streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
n.  Land-Disturbing Activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in Section 4.400.2b of this Ordinance. 
o.  Except as provided in paragraph (p) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal Stream flow or wave action, or from the normal pool surface elevation for ponds and lakes, except where the Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the Director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream that (1) under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; (2) has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; (3) for which ground water is not a source of water; and (4) for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted, as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet, established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12 of the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the Director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
1.  No Land-Disturbing Activities shall be conducted within a Buffer and a Buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all Land-Disturbing Activities on the construction site are completed. Once the Final Stabilization of the site is achieved, a Buffer may be handed thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the Stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may hand thin or trim vegetation in a Buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the Stream bed; and 
2.  The Buffer shall not apply to the following Land-Disturbing Activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the Stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the Buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented; (a) Stream crossings for water lines; or (b) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
p.  There is established a fifty-foot Buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal Stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any State Waters classified as "trout Streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and Streams classified as trout Streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot Buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the Buffer requirement for any adjacent trout Streams. The Director may grant a variance from such Buffer to allow Land-Disturbing Activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such Buffer: 
1.  No Land-Disturbing Activities shall be conducted within a Buffer and a Buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all Land-Disturbing Activities on the construction site are completed. Once the Final Stabilization of the site is achieved, a Buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the Stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a Buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the Stream bed; and 
2.  The Buffer shall not apply to the following Land-Disturbing Activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, with twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the Stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the Buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (a) Stream crossings for water lines; or (b) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
4.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in Sections 4.400.2 and 4.400.3. of this Ordinance. 
5.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 003-2017, §§ 3, 4, 7-10-17) 
4.500. - Application/Permit Process. 
1.  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The Local Issuing Authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this Ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
2.  Application Requirements. 
a.  No person shall conduct any Land Disturbing Activity disturbing one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of an acre or greater within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Woodstock, Georgia without first obtaining a Permit with the City of Woodstock, Georgia to perform such activity and providing a copy of the NOI submitted to EPD, if applicable, to the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
b.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City of Woodstock, Georgia and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in this Chapter. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provision of Section 4.400, paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Ordinance. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four (4) copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10. 
c.  A fee shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. The fee shall be in accordance with the latest edition of the fee schedule for the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
d.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the State General Permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the Permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a Local Issuing Authority in the jurisdiction. 
e.  Immediately upon the receipt of an application and plan for a Permit, the Local Issuing Authority shall refer the application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The District shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the District to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the Issuing Authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variance required by Section 4.400, paragraph 3, subparagraphs (o) and (p) and bonding, if required as per Section 4.500, paragraph 2, subparagraph (g), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the Local Issuing Authority and the District have entered into an agreement which allows the Local Issuing Authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised Plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the Local Issuing Authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
f.  If a permit applicant has two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this Ordinance Section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date filing of the application under consideration, the Local Issuing Authority may deny the permit application. 
g.  A bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable Letter of Credit, of any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit is required, unless a variance has been granted by the City of Woodstock's Environmental Manager and is submitted at the time of issuance of the Land Disturbance Permit. If applicant does not comply with this Ordinance or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the Local Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an Ordinance or statute specifically providing for a hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the Local Issuing Authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
3.  Plan Requirements. 
a.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Section 4.400, paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Ordinance. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this Ordinance. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological, and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local Ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
b.  Data required for Site Plan shall include all the information required form the appropriate Erosion. Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted (see documents section of www.gaswcc.org ). 
4.  Permits. 
a.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the Local Issuing Authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
b.  No permit shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the District and the Local Issuing Authority has been affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this Ordinance, any variance required by Section 4.400, paragraph 3, subparagraphs (o) and (p); are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per Section 4.500, paragraph 2, subparagraph (g); are met and all regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
c.  Any land-disturbing activities by a Local Issuing Authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this ordinance, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the Division shall enforce such requirements upon the Local Issuing Authority. 
d.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
e.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the Local Issuing Authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this Ordinance. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
f.  The Local Issuing Authority may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 003-2017, §§ 5, 6, 7-10-17) 
4.600. - Inspection and Enforcement. 
1.  The City of Woodstock will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the Local Issuing Authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the State General Permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that the person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this Ordinance, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this Ordinance. 
2.  The Local Issuing Authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
3.  The City of Woodstock shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in the Ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
4.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of Issuing Authority, the Commission, the District, or Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representation while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
5.  The Districts or the Commission or both shall periodically review the actions of Counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The District of the Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any County or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the County's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The Districts or the Commission shall notify the Division and request investigation by the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
6.  The Division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county of municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a Local Issuing Authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a Local Issuing Authority. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.700. - Penalties and Incentives. 
1.  Failure to Obtain a Permit for Land-Disturbing Activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this Ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person may be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Issuing Authority. 
2.  Stop-Work Orders. 
a.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this Ordinance, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violations is not corrected within five (5) days the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
b.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the Director or the Local Issuing Authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
c.  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
d.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a Stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his/her designee, have been or are being discharged into State waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the Local Issuing Authority or by the Director or his/her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
3.  Bond Forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in Land-Disturbing Activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one (1) under the provision of Section 4.500, paragraph 2, subparagraph (g). The Issuing Authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it to compliance. 
4.  Monetary Penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this Ordinance, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this Ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director issued as provided in this Ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of County Ordinances, any Magistrate Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this Ordinance under County Ordinances approved under this Ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation, or failure, or refusal to comply continues shall be separate violation. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.800. - Education and Certification. 
1.  Persons involved in Land Development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any Land-Disturbing Activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, as per O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(a)(1), dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission in consultation with the Division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
2.  For each site on which Land-Disturbing Activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the State General Permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of Erosion and Sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever Land-Disturbing Activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any Land-Disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of Development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the State General Permit. 
3.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a State General Permit but otherwise requiring Certified Personnel on site may contract with Certified Personnel to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
4.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of Land-Disturbing Activities for a site has met the certification requirements of Paragraph (1) of Subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in Land-Disturbing Activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in Paragraph (4) of Subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
4.900. - Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review. 
1.  Administrative Remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification, or grant with condition of a permit by the Local Issuing Authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to an appeal as outlined in Chapter 10, Section 10.162 of this ordinance. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order, as it relates to this Chapter, may appeal in writing, as outlined in Chapter 10, Section 10.162, of this Ordinance. 
2.  Judicial Review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Issuing Authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Cherokee County. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 003-2017, § 7, 7-10-17) 
4.1000. - Effectivity, Validity, and Liability. 
1.  Effectivity. This Ordinance shall become effective on the 1st day of July, 2010. 
2.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this Ordinance. 
3.  Liability. 
a.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this Ordinance, nor the compliance with provisions of this Ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the Issuing Authority or District for damage to any person or property. 
b.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
c.  No provision of this Ordinance shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any Waters of the State as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 9-12-2011(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter V - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
    The regulations and standards herein established are made for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community. They are designed to promote desirable living conditions; to sustain the stability of neighborhoods; to protect property again blight and depreciation; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; to prevent overcrowding of land; to secure safety from fires, flooding, and other dangers; and to lessen congestion in the streets. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL INFORMATION 

5.200. - Location, Site, and Design Criteria. 
1.  Application of Article. The provisions of this article shall apply to all mobile home parks throughout the City of Woodstock. Before an applicant initiates any construction or development of a proposed mobile home park, or expansion of an existing mobile home park, said applicant shall first submit a proposed mobile home park plan to the Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission pursuant to the requirements of Article IV of this chapter. The Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission will subsequently review and recommend approval or disapproval of the proposed mobile home park, as specifically provided in the following sections of this chapter. 
2.  Park Planning, Site Design, and Development Criteria. All mobile home parks shall be planned, designed, and developed to meet or exceed conditions and factors conducive to the creation and maintenance of a healthful and safe residential environment. This should be done in such a manner that the quality of the overall environment is optimized and the amenities, facilities, services, and conveniences for the residents are maximized. To achieve these conditions, the design of the park should also be adaptive to the tract of land and its surroundings, especially with respect to topography, trees and vegetation, visual conditions, adjacent land uses, structures and activities. In border to meet these goals, objectives, and purposes, all mobile home parks shall meet or exceed the criteria contained in this chapter. 
3.  Site Grading and Drainage. Mobile home parks shall be properly graded and drained to provide adequate drainage of each space and the entire park. Any necessary drainage improvements shall be installed according to plans and specifications approved by the City Engineer. 
4.  Minimum Mobile Home Space and Yard Requirements. In order to ensure adequate space for privacy, normal and emergency access, natural light, air, and human circulation, and a healthy and safe environment, the following area and yard requirements shall be provided for each mobile home space in a park. 
a.  Minimum of sixty (60) feet in width with a minimum lot area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet per individual mobile home space. 
b.  There shall be a twenty-foot side yard and a twenty-foot clearance between mobile homes, including mobile homes parked end to end. 
c.  No mobile home shall be located closer than twenty (20) feet to any building or street within the park, or twenty-five (25) feet of any public right-of-way and any boundary line of the park. 
5.  Improvements to Mobile Home Spaces. 
a.  Each mobile home space in a park shall have a permanent concrete pad to support the mobile home. The size of the pad shall be equal in length and width to the size of the mobile home located upon it. 
b.  The chassis of each mobile home shall be affixed securely to the concrete pad, which shall meet minimum requirements of the Georgia State Building Code. 
c.  Each mobile home space shall be clearly delineated on the ground with permanent markers such as steel pipes at the intersection of lot lines. Each space shall be given a lot number and marked accordingly to be visible from the street providing access thereto. 
d.  The base of the mobile home shall be covered with appropriate skirting, in conformity with the exterior material of the unit. 
6.  Parking. Each mobile home space shall be provided with two (2) off-street paved parking spaces. Such spaces shall be provided on or adjacent to each mobile home space. 
7.  Signs. Any sign must conform to the requirements and provisions contained in Chapter VI of this Ordinance. In addition: 
a.  The park may be identified by one (1) sign located at the primary entrance to the park site, not to exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area for the purpose of denoting the name of the mobile home park. 
b.  One (1) sign, not to exceed one (1) square foot in area, may be permitted for each mobile home. Said sign shall indicate only the name and address (or lot number) of the occupant of the mobile home. 
c.  No sign shall be located so as to impede vehicular visibility at any intersection of streets or the intersection of driveways and streets. 
8.  Streets, Utilities, and Refuse Collection. All mobile home parks shall provide street maintenance, utilities, and refuse collection facilities that shall be used by all mobile homes within the park. The quality, design, and location of all such systems shall be done in such a manner so as to maximize the health and safety of occupants and users, and shall conform to the following: 
a.  Streets and Access. All mobile home parks shall be provided a street system designed to provide convenient circulation within the park, and shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
1.  All internal mobile home park streets shall be constructed with a base and pavement surface which meets the minimum standards of Woodstock Subdivision Regulations. All streets shall be paved to a minimum uniform width of twenty-four (24) feet from back of curb to back of curb. 
2.  All streets within the mobile home park shall be maintained in a good state of repair by the owner of the park. 
b.  Street Lighting. All interior drive and walkways within the mobile home park shall be lighted at night with electric lamps spaced at intervals of no more than one hundred fifty (150) feet. Such lighting shall meet the minimum requirements of the Georgia State Building Code. 
c.  Electrical Supply. Each mobile home space shall be provided with an electrical outlet supplying a minimum of 120/240 volts AC to one hundred (100) amperes. All outlets and connections shall be grounded and weather-proofed, and installations shall meet the requirements of the Georgia State Electrical Code. 
d.  Water Supply. All mobile home parks shall be required to provide an adequate, safe, and porable supply of water that is easily accessible for maintenance and meets the following minimum requirements. 
a.  All mobile home parks shall connect to an existing public water system that is adjacent to or nearby the mobile home park. 
b.  Each mobile home space shall be provided with at least one (1) water riser located and arranged to permit convenient attachment to the mobile home. Riser pipes shall extend at least four (4) inches above grade and have a minimum inside diameter of three-fourths inches. 
e.  Sewage Disposal and Treatment. All mobile home parks shall be required to connect to an existing approved public sewer system that is adjacent to or nearby the mobile home park. All mobile home spaces shall be provided with at least a three (3) inch diameter sewer riser pipe which shall extend from the sewer connection to at least four (4) inches above the ground in a vertical position. When lots are unoccupied, the risers shall be securely capped. 
9.  General Requirements. 
a.  Service Buildings. Service buildings such as shelters, restrooms, management offices and storage facilities are permitted in each mobile home park, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Such buildings and their parking areas shall not occupy more than ten (10) percent of the gross land area of the park; 
2.  All service building shall be required to conform to the Georgia State Building Codes. 
b.  Minimum Size of Mobile Homes. No mobile home shall be placed in a mobile home park which has less than seven hundred twenty (720) square feet of floor space or does not contain a built-in bathroom with water closet, lavatory and shower or tub which are in working condition. 
c.  Maintenance of Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Spaces. All mobile homes shall be maintained in a good state of repair and the area shall be kept clean and free from refuse, rubbish, glass bottles, or other unsightly materials. 
Unoccupied mobile home spaces shall be kept clear of debris, and shall not be used as temporary storage or damaged mobile homes, automobiles under repair, appliances, or other similar items. 
d.  Mobile Home Storage. The temporary storage of mobile homes intended for sale or repair shall be confined to mobile home sales lots or warehouses which are separated from the residential areas of the mobile home park. 
10.  Mobile Homes on Individual Lots. 
a.  After the effective date of this Ordinance, any existing mobile home on an individual lot may be continued and maintained. 
b.  No existing mobile home on an individual lot shall be relocated to another site or lot vacated by an existing mobile home. 
11.  Mobile Home Parks. Any mobile home parks existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance shall comply with the provisions of this Ordinance within a period of three (3) years. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 

5.300. - Enforcement and Penalties. 
1.  Development Permits Required. It shall be unlawful to develop, construct, locate, operate, expand, or enlarge any mobile home park, or mobile home on a tract of land outside of an approved mobile home park without first obtaining a mobile home development permit from the Woodstock Building Inspector's Office. 
2.  Inspection of Mobile Home Parks. 
a.  The Health Officer and/or Building Inspector are hereby authorized and directed to make annual inspections to determine the condition of mobile home parks located within the City of Woodstock. 
b.  The Health Officer and/or Building Inspector shall have the power to enter at reasonable time upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
c.  The Health Officer and/or Building Inspector shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all mobile homes and occupants using the mobile home park. 
d.  It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile home parks, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the Health Officer and/or Building Inspector free access to such premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. 
e.  It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such mobile home park or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this Ordinance, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provision of this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

5.400. - Administration of Ordinance. 
    The administration of this Ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission. The provisions of this article are intended as legal guidelines and requirements for the establishment and operation of the administration of this Ordinance. 
    The review and decision of the Planning Commission and City Council shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XI of this Ordinance. 
1.  Permits for Mobile Home Parks. In order to obtain a development permit for a mobile home park, the applicant shall first submit an application and plan to the City Staff according to the following procedures: 
a.  Pre-Application Review. Prior to the submittal of a preliminary plan for the development of a mobile home park, the applicant shall meet with the City Staff for a review of the location, slope, and nature of the proposed mobile home park. 
b.  Submission of Preliminary Plan. Prior to issuance of a land-disturbance or construction permit, the developer shall submit a preliminary plan prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance to the City Planning staff, at least ten (10) business days prior to the regular meeting date of the Planning Commission. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to scale or one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet and include the following information: 
?  Name of proposed park: as well as the name and address of owner and developer; 
?  Date prepared, north arrow, land lot lines, angles, bearing and distances, location and dimensions of proposed streets, mobile home lots, easements, buildings, parking, recreation areas, yards, and other open spaces; 
?  The boundary line of the tract to be developed with accurate linear and angular dimensions; 
?  Sketch or city map showing general location of the proposed mobile home park; 
?  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than five (5) feet; 
?  The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, water courses, railroads, bridges, water mains, sewers, culverts, drain pipe, and public utility easements, both on the land to be developed and on that portion of the land immediately adjoining which abuts the land to be developed, and any other pertinent characteristics of the land; 
?  Names of adjoining subdivisions or the names of record: as well as all adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land; 
?  Utility and drainage plans shall be provided including all information required by the County Health Department, the City Engineer, and City Building Inspector to determine the water, sewer, electricity, refuse collection, and storm drainage improvements will be made and located in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance; 
?  The location, dimensions, and treatment of all required buffer or screening areas; and 
?  Other information required by the Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission to insure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
3.  Approval/Disapproval of Preliminary Plan. The Planning Commission shall have thirty (30) days from the date that the completed application is submitted for review, to recommend to the Woodstock City Council approval or disapproval of the preliminary plan for the proposed mobile home park. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within thirty (30) days shall be deemed approval of such plan. 
4.  Submission of Final Plan. Approval of the preliminary plan by the Woodstock City Council shall authorize the developer to proceed with actual construction and development of the proposed mobile home park. Upon completion of all required improvements, and certification by the City Clerk that surety in a sufficient amount to assure completion of all required improvements has been received, the developer shall submit copies of a final plan for review and approval by the Planning Commission. The final plan shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan and shall meet all requirements of this Ordinance. The Planning Commission shall follow the procedures in Chapter XI for review and approval of the final plan. 
The final plan shall also include the following: 
a.  Certification by a registered engineer or surveyor attesting to the accuracy of the plan; 
b.  Certification by the Cherokee County Health Department that the water and sewerage systems fully meet the requirements of the Health Department; 
c.  Certification by the City Engineer that all streets and storm drainage improvements have been installed, and surety provided therefore, according to the plan; and 
d.  Certification of approval by the Chairman of the Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission. 
5.  Approval of Final Plan. Within thirty (30) days after submission of the final plan together with all required supporting data and certifications, the Planning Commission shall review and approve or disapprove the plan. Failure of the Planning Commission to act within thirty (30) days shall be deemed approval of such plan. 
6.  Development Compliance. At least one hundred (100) percent of each phase of all planned spaces, as well as all streets, utilities, and other required improvements necessary to serve them pursuant to these regulations must be completely constructed according to the mobile home park plan approved by the Planning Commission before the fist mobile home location permit will be issued. 
Failure of the developer or applicant to construct this minimum phase within two (2) years after approval by the Planning Commission shall cause such approval to expire. 
ARTICLE V. - FACTORY-BUILT BUILDINGS/MANUFACTURED HOMES 

5.510. - Definitions. 
    Component: Any assembly, subassembly or combination of parts for use as a part of a building, which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and fire protection systems and other systems affecting health and safety. 
    Industrialized Building: Any structure or component thereof, which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to or destruction thereof. 
    Installation: The assembly of an Industrialized Building on a site, and the process of affixing the Industrial Building, component or system to land, a foundation, footings or an existing building. 
    Manufacture: The process of making, fabricating, constructing, forming or assembling a product from raw, unfinished, or semi-finished materials. 
    Manufactured Home: Class I means a single-family dwelling unit that is constructed in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards and bears insignia issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, or one, if constructed prior to applicability of such standards and insignia requirements, was constructed in conformity with the Georgia State Standards in effect on the date of manufacture. 
    Class II means a unit meeting the requirements of a Manufactured Home Class I and in addition, bears an insignia of the Southern Standards Building Code Congress International (SSBCCI) of Birmingham, Alabama. 
    Modular Home: A factory-manufactured single-family dwelling which is constructed in one (1) or more sections and complies with the definition of "Industrialized Building". 
    Site: The entire tract, subdivision or parcel of land on which the Industrialized Building or Manufactured home is installed. 
    System: Structural, plumbing, mechanical, electrical or fire safety elements, materials or components used separately or combined for use in a building. 
5.520. - Manufactured Homes: Class I. 
1.  Zoning. No Manufactured Home, Class I, shall be installed, used, parked or occupied on any site in the City of Woodstock, except one zoned for mobile home parks, except that such units may be located for sale upon a site properly zoned to a commercial classification which allows such activity. 
2.  Notification to Purchaser. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of a unit of this class to notify any potential purchaser, prior to completion of any sale, of the zoning requirements of paragraph (1) above, and this notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each purchaser at the time of any sale that such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. 
Such signed statement shall be retained by the seller for a minimum of three (3) years from the date of sale, and shall be produced for inspection at any tie between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays established by the City, through any authorized agent appointed by the Woodstock City Manager upon request by the City for inspection. 
5.530. - Manufactured Homes: Class II. 
1.  Zoning and Permits. No manufactured home of this class shall be installed, used, parked or occupied on any site in the City of Woodstock, except one zoned for mobile home parks, except that such units may be located for sale upon a site properly zoned to a commercial classification which allows such activity, unless the following requirements are met: 
a.  An application shall be filed with the City Planning Department for a permit to allow such installation, use and occupancy for single-family purposes on any site zoned for single-family use. Such application shall be on forms specified by the City and shall include such information as is reasonably necessary for evaluation of the request. Such permit must be obtained prior to transportation of the unit to the site. 
b.  In addition to the information requested on the application form, the following documents shall be filed with the application: 
1.  Complete set of design plans as approved by SSBCCI, which should also include a drawing depicting each elevation of the exterior appearance of the unit. 
2.  Plat of the proposed site prepared by a surveyor or engineer registered in the State of Georgia, showing at a minimum, the exterior boundaries of the site, the proposed location of the unit on the site, and side, front and rear setbacks of the unit as proposed to be located measured from the exterior boundaries of the site: 
3.  A fee in an amount determined by the Mayor and City Council and on file in the Planning Department and with the City Clerk; and 
4.  A certificate from an inspector selected or approved by the City certifying that the unit was manufactured in accordance with the SSBCCI approved plans and the building codes in effect for the City at the time of filing the application for the permit (for example: building, heating, air conditioning, plumbing, electrical and other codes). 
c.  The permit herein required shall be in addition to all other permits or requirements of the Ordinances, rules and regulations of the City. 
d.  No action on a request for permit shall be considered by the Mayor and City Council until: 
1.  A sign is posted on the proposed site for a period of no less than fifteen (15) days stating the request action and the date, time and place for the hearing; and 
2.  A hearing is conducted by the Mayor and City Council. 
e.  No permit shall be issued unless the unit, when completely installed as a single-family dwelling unit, will be compatible with the adjacent and surrounding area, especially in size, exterior appearance, front, rear, and side setbacks, and will have no adverse effect upon the value of adjacent property and the surrounding area and will not otherwise be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the City. 
No unit shall be installed on any site unless and until any permit herein required is granted and unless and until all permits for any on-site work to be performed (site preparation, utility and service connections, foundation or any other on-site work) have been obtained from the City. The applicant for any such permits shall pay to the City, at the time of application, its fee for those inspections required for on-site work. Such fees shall not exceed the amount charged for similar inspections and/or permits on conventionally-built structures. 
f.  In addition to obtaining the above permit and prior to occupancy, every such unit which is installed shall be installed on a permanent foundation, which is permanently enclosed and shall have all wheels, axles and hitches removed. 
g.  No unit shall be installed upon any lot or parcel of land which forms a part of a platted subdivision for which a plat has been approved by the City and recorded in the office of the Clerk of Cherokee Superior Court. 
2.  Notification to Purchaser. It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of a unit of this class to notify any potential purchaser, prior to completion of any sale, of the requirements of zoning or the necessity to obtain a permit as set forth in section 5.530.1. This notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each purchaser prior to closing, which such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. Such signed statement shall be retained by the seller and subject to inspection in the same manner as such statements are required to be retained for Class I units. 
5.540. - Industrialized Buildings. 
1.  Permits Required. No industrialized building shall be installed on any site unless and until all City permits for any on-site work to be performed (site preparation, utility and service connections, foundation or any other on-site work) have been obtained. 
2.  Permit Fees. The applicant for any such permits shall pay to the City, at the time of application, its fee for those inspections and/or permits on conventionally-built structures. 
3.  Insignia Requirements. No industrialized building shall be installed or occupied in the City unless it bears an insignia of the Department of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia indicating Georgia State approval pursuant to the Acts of the General Assembly. 
4.  Zoning. No industrialized building shall be erected on any site in the City, nor used for any purpose, unless the site is properly zoned for mobile home parks and unless all other requirements of zoning (setback requirement, building size, etc.) and other ordinances of the City are met, which are applicable to the zoning classification for the site or for the installation. 
5.  Other Ordinances. This chapter does not eliminate the necessity of complying with any Ordinance, Rule or Regulation of the City which relate to matters addressed, investigated and approved by the State of Georgia through its Department of Community Affairs resulting in the issuance of its insignia. 
6.  [Notification of requirements.] It shall be the duty and responsibility of any seller of any Industrial Building to notify any potential purchaser of these requirements prior to completion of any sale. This notification shall be evidenced by a statement signed by each at the time of completion of a sale, which such notification was made prior to completion of the sale. Such signed statement shall be retained and open for inspection the same as for a Manufactured Home Class I, above. 
5.550. - Violations. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or loss of business license of any seller. In addition, any manufactured home or industrialized building erected, constructed, parked, occupied, or used in violation of the terms of this chapter shall be termed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued, and such violation may be subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by the laws of this State, and the industrial building or manufactured home shall be instantly removed from the site. 
    In addition, the terms of this chapter may be enforced by the City or proper City authority authorized by the City Manager by injunction or otherwise. This right to injunctive relief is cumulative and is not to be construed as curtailing the right of any person, firm or corporation, resident, property owner, or other enforcement of this Ordinance or of such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the City in pursuance of this Ordinance. 
Chapter VI - SIGN STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 13, 2017, repealed the former Ch. VI, §§ 6.1.1-6.1.5, 6.2.1-6.2.8, 6.3.1-6.3.3, 6.4.1-6.4.15, 6.5.1-6.5.6, 6.7.1-6.7.8, and enacted a new Ch. VI as set out herein. The former Ch. VI pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

6.1.1. - Findings, Purpose and Intent. 
(a)  The City of Woodstock finds that Signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, Signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of Signs tends to proliferate, with property owners desiring ever increasing numbers and sizes of Signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. In addition, the competition among competing Sign owners for visibility of their Signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the Sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of its idea or identification of its premises. 
(b)  Regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of Signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of Signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the City, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the City's citizens. 
(c)  The purposes of this chapter are to encourage the effective use of Signs as a means of communication within the City; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of Signs on nearby public and private property; to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.1.2. - Interpretation Generally. 
    Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning set forth in this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter, but defined in other City ordinances, shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinances. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Chapter, article and section headings or captions are for reference only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this chapter. 
    Any Sign permitted under this chapter to contain commercial expression may also include noncommercial expression. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.1.3. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter and other Sign regulations contained within the Land Development Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in Chapter II. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.1.4. - Authority for Provisions. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the Georgia Constitution of 1983, the Charter of the City of Woodstock, the general police powers of Woodstock and other authority provided by federal, state or local laws applicable hereto. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.1.5. - Applicability. 
    Signs shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created and maintained in accordance with the physical standards outlined in this chapter and other applicable provisions of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE II. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS 

6.2.1. - Computation of Sign Area. 
(a)  Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this Section 6.2.1, the area of a Sign Face shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, color, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the Sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets other regulations of the City and is clearly incidental to the display itself. 
(b)  Area of Multi-Faced Signs. The area of Signs with more than one (1) Sign Face shall be computed by adding together the area of all Sign Faces visible from any one (1) point. When two (2) Sign Faces are placed back to back, so that both faces are parallel, and when such Sign Faces are part of the same Sign structure and are not more than forty-two (42) inches apart, the Sign Face area shall be computed by the measurement of the larger of the two (2) faces. 
(c)  Area of Monument Signs. The computation of the Sign area of a Monument Sign shall include the entire monument structure, as measured from the top to ground and side to side, including the base of the Sign, upon which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors or other design elements occur. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.2.2. - Signs Allowed Without Permit. 
    The following Signs are allowed on property without obtaining a permit and with the permission of the property owners or the property owner's agent and are not included in the maximum allowable signage on a parcel: 
(1)  Address numerals not exceeding four (4) inches in height in residential districts or eight (8) inches in height in commercial and industrial districts. 
(2)  Flags, provided that no Flag shall exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area in any residential zone or sixty (60) square feet in area in any commercial or industrial zone and shall not be flown from a pole, the top of which is higher than twenty-five (25) feet in any residential zone or forty (40) feet in height in any commercial or industrial zone. The number of Flags allowed shall not exceed four (4) per parcel. Any Flag not meeting any one (1) or more of these standards shall be considered a banner and shall be subject to regulation as such. 
(3)  Any Sign/traffic control device erected by or at the direction of the State of Georgia, any county or any municipality that is necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.2.3. - Mixed Use Districts. 
    Those properties zoned as mixed use under the City zoning regulations shall follow residential district standards for residentially used portions of the development and commercial standards for commercial portions of the development. Where a mix of uses occurs within a single building, such as residential over office or storefront use, the commercial standards of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.2.4. - Private Signs Erected on Public Property. 
(a)  No person shall erect a Sign on public property other than the governmental entity responsible for such property or public utility companies or contractors occupying or working on public property pursuant to governmental contract or franchise. Such public utility companies and contractors occupying or working on public property shall be limited to temporary traffic control signage meeting state specifications for on-going work in street rights-of-way and necessary signage to identify fixtures for public safety response in the event of emergency. 
(b)  Any Sign erected or installed on public property in violation of this section shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation and removal by the City without notice. In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter, the City shall have the right to recover from the owner or person posting such a Sign the full cost of removal and disposal of the Sign. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.2.5. - Prohibited Signs. 
(a)  No Sign shall be erected or continued to be displayed at the intersection of any street or any public right-of-way in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic control Sign, signal or device; or which makes use of the words, "STOP," "LOOK," "DANGER" or other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(b)  No Sign shall be placed or painted on any tree or rock. 
(c)  No Sign shall be placed on any utility pole, light pole, telephone pole, street Sign or similar utility fixtures except as permitted within this chapter. 
(d)  No person shall erect, operate or use any attraction device or Sign that contains a beacon of any type and/or contains a spotlight providing direct illumination to the public. 
(e)  Roof Signs. 
(f)  Signs emitting or utilizing in any manner any sound capable of being detected on a public road or adjoining property by a person of normal hearing. 
(g)  Signs displaying any obscene message as obscenity is defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(h)  Signs which obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation, or prevent free passage from one (1) part of a roof to any other part thereto; Signs attached in any manner to any fire escape. 
(i)  Bandit Signs or any other temporary Signs with the exception of those permitted under Chapter XX of the Land Development Code. 
(j)  No person shall erect, operate or use any pennants, streamers, air or gas filled device as a Sign, except as permitted within this chapter. For the purpose of this Chapter, a balloon twelve (12) inches in diameter or less shall not be considered an air-filled device, except as provided under Chapter XX. 
(k)  No person shall erect attraction devices or continue the operation of any such Signs that revolve, rotate, move or simulate movement or action; provided this restriction does not apply to tri-vision Signs meeting the standards of this Chapter in which the mechanical movement of panels to form new messages conforms to operational standards of state law. 
(l)  No person shall use a vehicle or trailer in such manner as to attempt to circumvent the regulations of this chapter. Vehicles driven and parked within the City limits which are regularly used in the course of business or that are driven to and from a place of business may contain identifying information on the vehicle and may be parked in lots serving the identified business, provided that such vehicle is regularly used for transportation unrelated to signage. Vehicles parked on property located in the City for indefinite periods of time (or moved temporarily and then returned to the same or similar location) and not regularly used in the course of business that contain identifying information shall be considered portable Signs. The use of vehicles to travel the streets and highways conveying billboards or Signs as displays to the traveling public are specifically prohibited. 
(m)  Animated Signs. 
(n)  Electronic Signs, except as provided under Section 6.4.8. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Cross reference- Prohibited Temporary Signs, § 20.204. 
6.2.6. - Owner's Permission Required for Erection of Signs. 
    No Sign shall be placed on any property without first obtaining the written consent of the owner or owner's agent of the property. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.2.7. - Compliance With Technical Codes and Zoning. 
(a)  All Signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, altered, relocated or modified within the City shall conform with the requirements of the building and electric codes adopted by the City. Where the provisions of the building or electrical code and this Chapter conflict or overlap, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. 
(b)  All Signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, repaired, altered or relocated within the City shall conform to the zoning ordinance of the City. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the zoning ordinance, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.2.8. - Maintenance. 
(a)  All Signs erected or posted in the City shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes and in conformance with this chapter, at all times. Except for Banners, Flags, Sandwich Signs (where permitted) and those Signs that may be erected without permit, all Signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure. 
(b)  All Signs and the premises surrounding them shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish, weeds and overgrown grass. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES 

6.3.1. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article apply to all properties zoned single-family residential, properties used for single-family residential occupancy, and townhomes, as well as properties in mixed use or overlay districts designed for single-family residential occupancy. Institutional uses located in single-family residential zones and multi-family residential uses are governed by Article IV, rather than this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.3.2. - Setback Requirements. 
    Signs must be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the pavement edge and be erected in such a manner as to not obstruct the view of motorists or pedestrians. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.3.3. - Common Entrance Signs. 
(a)  The location and size of the structure upon which the Common Entrance Sign will be mounted is subject to approval by the Community Development Director, who will approve such structure upon the dual criteria of construction safety and traffic safety. 
(b)  The maximum Sign Face area of a Common Entrance Sign is thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(c)  Banner may be allowed when attached to a common entrance Sign in accordance with the regulations outlined in Section 20.305 of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL, INDUSTRIAL AND MULTIFAMILY PROPERTIES 

6.4.1. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article apply to all properties zoned for commercial, institutional, industrial and multi-family use, as well as properties in mixed use or overlay districts designed for such uses. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.2. - Street Numbering to be Displayed. 
(a)  Freestanding Signs located within one hundred (100) feet of a public or private right-of-way shall display the street address of the property. Within a commercial center where multiple addresses exist, the highest and lowest street address numbers shall be identified. This section shall not apply to any Freestanding Sign where the Sign is located on a second street frontage for property which has more than one (1) street frontage. 
(b)  Street address numbers shall be of contrasting colors against the background. Numbers shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in height except for properties designated within the downtown zoning district. Upon property designated within the downtown zoning district, numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches and a maximum of eight (8) inches in height. In the Downtown District, the street numbers may be placed on an awning, the building itself or any other highly visible place. Numbers shall be visible from both directions of travel along the street. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.3. - Restrictions on Future Pole Signs. 
(a)  No new Pole Sign shall be erected. 
(b)  No existing Pole Sign shall be extended in height. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.4. - Height, Size and Number Limits for Freestanding Signs. 
    All Freestanding Signs shall be Monument Signs, except as provided Article V and in Chapter XXI of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(a)  Sign Area for Monument Signs shall only be permitted under the following conditions, not exceeding: 
(1)  One hundred twenty (120) square feet for malls, shopping centers, office parks, industrial parks and other shared commercial and industrial multi-tenant spaces. 
(2)  Eighty (80) square feet for single tenant buildings on a parcel, including single institutional uses. 
(b)  Monument Signs shall be limited to one (1) Sign per Parcel per Street Frontage. Where a Parcel has Street Frontage on more than one (1) street, a Monument Sign shall be allowed on each Street Frontage. 
(c)  No Monument Sign shall be erected to a height greater than twelve (12) feet for multiple tenant properties or eight (8) feet for single tenant properties. 
(d)  All Monument Signs are required to have a distinct supporting base upon which the monument Sign is affixed. The supporting base shall be no less than eighteen (18) inches in height, as measured from the top of the footing of the Monument Sign. No Monument Sign base shall be constructed of vinyl, EIFS, metal, or wood. Monument Sign bases shall be faced with decorative masonry or cementitious materials. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.5. - Setback Requirements for Freestanding Signs. 
(a)  Freestanding Signs shall be located outside of any public right-of-way and be setback no less than fifteen (15) feet from the pavement edge and at least fifty (50) feet from any Parcel designed or intended for single-family residential use. 
(b)  No Freestanding Sign shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.6. - Awning Signs. 
    Awning Signs shall not project above the parapet wall and shall not project beyond the building face by more than four (4) feet. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.7. - Projecting Signs. 
    Projecting Signs shall be supported by overhead supports and shall leave a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance over any sidewalk or walkway. Supports for Projecting Signs shall be set at a perpendicular angle to the building and parallel to the plane of the ground. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.8. - Changeable Copy Signs. 
(a)  Any Sign on which the message changes more than eight (8) times per day shall be considered an Animated Sign and not a Changeable Copy Sign for purposes of this chapter. Each rotation or change among two (2) or more messages shall be considered a change of message subject to the eight (8) change per day limitation; provided that tri-vision billboards meeting the definitions of this chapter are not considered Changeable Copy Signs and are subject to the regulations of Section 6.4.6. 
(b)  Changeable Copy Signs are permitted as an integral part of freestanding and Wall Signs in commercial, office and industrial zoning districts, subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  The Changeable Copy portion of the Sign shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the overall maximum Sign area of the Sign to which it is attached. 
(2)  The total Sign area of the combined Sign (Freestanding or Wall Sign plus changeable copy board) shall not exceed the overall size limitations imposed by this chapter. 
(3)  Changeable Copy Signs erected in combination with Freestanding or Wall Signs must be on the same pole, post or standard or within the same frame as the principle Sign. 
(4)  Electronic Signs are specifically prohibited as Changeable Copy Signs, except as provided under subsection (c) below. 
(5)  No Changeable Copy Sign shall be programmed or utilized in such a manner as to flash or simulate movement. 
(c)  Electronic Signs. Changeable Copy Signs may be Electronic Signs, used in accordance with the following provisions and legal non-conforming changeable copy Signs shall not be converted to an Electronic Sign except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  The following shall apply to all Electronic Signs: 
i.  Electronic Signs shall only be incorporated into Freestanding Signs as the Changeable Copy Sign, adhering to all provisions set forth under this article. All other applications of Electronic Signs are expressly prohibited, including but not limited to as Building, Wall, or Canopy Signs. 
ii.  Only commercially zoned property fronting Highway 92 within the Parkway Overlay District are eligible for the use of Electronic Signs. Electronic Signs must be located on a property/lot with at least 200 feet of public road frontage and cannot be within 200 linear feet of another Electronic Sign. 
iii.  Electronic Signs shall contain static messages only, and shall not have movement nor flashing on any part of the Sign structure, design, or pictorial segment of the Sign, nor shall such Sign have varying light intensity during the display of any single message. Message changes shall occur instantly with no visible transition. 
iv.  Electronic Signs must operate within brightness levels as established in this article. A certification of brightness provided by a qualified and independent contract is required for the issuance of the permit. 
v.  Each Sign must have a light sensing device that will adjust the brightness of the display as the natural ambient light conditions change. 
vi.  Each individual static message must be displayed for not less than 60 seconds. 
vii.  Electronic Signs located on non-residentially zoned property may not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.20 foot candles above ambient light levels (at measurement conditions) as measured at a distance of 125 feet. 
viii.  If the Electronic Sign is located in the line of sight of a residentially occupied structure on a residentially zoned property, such Electronic Sign shall not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.1 foot candles above ambient light levels (at measurement conditions) as measured at the nearest portion of such residential structure. 
ix.  The owner of said Electronic Sign shall provide to the Community Development Director, information for a 24-hour contact able to turn off the Electronic Sign promptly if a malfunction occurs. If, at any time more than 20 percent of the digital display lights malfunction or are no longer working, the owner of said Electronic Sign shall turn off the electronic display until repairs are made. 
x.  In the course of processing a complaint, the Community Development Department may request a certification of the brightness (under measurement conditions) by an independent contractor (if such has not been certified within the preceding twelve (12) months). If this investigation and certification indicates that the electronic Sign exceeds the brightness levels specified in this article, the owner of the Sign, within twenty-four (24) hours of a request by the Community Development Department, shall turn off the Sign until the brightness of the Sign is corrected to comply with this Article at owner's expense. 
xi.  Any electronic Sign whose face or structure is physically removed for whatever cause must alter the Sign to comply with this Ordinance. 
xii.  No electronic Sign shall utilize, house or contain any interactive features or components, or function as an interactive or Animated Sign. 
xiii.  Notwithstanding any provisions otherwise providing for variance to the terms and limitations in the Land Development Code, the limitation on the frequency by which the image on an Electronic Sign may change shall not be subject to variance other than by amendment to this article. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.9. - Signs on Windows and Doors. 
(a)  Signs may be painted on or affixed to glass surfaces of windows and doors. Such Signs are subject to permit requirements as other signage. Such Signs shall leave at least seventy (70) percent of the glass unobscured. 
(b)  Temporary Signs may be placed inside premises in non-residential areas without first securing a permit, provided such window Signs leave at least fifty (50) percent of the window glass unobscured. Any such temporary Sign shall be maintained in good condition, free from tears, tatters, or discoloration. Torn, soiled or out of date temporary Signs in windows shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.10. - Incidental Signs and Campus Signs. 
    Incidental Signs conforming to the definition in LDO Chapter II, Definitions, and to the standards of this chapter may be erected on private property. Incidental Signs shall have a Sign Face area no larger than two (2) square feet, and Incidental Signs that are attached to the ground, rather than a building, shall be no taller than four (4) feet. No more than two (2) such Signs shall be located at a driveway entrance and shall be placed in such a manner as to not constitute a traffic hazard. Each Parcel is limited to a maximum of four (4) Incidental Signs. Parcels larger than fifteen (15) acres may have up to eight (8) Incidental Signs. 
    An academic, commercial, or institutional campus of three (3) acres of more may install campus signs as long as the Signs are not readily visible from a public right-of-way. Examples of campus signs include most any Signs meant for the exclusive use by patrons on private property, including but not limited to the following purposes: directional, informational, etc. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.11. - Marquee Signs. 
    Marquee Signs are allowed only in conjunction with indoor movie theaters and live performance theaters. Marquee Signs shall be attached to the outside wall of the affected building. Marquee Signs are subject to the size and location restrictions of building Signs. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.12. - Drive-thru Windows. 
    Any parcel containing a restaurant where food is delivered at a drive-thru delivery point other than on the front side of the building is permitted two (2) additional Freestanding Signs, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Only two (2) Signs serving the drive-thru delivery system shall be permitted. 
(2)  The Signs are restricted to the side or rear yard of the restaurant. 
(3)  No such Sign shall exceed forty-five (45) square feet in Sign area nor six (6) feet in height. 
(4)  The stacking lane (drive-thru lane) shall begin a minimum of eighty (80) feet from the Sign. 
(5)  Lettering on the Sign may not be legible from any distance off the Parcel for which it is approved. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.13. - Building Signs. 
(a)  Where a building houses more than one (1) business, Building Signs shall be limited in number to one (1) Sign per business on each wall, with a limit of two (2) Building Signs per business per building. The Sign Face of any one (1) Building Sign shall be no more than ten (10) percent of the total store frontage, not to exceed one hundred sixty (160) square feet. 
(b)  Where a building houses only one (1) business, a maximum of two (2) Building Signs may be placed on one (1) wall, but no more than four (4) Building Signs may be placed on the entire building. The Sign Face of any one (1) Building Sign shall be a maximum of one hundred sixty (160) square feet or ten (10) percent of the area of the wall on which they are located, whichever is less. 
(c)  Wall Signs shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the surface upon which they are mounted. 
(d)  The upper edge of a Wall Sign mounted on a mansard roof may project more than eighteen (18) inches so long as the Sign is perpendicular to the ground. 
(e)  Building Signs that are Illuminated, Internal, are limited to channel letter style signage only, except that an internally illuminated graphic representation, such as a logo or image, may be included as part of a channel letter style Sign, provided the graphic representation does not exceed thirty (30) percent of the square footage of the overall Sign of which it is a part. Channel letter style Signs may include a non-illuminated backer board, the area of which shall be included in the computation of Sign Face area. Awning and Canopy Signs that are Illuminated, Internal, are prohibited. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.14. - Signs on Light Poles. 
(a)  Within areas of the LI, GC, SL-C, and any FBC zoning classifications, Signs or Banners may be permitted to be placed on light poles, such Signs or Banners shall be permitted on no more than fifty (50) percent of light poles on each Parcel. 
(b)  Light pole Signs or Banners shall not be located within twenty (20) feet of the front property line of a Parcel. 
(c)  Each light pole shall be limited to two (2) back to back Sign faces, no larger than ten (10) square feet in size. 
(d)  Signs or Banners shall be constructed and maintained with durable materials, meet required wind load regulations and maintain a minimum clearance from the ground of six (6) feet. Signs or Banners shall be placed on the light pole via a permanent support structure meant for the placement of a Sign or Banner. 
(e)  Both the owner of any given light pole and the owner of the property upon which the light pole is located must give their consent for the installation of any Signs or Banners on light poles. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.4.15. - Streetlight Banners. 
(a)  Within areas of the LI, GC, SL-C, and any FBC zoning classifications, Banners may be permitted to be placed on Streetlights located within rights-of-way. 
(b)  Banners shall be made of flexible material, be no larger than ten (10) square feet in size, meet required wind load regulations and maintain a minimum clearance from the ground of eight (8) feet. 
(c)  Both the owner of any given Streetlight and the owner of the property upon which the Streetlight is located must give their consent for the installation of any Banners on said Streetlight. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE V. - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE DOWNTOWN DISTRICT 

6.5.1. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article is applicable to areas that are zoned Downtown District. 
(b)  The requirements of this article supersede other ordinances, codes and laws of the City of Woodstock, Georgia only so far as they exceed the requirements of those documents or as specifically stated herein. Compliance with these guidelines does not negate any responsibility to comply with other ordinances and codes not superseded by this article, including all provisions of this chapter not explicitly revised by this article. 
(c)  Unless specifically identified in sub-area regulations or allowed as of right without permit, the types, number and size of Signs permitted within the Downtown District shall be as indicated in the "Downtown Sign Table." Also allowable are Temporary Signs, as regulated in LDO Chapter XX, Temporary Signs. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.5.2. - Downtown Sign Table. 
P = Permitted
X = Not Permitted DT-CBD
Subarea DT-CMU
Subarea DT-GC
Subarea DT-RO
Subarea DT-MR-A
and
DT-MR-B
Subareas DT-LR
and
DT-VLR
Subareas DT-HO
Historic
ZoneBuilding Signs  Canopy Signs (see Section 6.5.3) P P P P X X X  Marquee Signs (see Section 6.5.3) P P P X X X X  Projecting Signs (see Section 6.5.3) P P P X X X X  Shingle Signs (see Section 6.5.3) P P P P P X P  Wall Signs (see Section 6.5.3) P P P P P X P  Window Signs (see Section 6.4.9) P P P P X X P Freestanding Signs  Common Entrance Sign (limit 1, max., area 32 sf., max. height 8 ft.) X X X X P P P  Nostalgic Sign (limit 1, max. area 16 sf., max. height 8 ft.) P P P P X X P  Monument Sign (limit 1 per parcel, max. area 80 sf., max. height 8 ft.) P * P * P P * X X X  Outdoor Menu Board (limit 1, max. 16 sf.) P P P X X X X  Sandwich Board (limit 1, max. 30"×48") P X X P P X P  Incidental Signs (limit 2 per Parcel, max. area 2 sf., max. height 4 ft.) Sign Lighting and Materials General Requirements  Internally Illuminated P P P X X X X  Externally Illuminated P P P P P P P  Materials Regulated (see Section 6.5.5) Y N N Y Y Y Y  
* Monument Signs are permitted on a street frontage where an existing building facade as of July 11, 2006 is setback more than twenty (20) feet from the property line. Monument Signs are limited to a maximum Sign Face area of thirty-two (32) square feet and are not to exceed five (5) feet in height. Monument Signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the sidewalk clear zone. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.5.3. - Building Sign Regulations. 
(a)  Each business shall be permitted a maximum of three (3) Building Signs. A Building Sign shall be allowed on any building frontage facing a street, alley or parking area. 
(b)  No more than two (2) Building Signs shall be placed on any one (1) frontage, however when a building faces a street at least one (1) Building Sign is required on that frontage. 
(c)  The maximum allowable square footage of each Building Sign shall be calculated by multiplying the linear frontage of the building or suite by one and one-half (11/2), with a maximum square footage per Sign of thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(d)  Canopy Signs shall not be Internally Illuminated. When a Canopy Sign is used in conjunction with a Wall Sign, the Canopy Sign shall not be larger than six (6) square feet. 
(e)  Marquee Signs are permitted only in conjunction with indoor movie theatres or a live performance theater. The size of the Marquee Sign shall be no larger than eight (8) square feet for each screen built or a maximum of one hundred sixty (160) square feet. 
(f)  Projecting Signs shall be at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk area, public right-of-way or parking area and at least fourteen (14) feet above an alley it faces. Such Sign shall not extend more than four (4) feet from the building wall or be located less than one (1) foot from the street curb line 
(g)  Shingle Sign shall mean a type of Projecting Sign that reads on two (2) sides and is located between eight (8) and twelve (12) feet above the sidewalk area and affixed or installed perpendicularly to a building wall in such a manner to read on both sides and perpendicularly to such wall. Each business shall be permitted one (1) Shingle Sign which shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. A Shingle Sign is considered independent of and additional to the number of Building Signs permitted. 
(h)  Wall Signs shall be located at least eight (8) feet above grade and shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the surface upon which they are mounted; provided, the upper edge of a Wall Sign mounted to a Mansard Roof may project more than eighteen (18) inches so long as the Sign is perpendicular to the ground. 
(i)  Building markers shall be permitted when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials. Maximum size allowed is eight (8) square feet. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.5.4. - Freestanding Sign Regulations. 
(a)  Freestanding Signs shall be located entirely on private property and a minimum of ten (10) feet from the sidewalk clear zone. 
(b)  No Sign shall be placed on the surface of the sidewalk clear zone and in addition, no Freestanding Sign shall be placed above the sidewalk clear zone. 
(c)  Nostalgic Signs shall not be considered a Pole Sign. Nostalgic Signs shall mean Signs which are historic in style including hanging Signs and/or wooden Signs supported by two (2) posts, or decorative metal Signs supported by one stanchion. Nostalgic Sign materials are limited to metal and wood and shall not be internally illuminated. 
(d)  Outdoor menu boards are allowed on parcels approved for restaurants with drive-thru windows and under the following conditions: 
(1)  Only one (1) outdoor menu board shall be permitted per business. 
(2)  Display surface area shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet. 
(3)  Menu boards shall not be visible from Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, or Arnold Mill Road. 
(e)  A Sandwich Sign or Portable Swinger Sign may be no larger than thirty inches by forty-eight inches (30" × 48") on each side and must be placed on the property where the business is located in the sidewalk landscape zone or the sidewalk supplemental zone as long as it does not impede pedestrian traffic and is located a minimum of thirty (30) inches from the face of the curb and fifteen (15) feet from point of intersection of street curb lines. Each business shall be permitted one (1) Sandwich Sign which shall be removed at the end of each business day. Where a sidewalk landscape zone does not exist per the requirements established in the Downtown District standards, a Sandwich Sign may be placed within three (3) feet of the facade of the building but must meet all other requirements contained in this subsection (e). 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.5.5. - Sign Material Regulations. 
    When regulated by Section 6.5.2, Signs shall be of quality design, construction, color and materials consistent with the design of the building and/or development. This includes glass, masonry, wood, natural stone, ornamental metalwork, and ceramics. Paint and metal gilt work are also acceptable. "Faux" materials such as "Sign foam," vinyl and plastic are prohibited. Vinyl lettering affixed to a Sign with otherwise conforming materials may be permitted with staff approval. Signs painted on cloth awnings are permissible. Mixed media are permitted, including reverse illuminated letters and etched or cutout solid materials, illuminated from behind. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.5.6. - Streetlight Banners. 
    Within areas of the DT-CBD and DT-RO zoning classifications, Banners may be permitted to be placed on Streetlights located within rights-of-way. The Banners shall be made of flexible material, be no larger than eight (8) square feet in size, meet required wind load regulations and maintain a minimum clearance from the ground of eight (8) feet. Both the owner of any given Streetlight and the owner of the property upon which the Streetlight is located must give their consent for the installation of any Banners on said Streetlight. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

6.7.1. - Permits; Procedures. 
(a)  Unless specifically exempted from obtaining a Permit under provisions of this chapter, no person shall erect, construct, replace, relocate or structurally alter any Sign within the City without first obtaining a Sign Permit from the Department of Community Development. 
(b)  Applications for Permits shall be made upon forms provided by the City and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Tax Parcel ID and address of building, structure, or parcel to which or upon which the Sign is to be attached or erected. In the absence of a street address, a method of location that is acceptable to the Community Development Director shall be used. 
(3)  Two (2) accurate drawings showing the position of the Sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, including other Signs, driveways, parking areas, and any other limiting site features (survey not required). 
(4)  One (1) accurate drawing to scale of the plans, specifications and method of construction and attachment of the Sign to the Building or ground. The drawing shall be an engineered structural drawing designed to the International Building Code and shall specifically include the size of the Sign area, overall height of the Sign, location of the Sign installation and its relation to existing rights-of-way and all driveways, a site distance diagram, and, if a Pole Sign or Monument Sign, any protective devices or landscaping around the base of the Sign. 
(5)  Name, address, telephone number and business license number of the person erecting the Sign. 
(6)  Written consent of the owner or lessor of the Building or land to which or upon which the Sign is to be erected. 
(7)  The location and size of all other Signs on the parcel upon which the Sign is to be erected. 
(8)  The size of the Parcel on which the Sign is to be erected and the length of the street frontage for the street to which the Sign is oriented. 
(9)  If the Sign is to be lighted, an application for electrical permit meeting all standards of the City's electrical code. 
(10)  The value of the Sign. 
(11)  Such other information as the City shall require to show full compliance with this and other ordinances of the City. 
(c)  No review of the specific content of any proposed Sign shall be made or required. 
(d)  For Signs shared by more than one (1) person or entity, the property owner or Sign contractor shall secure a permit for the Sign structure and the property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the structure as well as for removal of individual Sign panels identifying uses which no longer exist within the Building or Buildings covered by the shared Sign. In addition to the Permit required for a shared Sign structure, a separate Permit shall be required for each entity shown on the Sign which shall be obtained by the owner, his tenant, an authorized agent, or the Sign contractor. 
(e)  Each application for Permit shall be accompanied by the applicable permit fees. Fees for Permits shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Council. 
(f)  Upon the filing of an application for a Permit, the Community Development Director or his designee shall examine all plans and specifications submitted, including electrical wiring and connections, and the premises upon which the Sign is proposed to be erected. The plans shall be reviewed for zoning compliance by the Department of Community Development and review by other officers and employees of the City may be obtained on an as-needed basis. Such review shall be completed within thirty (30) business days of submission of a completed Sign application. If it appears from review of the Permit application and inspection of the site that the proposed Sign is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other ordinances and laws of the City, the Community Development Director shall issue a Permit upon payment of Permit fees no later than thirty (30) business days from receipt of the completed application. 
(g)  The City shall deny Permits to applicants who submit applications for Signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, are incomplete, or contain any material false statements. Violation of any provision of this chapter will be grounds for terminating a Permit granted by the City for the erection of a Sign. Should it be determined that a Sign Permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a Permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the Community Development Director shall revoke the Permit. Should the Community Development Director deny a permit, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the Permit application on or before thirty (30) business days after the City received the completed application. Alternatively, the City may personally serve the Sign applicant with a copy of the written notice of denial within thirty (30) business days after the City's receipt of the application. The failure of the City to act on any completed Sign application within thirty (30) days after the City's receipt of the application shall be deemed a denial of said application. Any applicable denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. 
(h)  No Permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after the applicant is given ten (10) days written notice containing a statement of the reasons for the denial of the permit application or the revocation of a permit. "Due cause" is the violation of any provision of this chapter, or other applicable ordinances, state or federal law regulating Signs, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(i)  An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision to the Mayor and City Council, provided such appellant files a written notice of appeal with the City Manager within ten (10) business days of the Community Development Director's notice. Such appeal shall be considered by the Mayor and City Council for the City of Woodstock, Georgia at a regular meeting within ninety (90) days from the date that the written notice of appeal is received by the City Manager. The City Manager shall select the meeting date and give the appellant written notice of the appeal hearing date, after the City's receipt of the written notice of appeal. The Mayor and City Council shall issue a written decision to the applicant no later than thirty (30) days following the close of the appeal hearing. Decisions of the Mayor and City Council to affirm the decision of the Community Development Director or to overrule the decision of the Community Development Director and grant or continue the permit for which appeal is taken shall be reduced to writing and served upon the applicant in the same manner as the original notice to deny or notice of revocation. Such decision shall constitute a final determination by the City of Woodstock. 
(j)  In the event an applicant whose permit has been denied or a permit holder whose permit has been revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the Mayor and Council, such applicant or permit holder may petition for Writ of Certiorari to the Superior Court as provided by law. 
(k)  Any person commencing work on a Sign before securing the necessary Permit from the Community Development Department shall be subject to double Permit fees under the Permit fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.2. - Permit Expiration. 
    A Sign Permit shall become null and void if the Sign for which the Permit was issued has not been completed and installed within six (6) months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made of permit fees for Permits that expire due to failure to erect a permitted Sign; provided that where an applicant can demonstrate that a commercial entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted Sign but the fabrication has not yet been completed, one (1) six-month extension may be granted by the Community Development Director on the duration of the permit. Where a permit has expired for failure to erect the Sign, if an individual later desires to erect a Sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule in effect at the time of resubmission. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.3. - Display of Permit. 
    The owner of the Sign shall be responsible for maintaining the permit for every Sign constructed, erected or maintained for which a permit is required by this Ordinance. Such Permit shall be kept on the premises served by the Sign and shall be exhibited promptly upon request of city officers and employees. Additionally, the Sign Permit number shall be affixed to every Sign for which a Permit has been issued by the Sign company installing the Sign; such number shall be in no less than one-inch characters. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.4. - Non-conforming Signs. 
(a)  Signs that, on the effective date of this Ordinance, were approved and legally erected under previous Sign restrictions, and that became or have become a Non-conforming Sign with respect to the requirements of this Ordinance, may continue in existence subject to the remaining provisions of this section. 
(1)  No increase in size of the Non-conforming Sign shall be permitted. 
(2)  Existing Signs which were legally erected and which have become Non-conforming and do not meet the setback requirements of this Ordinance due to road widening may be moved to meet the setback requirement of this Ordinance but shall not be increased in size, shape or changed in any manner except as to become conforming. 
(3)  In all zoning districts, Signs which were: 
a.  Illegally erected or maintained with respect to prior ordinances; 
b.  Made of paper, cloth or non-durable materials (except standard informational Signs); or 
c.  Located in the public right-of-way (except as permitted by this Ordinance) shall be prohibited and shall be removed by the owner. 
(b)  Upon failure to comply with any requirement of this section, the Community Development Director or his authorized agent may cause the removal of such Sign at the expense of the owner. 
(c)  A Non-conforming Sign shall not be replaced by another Non-conforming Sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or demountable material on Nonconforming Signs shall be permitted. 
(d)  Minor repairs and maintenance of Non-conforming Signs such as electrical repairs or lettering repair shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the Sign shall be permitted except to make the Sign comply with the requirements of this Ordinance; provided that Signs damaged by fire or act of God may be restored to original condition. 
(e)  Each Non-conforming Sign shall be registered within ninety (90) days of the enactment of this Ordinance by the Sign owner, and if it is determined that such Non-conforming Sign was legally erected under the prior ordinance, then a Sign Permit shall be issued to the Sign owner without charge. Should the owner of a Non-conforming Sign fail to register such Sign with ninety (90) days from the enactment of this Ordinance, such failure to register shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance, and such person shall be subject to citation in Municipal Court. 
(f)  Existing Signs on the property of newly annexed territory that were legally erected under the county ordinance which would become Non-conforming under this Ordinance upon annexation by the City shall be allowed to remain, provided such Sign shall be registered with the City within ninety (90) days of annexation. 
(g)  The Community Development Director shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this section. Notices of violation shall be provided to the Sign owner in accordance with the requirements of Section 6.7.7. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.5. - Inspections. 
    The Community Development Director or his designee shall periodically inspect each permanent and temporary conforming and Non-Conforming Sign in an attempt to ascertain whether the same is secure or insecure, and whether it is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or in need of repair. Responsibility for the safety of Signs and security of their attachment or erection remains at all times with the Sign Owner. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.6. - Signs Requiring Removal. 
(a)  Traffic hazards. Any Sign constituting a traffic hazard or a menace to the motoring public or pedestrians, as determined by the Community Development Director in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall be removed as provided in Section 6.7.7. 
(b)  Abandoned Signs. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any Sign that is located on property that becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of three (3) months or longer, or any Sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Permanent Signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change of ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of six (6) months or more. Sign panels from abandoned Signs shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which the Sign is located within the time frame specified in this subsection. The supporting structure of an abandoned Sign shall be subject to the Non-conforming use provisions of Section 6.7.4. It shall be considered adequate compliance with this Section for Sign panels and channel letters of abandoned Signs to be removed, provided the owner of the Sign or owner of the premises supplies a protective cover that protects exposed electrical components from exposure to the elements. 
(c)  Dangerous, dilapidated or defective Signs. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any Sign that is in a dangerous, dilapidated or defective condition. Any such Sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or owner of the Sign. Upon failure of the owner to remove or repair a dangerous or defective Sign, the Community Development Director shall proceed as described in Section 6.7.7. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.7. - Removal Procedure. 
(a)  The Community Development Director shall cause to be removed any Sign that he determines endangers the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or electrically or structurally defective Sign or a Sign for which no permit has been issued or which is otherwise in violation of this chapter. The Community Development Director shall prepare a written notice that shall describe the Sign and specify the violation involved. The notice shall state that if the Sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within twenty (20) business days, the Sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  All notices by the Community Development Director shall be personally served or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date received if hand delivered or otherwise on the date delivered as shown upon the return receipt of the U.S. Postal Service. 
(c)  The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the Sign is located, the owner of the Sign, and the occupant of the property. If any such person is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such person's last known address, if any, and posted on the Sign or on the premises. 
(d)  Any person having an interest in the Sign or the property may appeal the determination of the Community Development Director ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Manager within ten (10) business days after receipt of the notice. Appeals will be handled as provided in Section 6.7.1(i) and (j). 
(e)  If the person to whom notice is directed fails to take corrective action within the time period prescribed, or if on appeal the City affirms the decision of the Community Development Director and the person fails to take corrective action or remove the offending Sign within the time period prescribed, then the Community Development Director shall proceed to have the Sign removed or corrected to bring such Sign into compliance with this chapter or to remove any unsafe condition. 
(f)  When it is determined by the Community Development Director that the Sign would cause imminent danger to the public safety and contact cannot be made with the Sign owner or building owner, no written notice shall have to be served prior to removal. In such emergency situation, the Community Development Director shall document the unsafe condition and may correct the danger, with all costs being charged to the Sign owner or the property owner. 
(g)  If it shall be necessary for the Community Development Director to remove the Sign pursuant to the provisions of this section, and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any material derived in the removal, the Community Development Director may sell or salvage any material derived in the removal. He may sell the same at public or private sale at the best price obtainable and keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the cost of removal to be charged to the Sign owner or property owner. Any proceeds in excess of the cost of removal shall be returned to the Sign owner, if known, or if unknown, shall be deposited in the City Treasury and maintained for benefit of the owner for a period of three (3) years. At the end of three (3) years, all unclaimed proceeds shall become the property the City. Where the proceeds derived from such sale are less than the costs of removal, such deficiency shall constitute a lien against the property on which the Sign is located. Such lien shall be collectable in the same manner as City property taxes. 
(h)  Any Sign removed by the Community Development Director pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become the property of the City and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the City. The cost of removal of the Sign by the City shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as City property taxes. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the City in connection with the Sign removal. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.8. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances from the regulations of this chapter shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
(1)  Where the proximity of existing Signs on adjoining lots causes the subject property to be ineligible, due to spacing requirements, for a Sign of the type sought; or 
(2)  Where visibility of a conforming Sign from the proposed street and within fifty (50) feet of the proposed Sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, Signs, buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
a.  Placement of the Sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; 
b.  Such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and 
c.  The variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 
(b)  Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variances shall be granted to allow a greater number of Signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. No variance shall transfer to a new owner or occupant of the property. 
(c)  Relief from the application of the provisions of this chapter by use of variances granted by the City shall be granted only upon a finding of hardship as previously defined. Hearing on such variances shall be noticed using this same time frames and notice requirements as for appeals under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
6.7.9. - Waivers. 
(a)  Waivers from the regulations of this chapter for reasons other than hardship shall be considered by the Development Process Committee, with recommendation to the Planning Commission, and to the Mayor and City Council. The application deadline for waivers shall be the first Friday of each month, and the waiver case shall be heard at the Planning Commission and City Council meetings for the following month. The Mayor and City Council shall render a final decision on waivers using the criteria set forth below. Fees assessed for Sign waiver applications shall be the same as for Sign variances. 
(b)  Waiver Evaluation Criteria. Each waiver requested will be evaluated by the DPC, Planning Commission, and Mayor and City Council using these criteria: 
1.  Are the proposed Sign(s) visually compatible with the character of the surrounding area? 
2.  Are the proposed Sign(s) of a consistent size and scale to existing Signs in the immediate area? 
3.  Are the proposed Sign(s) reasonably scaled to the size of the subject structure and/or premises? 
4.  Do unusual circumstances exist that warrant granting this waiver? 
(c)  No Sign waiver shall transfer to a new owner or occupant of the Parcel. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter VII - PERFORMANCE ZONING STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1, adopted February 12, 2018, repealed the former Ch. VII, Art. I, §§ 7.200, 7.201, 7.300-7.304, Art. IV, 7.500-7.521, 7.600-7.609, 7.710-7.732, 7.810-7.899, 7.910-7.933, and enacted a new Ch. VII as set out herein. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Chapter X, Land Development Ordinance, Administration and Enforcement; Chapter XVII, Land Development Ordinance, Stream Buffer Protection. 

ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
    There is hereby adopted, ordained, and enacted into law this Ordinance to wit, the Woodstock Zoning Ordinance, and the zoning classifications stated therein for the use of property in the incorporated area of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
    There is hereby adopted a Land Use Map captioned "Official Woodstock Zoning Map," which shall bear the signature of the Mayor of the City of Woodstock, Georgia together with the attest of the City Clerk and the Seal of the City, which Map shall be kept under the custody of the Clerk of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. Said Official Zoning Map shall be maintained for public inspection during normal business hours at Woodstock City Hall. The "Official Woodstock Zoning Map" is incorporated into this resolution by express reference. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE 

7.200. - Short Title. 
    This Ordinance shall be known and cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Woodstock, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.201. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish minimum standards for the use of the land and improvements thereon in the City of Woodstock, Georgia. The purpose of this Ordinance is not intended as an infringement upon the liberty of one to use his land as he chooses, but instead it is intended as a protection of freedom, and to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of property. The Ordinance provides a means by which the right to the full enjoyment of property use can be protected against the prejudicial influence of other uses, which do not constitute a nuisance. 
    The Ordinance will serve as a tool of the City to bring about efficient land use management by establishing minimum standards such as lot size, buffers, setback from right-of-way and density per acre for land development. The use of this tool will enable the City of Woodstock, Georgia, to avoid overcrowding and congestion, and prevent overloading of the systems that provide water, sewage disposal, traffic circulation, police and fire protection, and other public services. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL INFORMATION 

7.300. - Zoning Districts. 
7.301. - Establishment of Districts. 
    For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City of Woodstock, Georgia, is divided into the following districts: 
CV Civic District 
This district is intended for government-owned properties outside the Downtown District. All government-owned properties not otherwise zoned are deemed Civic District, and shall continue to be zoned Civic District upon any transfer to any private person or entity. 
DT Downtown District 
This district is intended to allow continuation of traditional development patterns. The uses allowed in this district are those that will benefit from close proximity of uses and foster a pedestrian oriented environment. 
DT-CBD Central Business District 
Permits a mix of retail, office, and residential uses in mixed-use buildings. Maximum of twelve (12) dwelling units per acre. Individual restaurant and retail uses shall be limited to eight thousand (8,000) square feet; some exceptions apply and are listed in the Principal Permitted Uses Table. 
DT-CV Downtown Civic 
This district is intended for government-owned properties in the Downtown District. 
DT-CMU Commercial Mixed-Use 
Permits a mix of retail, office, and residential uses in mixed-use buildings at a scale and intensity greater than that permitted in the DT-CBD. 
DT-GC General Commercial 
Permits a mix of uses that are a scale and character compatible with regional serving and highway-oriented developments. 
DT-LR Low-density Residential 
Permits single-family residential uses and accessory dwelling units. No dwelling units shall be located above or below another dwelling unit. Maximum of six (6) residential lots per acre. Minimum lot size of three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. 
DT-VLR Very Low-density Residential 
Permits single-family residential uses and accessory dwelling units. No dwelling units shall be located above or below another dwelling unit. Maximum of two (2) residential lots per acre. Minimum lot size of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
DT-MR-A Medium-density Residential A 
Permits single-family and multifamily residential uses and limited uses. Maximum of nine (9) dwelling units or single-family lots per acre. Minimum lot size of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. 
DT-MR-B Medium-density Residential B 
Permits single-family and multifamily residential uses and limited uses. Maximum of twelve (12) dwelling units or single-family lots per acre. Minimum lot size of one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
DT-OS Downtown Open Space 
This district is intended for property dedicated to recreational and passive open space in the Downtown District. No commercial or residential uses are permitted other than parking. 
DT-RO Residential/Office 
Permits primarily office and residential uses. Non-office and non-residential establishments are limited to the first floor and a maximum of three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet, except athletic club and facilities. Maximum of eight (8) dwelling units per acre. Uses located within historic residential structures within the historic zone are exempt from size limits requirements. 
GC General Commercial District 
This district is intended to provide suitable areas for a variety of commercial sales and service activities which generally serve the wide area uses, located along the major thoroughfares to concentrate commercial activities. Strip development is discouraged. 
HI Heavy Industrial District 
Industrial operations of all types that do not pose a liability for the community are permitted. This district should be accessible to railroads and major highways. Residential and retail uses are prohibited. Natural barriers or buffers are required to separate these uses from residential districts. 
LI Light Industrial District 
Light industrial operations, limited to business parks and warehouses, but prohibiting residential uses. Limited manufacturing establishments that do not use large quantities of water or emit excessive noise, odors, dust, vibrations, or fumes may be permitted. 
OS Open Space 
This district is intended for property to be used for recreational and passive open space outside the Downtown District. No commercial or residential uses are permitted. 
NC Neighborhood Commercial District 
Limited retail activities, personal services and professional offices are encouraged to serve the general needs of a residential neighborhood. Development in this zone is regulated for compatibility with surrounding residential areas. Strip development is discouraged. 
OSI Office Space and Institutional District 
Office parks, including medical or professional buildings and institutions, such as a college or university are permitted. Limited related retail business and service activities may be permitted. Residential, industrial and manufacturing uses are prohibited. 
PUD Planned Unit Development 
This zone classification has been discontinued for future rezonings. 
R-1 Single-family Residential District 
Single-family detached residential development at the lowest density and moderately high minimum heated area requirements with or without central sewer. 
R-2 Single-family Residential District 
Single-family residential development, at a low density and moderately low minimum heated area requirements. Central sewer system is required. 
R-3 Medium Density Residential District 
Residential development at moderate density and moderately low minimum heated area requirements. Central sewer system is required. 
R-4 High Density Residential District 
Residential development at high density and moderately low minimum heated area requirements. Central sewer system is required. 
RR Railroad District 
This district includes all of the railroad right-of-way. The only allowable uses within this district are railroad infrastructure and signage, which signage is required by Federal, State or City law or regulation, utility infrastructure and easements and transportation infrastructure. 
RD Rural District 
This district is intended to protect existing agricultural, farming and forestry uses and to preserve the peace and quiet. Any uses which would bring frequent patrons or traffic are prohibited. Very low residential use, limited to one (1) dwelling unit per five (5) acres may be permitted. 
SL Senior Living 
This district is intended to allow for the development of detached, attached and multi-family dwelling units and associated services limited to those persons age fifty-five (55) and older. 
SL-A Senior Living A 
Permits single-family detached residential units with a base density of no more than four (4) dwelling units per acre. 
SL-B Senior Living B 
Permits single-family attached residential units with a base density of no more than six (6) dwelling units per acre. 
SL-C Senior Living C 
Permits multi-family residential units and limited uses with a base density of no more than twelve (12) dwelling units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.302. - District Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the districts established in Section 7.301 of this article are hereby established as shown on the "Official City of Woodstock Zoning Map." The "Official Woodstock Zoning Map" shall be signed by the Mayor of the City of Woodstock, Georgia, and certified by the City Clerk as being the official copy and shall be kept on display in City Hall. Maps and descriptions of approved amendments to the Official Map shall be displayed adjacent to the official copy until such time as the official copy is updated. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.303. - Interpretation of Zoning Map. 
    Where, due to the scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the Zoning Map accompanying this Ordinance, there is uncertainty, contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of any zoning district boundary as shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location of the zoning district boundary line shall be determined by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.304. - Development Standards Applying to All Districts. 
    The following general development standards shall apply to all districts outlined in this Ordinance: 
1.  Minimum Acreage Requirement. New residential developments outside the Downtown District shall have a minimum acreage/assemblage requirement of eight (8) acres. 
a.  Projects which involve an annexation are exempt from this requirement. 
b.  For projects proposed on less than eight (8) acres, including the addition of phases to existing developments, the applicant may pursue a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Land Development Ordinance. 
c.  For acreage requirements inside the Downtown District, see Section 7.721. 
2.  Critical Mass for Redevelopment Requirement. Redevelopment of more than two (2) existing lots in a platted subdivision on the same Land Disturbance Permit is prohibited unless a critical mass of eighty (80) percent or more contiguous lots in the subdivision are acquired and assembled, leaving the remaining twenty (20) percent of the lots as one intact subdivision. For the purposes of this section, lots are considered contiguous if they share more than half of the length of the adjoining property line for each adjacent parcel that is to be considered contiguous. The phasing of redevelopment over several LDPs as a way to subvert this section is prohibited. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a platted subdivision is a subdivision of residential lots for which a subdivision plat has been recorded in the Superior Court Clerk's Office of Cherokee County. 
3.  Buildings Under Construction. Nothing in this Ordinance shall require any change in the construction or intended use of a building, which is legally under construction or for which a building permit has been issued at the effective date of this Ordinance. 
4.  Use of Land. No land shall be used for a purpose which is not permitted in the district in which it is located. Outdoor display of goods for sale at retail establishments is prohibited, except for Garden/Landscape Supply - Retail, Consumer Fireworks Retail Stands - Temporary, and Junk/Salvage Yard uses, where permitted. Properties within the DT-CBD zoning district are exempt from this requirement concerning items displayed in Sidewalk Supplemental Zones. 
5.  Use of Structure. No structure shall be erected, use converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in conformance with this Ordinance. 
6.  Lot Reduction Prohibited. No parcel of land existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements of the zone district in which said lot lies. 
7.  Use of Substandard Lots. Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, such lot may nonetheless be used as a building site provided that said lot requirements are not reduced below the minimum specified in this Ordinance by more than twenty (20) percent. If, however, the owner of two (2) or more adjoining lots with insufficient land dimensions decides to build on or to sell off these lots, he must first combine said lots to comply with the dimensional requirements of the Ordinance. Any lot requiring dimensional waivers below the twenty (20) percent minimum forth in this section may be approved by the City Council provided that further decreased dimensional requirements shall conform as closely as possible to the required dimensions. 
8.  Vision Clearance. In all districts no fence, wall, shrubbery, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of two and one-half (21/2) feet and ten (10) feet above the finished grade of streets shall be erected, permitted, or maintained within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets or railroads. 
9.  Joint Open Space Not Permitted. No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading required about or in connection with any building for the purposes of complying with this Ordinance, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. Nor shall right-of-way easements for streets and roads be considered a part of a lot or open space, or front rear, or side yard for the purpose of meeting yard requirements. 
10.  Homeowners Association. Any new residential subdivision of more than three (3) residential units shall be required to have an incorporated Homeowners Association. 
11.  Condominium Owner's Association - Any new Residential - Multi-Family, Fee Simple development must create and be governed by an association formed in accordance with the Georgia Condominium Act, O.C.G.A. 44-3-70 et seq., now and as amended. 
12.  Corner Lots. A lot of which at least two (2) adjoining sides abut their full lengths on a public street. Said corner lot shall provide the minimum front yard setback for each street for the district in which the lot is situated. Rear setbacks for corner lots may be reduced to no less than the minimum side yard setback for the district in which the lot is situated. 
13.  Double Frontage Lots. This provision relates to lots having frontage on two (2) streets, but not located on a corner. This type of lot is not permitted in new subdivisions. However, if the lot was in existence prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, the minimum front yard shall be provided on each street in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
14.  Average Front Yard Requirements. The setback requirements of this Ordinance shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on already built upon lots located wholly or in part within two hundred (200) feet on each side of such lot and within the block and zoning district and fronting on the same street as such lot is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback of such a lot may be less than the requirement setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the developed lots. However, in no case shall setbacks be less than twelve (12) feet. 
15.  Code Requirements. All structures shall meet the requirements of all adopted codes in effect including, but not limited to, Building Code, Plumbing code, Electrical Code, Fire Prevention Code, and Housing Code. Where such codes exceed the minimum requirements of this Ordinance, the stricter provisions shall apply. 
16.  Fire Safety Requirements. Accessibility for firefighting equipment on an all-weather surface shall be maintained throughout all stages of construction. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with Standards for Water and Sewer in Chapter VIII of the Land Development Ordinance. 
17.  Zoning to Apply When Lot is Divided by Zoning District Boundary Line. In the event that a district boundary line on the Zoning Map divides a lot of record held in one (1) ownership on the date of passage of this Ordinance, each part of the lot so divided shall be used in conformity with the regulations established by this Ordinance for the district in which each such parcel is located; however, that if the property owner of such a lot so desires, he may extend a use allowed on the greatest portion of said lot one hundred (100) feet beyond the district boundary line in accordance with setbacks and yard requirements. 
18.  Side and Rear Yards May Not Be Required Next to Railroad. Within any non-residential district, the Planning Commission in its review of the site plan my waive the side and rear yard requirements when adjacent to the railroad rights-of-way if they determine the waiver will not adversely affect the area. 
19.  Permitted Encroachment of Yards and Setbacks. Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, chimneys, gutters, and fire escapes may project no more than three (3) feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways, which are or may be used for access for service and/or emergency vehicles; provided, however, that in the case of automobile service stations, motels, and similar uses which service the motoring public canopies shall be allowed over a driveway or walkway within the front yard not to extend from the principal building to a point any closer than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line. 
20.  State Department of Transportation Approval. All entrances or exits of any street or drive from or to any State highway shall be approved by the State Department of Transportation prior to the construction of such street or drive, or in the issuance of any building permit for any improvement to be served by such street or drive. 
21.  Accessory Use Requirements. The following requirements apply to accessory uses and structures regarding yard requirements: 
a.  Such structures shall not be permitted in any required front yard; 
b.  Where a corner lot adjoins in the rear of residential use, no accessory building shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building or closer than five (5) feet to the rear property line; 
c.  No garage nor other accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet to a side or rear lot line; 
d.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory; 
e.  Filling station pumps and pump islands where permitted may occupy the required yards, provided; however, that they are not less than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way; 
f.  Accessory uses in an apartment development may include but shall not be limited to, laundry facilities for the convenience of residents. All accessory structures in an apartment development shall be of construction equal to and compatible with the principal use structures and shall meet principal use setback requirements; 
g.  Swimming pools shall be enclosed by a fence of a minimum height of five (5) feet with all gates containing a self-closing, positive latch device to insure that the pool is enclosed at all times. 
h.  Satellite dish antennas shall be prohibited on the roofs of structures and in the front yards. When the dishes are placed in the side yard they shall meet the side yard setback requirements of the respective zone districts. 
22.  Lighting Strips, Lighting Injection Modules, LEDs or other continuous or connected series of lights shall not be used to outline individual windows, glass curtain walls, large glass sheets, doors, signs, or other architectural features of the building exterior. Rope or other connected series of lights intended for use as temporary holiday decoration shall be exempt from this section between the months of October and January. 
23.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018; Ord. No. 5202-A-2018, § 1, 7-9-2018; Ord. No. 5305-2018, § 1, 8-27-2018) 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONE DISTRICT PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
Development Standards Table Zoning
District Maximum Density (units/ac) Minimum Heated Area Minimum Lot Size (sq. ft.) Minimum project size Minimum Setbacks (feet) Front Side Rear R1 2 1,500 21,780 35 15 25 R2 3 1,300 12,000 25 15 25 R3-A (Single-family Detached) 4 1,200 7,500 25 10 25 R3-B (Duplex) 4 1,200 7,500 1 25 1 15 1 25 1 R3-C (Townhome) 7 1,000 N/A 8 acres 2 25 1 15 1 25 1 R4 12 800 N/A 8 acres 2 40 1 25 1 35 1 GC 21,780 40 15 30 NC 7,500 40 15 30 LI 21,780 50 25 25 HI sewer - 21,780 
no sewer - 43,560 50 25 25 OSI 21,780 35 15 25 RD 0.2 1,500 5 acres 35 25 35 RR DT refer to the Downtown District Standards SL refer to the Specific Standards for Senior Living 1. For the purposes of site planning, minimum setback requirements for R-3B, R-3C, and R-4 zoning categories, which are intended for attached and multi-family residential product, are to be applied per building, so that buildings may be setback from public or private rights-of-way and other buildings. Units within buildings may be ultimately platted with buildings subdivided into individual unit lots which may or may not include yard area in the lot area to be sold. 2. Refer to Section 7.304(1)(b), Conditional Use Permit. Note: Setbacks are required whether the right-of-way is public or private. For the purposes of this provision a private right-of-way shall run to the adjacent property or lot and the setbacks shall be determined from the property line of the adjacent property or lot unless the private right-of-way is by easement, in which event the setback shall begin at the paved area of the private right-of-way.  
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE V. - USE DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS 

7.500. - Purpose. 
    The following provisions apply to each of the zoning districts. In addition, requirements are contained within the District Development Standards and in other articles that apply to some or all of the zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.501. - Permitted and Prohibited Uses. 
    A Permitted Use is allowed within a zoning district by this Ordinance and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. If a use is not permitted within a zoning district by this Ordinance and is not eligible for consideration under a Conditional Use Permit, that use shall be considered a Prohibited Use. If the Zoning Administrator determines, in their sole discretion, that a use cannot be equated to a similar Permitted or Conditional use, then that use shall be considered a Prohibited Use. Decisions made by the Zoning Administrator may be appealed in accordance with the procedures outlined in Section 10.162. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.502. - Conditional Use Permit. 
    A Conditional Use Permit (CUP) may be applied for a use that generally would not be appropriate throughout a zoning district but which, if controlled as to the visual appearance, number, area, height, location, or relation to abutting or nearby uses, would not be injurious to the public, health, safety, appearance or general welfare. A CUP may be applied for only in zoning districts and for uses identified by this Ordinance and are subject to conditions, which may be imposed by the Mayor and City Council, and final approval by the Mayor and City Council through a Public Hearing process. 
    Upon issuing a conditional use permit, City Council may choose to attach the conditional use permit to a tax parcel, individual commercial suite or unit, or corporate entity, with or without successors. A conditional use permit is nontransferable to another location. 
    See Article IX for Non-Conforming Use Regulations for Conditional Uses. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.503. - Conditional Use Permit Review Criteria. 
    The Mayor and City Council may grant a Conditional Use Permit for the uses enumerated in Section 7.505 of this article. The granting of a Conditional Use Permit is conditional upon the site plan considered by the Mayor and City Council and are subject to the following process and review procedure: 
1.  All applications for Conditional Use Permits shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning, and Public Hearings will be held thereon in the same manner as applications for Public Hearings are conducted. 
2.  The Mayor and City Council may grant Conditional Use Permits for limited periods of time based upon the criteria set forth in Section 7.503(3). 
3.  In addition to district regulations, the Mayor and City Council shall consider, at a minimum, the following in its determination of whether or not to grant a Conditional Use Permit, whether to limit the time such Conditional Use is allowed and whether to restrict the Conditional Use to a particular owner or party: 
a.  Whether or not there will be a significant adverse effect on the surrounding area in which the proposed use will be located. 
b.  Whether or not the use is otherwise compatible with the surrounding area. 
c.  Whether or not the use proposed will result in a nuisance as defined under state law. 
d.  Whether or not quiet enjoyment of surrounding property will be adversely affected. 
e.  Whether or not property values of surrounding property will be adversely affected. 
f.  Whether or not adequate provisions are made for parking and traffic considerations. 
g.  Whether or not the site or intensity of the use is appropriate. 
h.  Whether or not special or unique conditions created by the use are consistent with the purpose, intent and goals of the Comprehensive Town Plan. 
i.  Whether or not adequate provisions are made regarding hours of operation. 
j.  Whether or not adequate controls and limits are placed on commercial and business deliveries. 
k.  Whether or not adequate landscape plans are incorporated to ensure appropriate transition between adjacent or nearby properties. 
l.  Whether or not the public health, safety, welfare or moral concerns of the surrounding neighborhood will be adversely affected. 
m.  Whether the application complies with any applicable specific requirements set forth in this chapter for Conditional Use Permits for particular types of uses. 
n.  Whether the applicant has provided sufficient information to allow a full consideration of all relevant factors. 
o.  Whether the Conditional Use requested emits or creates unusual odors which would warrant use of an odor elimination/attenuation system as recommended by industry standards. 
4.  In all applications for a Conditional Use Permit the burden shall be on the applicant both to produce sufficient information to allow the Mayor and City Council fully to consider all relevant factors and to demonstrate that the proposal complies with all applicable requirements and is otherwise consistent with the policies reflected in the factors enumerated in this chapter for consideration by the City. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.504. - Zoning District Descriptions. 
    The City has established the following zoning districts as part of the general zoning code. The Use/Zoning District Matrix in Section 7.505 applies to all uses within the following zoning districts: 
1.  General Districts: General Commercial (GC), Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Light Industrial (LI), Heavy Industrial (HI), Office Space Institutional (OSI), Single-family Detached Residential (R1, R2), Single-family Attached Residential (R3), Multifamily Residential (R4), Rural District (RD). 
2.  Downtown District: Central Business District (DT-CBD), Commercial Mixed Use (DT-CMU), General Commercial (DT-GC), Residential Office (DT-RO), Medium Density Residential (DT-MRA, DT-MRB), Low Density Residential (DT-LR), Very Low Density Residential (DT-VLR), Open Space (DT-OS). 
3.  Senior Living District: Single-family Detached Residential (SL-A), Single-family Attached Residential (SL-B), Multifamily Residential (SL-C). 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.505. - Use/Zoning District Matrix. 
    The following Use/Zoning District Matrix identifies the uses which are permitted in each zoning district and uses which are eligible for a Conditional Use Permit. Permitted uses are marked with a "P" and uses eligible for consideration under the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit are marked with a "C". 
    Additional development regulations or standards may further restrict uses marked with a "*" and a corresponding number. Refer to Section 7.506 for notes regarding these regulations. 
    Uses in which additional development regulations or regulatory permits are required are marked with a "R". Refer to Section 7.506 for these definitions or regulations. Further, additional development regulations may be required in the District Development Standards for the zoning district that the property is located in. 
Uses GC NC LI HI OSI R1 R2 R3 R4 CV RD OS DT-OS DT-CV DT-CBD DT-CMU DT-GC DT-RO DT-MRA/B DT-LR/VLR SL-A SL-B SL-C T3 T4 T4 Open T5 SD Advertising Display Sales P P Agricultural Business, Cooperative P P Ambulance Service P P P P P Amusement Park C C Animal Boarding, Daycare Facility P P P C C C C C Animal Hospital, Clinic P P P P P P P P C Appliance Sales, Repair Shop P P*2 P P P P C Assembly Hall, Auditorium, Civic Center P P*2 P P P C P P Athletic Club and Facilities P P P P*6 P P P*2/P*6 P P Auto Racetrack C C Automotive Repair Facility - Major C*2 P P C Automotive Repair Facility - Minor P*2 P*2 P P C C C C Automotive/Truck - Sales, Service, Parts, Rental C C C C C Automotive/Truck - Salvage, Scrap Parts C Bakery - Production, Distribution C P P C C Bakery - Retail P P P P P P*1 P P P Bank, Financial Institution P P P P P P P*3 P P P Bar/Tavern P*2 P*1 P P C C C Barber Shop, Beauty Salon P*2 P*2 P P P P*1 P P P Bed and Breakfast Inn P P P P P P Bodywork Therapy C*9 Bottled Gas - Storage, Distribution P C Bottling Plant P C Bowling Alley P P P P C Broadcast Station - With antenna C C C C Broadcast Studio - No antenna or visible communication device P P P P P P P P P P P Builder Supply - Distribution or Warehouse P P P Builder Supply - Retail P P*2 C C C C C P Car Wash C C C C C C Cemetery C C C C Check Cashing/Title Pawn/Bail Bond C Child/Day Care Center P P P P P P C P P P P Church, Place of Worship P C C C C P C C C C C C Club, Lodge P P*1 P P P P P*1 P*1 P*1 P P Coffee Shop P P Communication, Cellular, Microwave Tower C C C C C C C C Concrete/Paving - Batch Plant P Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Facility - Permanent P Consumer Fireworks Retail Stands - Temporary P*15 C*15 C*15 C*15 Customary Home Occupation (ref: Sections 7.507-7.508) P*2 P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Designated Recycling Collection Location C P P C C Dry Cleaning/Laundry - Drop Off, Pick Up Only P P*2 P P P*1 P P P Dry Cleaning/Laundry - On Premise P P P P C C Employment P P Family Care Facility C C C C C Firearm Dealer P P P P Florist - Production, Distribution P P P P C C Florist - Retail P P*2 P P P P P*1 P P P Funeral Home P P P P P P Funeral Home - With crematory C C C C C C Garden/Landscape Supply - Distribution or Warehouse P P C Garden/Landscape Supply - Retail C P*2 C C C C Gas/Fuel Station C C C C C C C Go kart/Motorbike Track C Golf Facility - Public or Private C C C C C C Government Buildings P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Gravel, Mineral Excavation and Processing C Grocery Store P P*2 Group Care Facility C C C C Heavy Equipment - Sales, Service, Storage, Rental P P Hospital C P C C C C Hotel (R) P*10 P*10 P*10 P*10 P*10 P*10 P*10 P*10 P*10 Ice Manufacturing, Sales P P Innovator Space P*16 P*16 P*16 P*16 P*16 P*16 Instructional Studios - Dance, Gymnastics, Martial Arts P P P*6 P P P P Junk, Salvage Yard C Laboratory P P P P P C C P Limited Accessory Use - Commercial (R) P*11 P C P Liquor, Package Store C*2 P C C C Machine Shop, Fabrication Facility P P P Manufacturing Facility P*2 C P C*5 C C Manufacturing Facility - Limited (R) P*12 C*12 P P*5/P*12 P*12 Massage Therapist (R) P*9 P*9 P*9 P*9 Massage Therapy Establishment C*9 Meat Processing Facility C Mobile Home Sales P Movie/Performance Theater C C P*1 P*1 P*1 P P P Multi-Tenant Building P P*2 Museum/Historical Display P P P P P P P P P Office - Common Business, Medical, Professional Service P P P P P P*6 P P P P P P Office - Contractor (R) P P P P P P*6/P*13 P*13 P*13 P*13 P P P Office - Real Estate Sales/Associated Services P P P P*6 P P P P P P Park/Open Space - Public P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P C Parking - Commercial (R) P P P P*14 P*14 P*14 C C C Pawn Shop/Precious Metal, Gem Dealer (R) C C C Personal Services P P*2 Petroleum Products - Storage C C Printing/Publishing/Engraving - Production Facility C P P P P Printing/Publishing/Engraving - Retail P P P P P P P P Recreation Center/Facility - Commercial C C C C C C C Recreational Vehicle - Sales, Service, Parts, Rental C C C Recreational Vehicle - Salvage, Scrap Parts C Residential - Accessory Dwelling Unit P P P P P P P P P Residential - Live/Work Unit P*8 P*8 P*8 P P P Residential - Multi-Family Assisted Senior Living P C C C P C C C C Residential - Multi-Family, Fee Simple C*2 P P*8/P*18 P*8/P*18 P*8/P*18 P*8/P*18 P*18 P P P P P Residential - Multi-Family Independent Senior Living P C C C P C C C C Residential - Multi-Family, Rental C*2 P C*8 C*8 C*8 C*8 C C C C Residential - Single Family Attached C C C C C C C C C Residential - Single Family Attached, Age-Restricted P Residential - Single Family Detached P P P*7 P P*8 P P P P P Residential - Single Family Detached, Age-Restricted P Restaurant - Drive-In P P C P P P C Restaurant - Drive-Thru P P*2 P*4 P*4 P*4 P P P Restaurant - Full Service P P P P*1 P P P*1 P P P P Retail Store - Common Merchandise P P*2 P*1 P P P*1 P P P Sawmill, Lumberyard P Schools - Private C C P C P P C C C P P C Self-Storage, Mini Warehouse C C C C Sexually Oriented Businesses C Spa Establishment (R) P*9 P*9 P*9 P*9 Storage Yard C C P C Tattoo Parlor/Body Piercing (R) C C C C C C Tobacco Specialty Shop C C*2 C C C C C Trade Shop, Skilled Tradesperson - Production Facility P P P P P P Trade Shop, Skilled Tradesperson - Retail P P*2 P*2 P*2 P P P P Truck Terminal C Utilities C C C C C C C C C P C C C P C C C C C C C C C C C C C C Warehouse - Storage C P P P*5 C C P Warehouse - Distribution C P P P*5 C C P Waste Transfer Station C  
(Ord. of 12-15-2017(1), § 3; Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018; Ord. No. 5202-C-2018, §§ 1, 2, 7-9-2018; Ord. No. 5305-2018, §§ 2-6, 8-27-2018; Ord. No. 5503-2018, §§ 1-5, 11-26-2018; Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
7.506. - Additional Development Regulations Required. 
    Where a use is conditional or permitted in Section 7.505, but is marked by a "*" and corresponding number, there are additional development regulations required as noted below: 
1.  P*1-Uses marked by this designation are limited to a maximum floor area of eight thousand (8,000) square feet. Bar/tavern uses shall be prohibited in any zoning classification with the Historic Overlay (HO) applied to it. No outdoor storage or sales is permitted. 
2.  P/C*2-Ridgewalk Overlay Requirements. Uses with this designation are exclusive to the Ridgewalk Parkway Overlay District. Additionally, unless otherwise stated, uses with this designation are limited to a maximum square footage of eight thousand (8,000) square feet. Uses identified with a "C" denotes that a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) is required. Uses in excess of the maximum square footage requirements may seek a CUP, as well. 
Additional requirements are as follows: 
Uses GC NC Automotive Repair Facility - Major 4,000 sq. ft. or greater N/A Automotive Repair Facility - Minor 4,000 sq. ft. max 4,000 sq. ft. max Builder Supply - Retail N/A N/A Customary Home Occupation For Multi-Family Units Only N/A Dry Cleaning/Laundry - Drop Off, Pick Up Only Only included in MTB 1 Only included in MTB Grocery Store N/A 40,000 sq. ft. max Liquor, Package Store Only included in MTB N/A Multi-Tenant Building (MTB) N/A 12,000 sq. ft. max Tobacco Specialty Shop Only included in MTB Only included in MTB  
1  MTB - Multi-Tenant Building 
3.  P*3-Uses marked by this designation shall have no drive-thru facility. 
4.  P*4-Uses marked by this designation shall have no drive-thru facility visible from any public street. 
5.  P*5-Uses marked are limited to a maximum floor area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. Any such use in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet shall have the ability to receive a conditional use permit for the use in an existing building. 
6.  P*6-Uses permitted by right by this designation are required to be located on a floor of a building which is not directly adjacent to a publicly accessible street (i.e., these uses may be allowed on upper floors of a building or in the basement of a building which fronts onto an alleyway). In the DT-CBD category, this restriction is limited to those buildings which front directly on Main Street between Noonday/Fowler Street and Kyle Street, East Main Street, Chambers Street, Arnold Mill Road and Fowler Street. Uses marked by this designation shall be available on a floor of a building directly adjacent to a publicly accessible street through the issuance of a conditional use permit. 
7.  P*7-Residential Single-Family Detached shall be permitted by right within the R3-A district only. Residential Single-Family Attached shall be permitted within the R3-B (duplex) and R3-C (townhome) districts only. 
8.  P/C*8-All residential uses (except Senior Living), as governed by the Use/Zoning District Matrix, Section 7.505, within the DT-CBD, DT-CMU, DT-GC, and DT-RO districts shall not front or provide direct access to an A or C Street (see Street Types Table in the Downtown District Standards); except however within DT-HO. Residential uses are allowed on upper floors or in basements of a building fronting any street type. 
a.  For DT-CBD and DT-CMU, the base density of twelve (12) DU/ac can be increased up to forty (40) DU/ac maximum, using any combination of the following bonus incentive procedures: 
i.  Vertical mixed-use structure-Twenty (20) percent DU/ac (Dwelling Units per Acre) increase. 
ii.  Provision of open space above the twenty (20) percent minimum requirement-One (1) percent DU/ac increase per one thousand (1,000) square feet of open space up to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet maximum or twenty (20) percent DU/ac increase maximum. 
iii.  Structured parking with parking spaces available to the public at no charge-One (1) percent DU/ac increase per one (1) parking space. 
iv.  Professional office space-Ten (10) percent DU/ac increase per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of professional office space. 
v.  Mayor and City Council reserve the right to increase density above forty (40) DU/ac on a case by case basis, depending on the compatibility of the project with adopted plans, considering the following elements: economic impact, regional significance, amenities provided to the community, and public infrastructure improvements. 
vi.  Once site plans are submitted to the Community Development Department utilizing any one (1) of the above bonus incentives, the Community Development Director will brief the Mayor and City Council, reviewing the project plan at the next available City Council Meeting. 
b.  Residential, Single-Family Attached is a Conditional Use in all districts where it is permitted. The following criteria shall be used for evaluating Conditional Use Permit proposals for Attached product, in addition to the criteria listed in Section 7.503-Conditional Use Permit Review Criteria: 
i.  Whether or not the proposed location and site is appropriate for a townhome product, and whether the property could have a higher and better use. 
ii.  Whether or not the proposal includes a mix of housing types and/or price points. 
iii.  Whether commercially zoned property is proposed to be converted to a primarily residential use. 
iv.  Whether the proposal includes innovative or unique design. 
v.  Whether the proposal includes the construction of street connections and/or Greenprints Trail connections. 
9.  P/C*9-The following uses: sexually oriented businesses, spa establishment, bodywork therapy, massage therapist, massage therapy establishment, pawn shop/dealer in precious metals and gems, tattoo parlor/body piercing, have additional regulations and/or regulatory fees governed by the Code of Woodstock. Tattoo parlor/body piercing shall only be permitted as an ancillary use in DT-CBD and DT-GC. 
10.  P*10-Hotels shall be required to provide main access to all guest rooms through a lobby of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet. Each guest room shall be accessed through an interior hallway and shall not have direct access to the exterior of the building unless it is required by fire safety regulations. Each hotel shall be required to provide staff or management on duty twenty-four (24) hours per day. Continental style dining for the guests of the facility is allowed in or near the lobby without providing additional parking. At a minimum provisions for weekly cleaning for each guest room shall be provided. Outside storage or long-term parking of heavy, construction or related equipment shall be prohibited. No facility permitted as a hotel shall be converted or used primarily as an apartment or condominium. No business license shall be issued for any business operating from a guest room within a hotel. This use excludes extended stay hotel or motels, which are advertised, designed, or utilized for weekly or monthly operation, unless approved by City Council with a Conditional Use Permit (C). 
11.  P*11-Limited Accessory Use-Commercial shall include retail bakery, barber shop, beauty salon, cafeteria/dining facility, dry cleaning-drop off, pick up only, grocery with general merchandise, pharmacy, shoe repair, tailor. 
12.  P*12-Manufacturing Facility-Limited shall be limited to establishments that produce small consumer household products and does not emit noise in excess of the City's noise restrictions for commercial users, odor, dust, vibration or fumes beyond the building enclosure, where all process, fabricating, assembly or disassembly of items takes place wholly within an enclosed building. 
13.  P*13-Office-Contractor shall be limited to office space only. No storage of materials, vehicles and/or equipment shall be permitted in categories not allowing storage-warehouse. 
14.  P*14-Parking-Commercial shall be required to be a parking structure in any of the permitted downtown districts. 
15.  P*15-Consumer Fireworks Retail Stands-Temporary shall include the following requirements: 
a.  License Required. A license shall be required in accordance with Chapter 22 of the Code of the City of Woodstock. 
b.  Permit Required. A permit shall be required prior to the establishment of a Consumer Fireworks Retail Stands-Temporary Use ("stand"). Said permit shall be posted on the site during the operation. Upon expiration of the permit, the use shall cease. 
c.  Permit Term. The permit is valid for no more than forty-five (45) days, no more than two (2) times in a twelve (12) month period. The permit shall specify the first and last day of the permit term, beginning at 12:01 a.m. on the first day and expiring at 11:59 p.m. on the last day specified by the permit. 
d.  Permission Required. The applicant shall provide a notarized written permission statement from the property owner or lease holder of the subject site. A twenty-four (24) hour contact number of the property owner or lease holder shall be provided along with the permit application. 
e.  Location. Only one (1) permit shall be issued per tax parcel stands shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a fire hydrant, unless the Fire Chief or designee of the Woodstock Fire Department in writing authorizes operation in excess of one thousand (1,000) feet. Stands shall maintain a minimum twenty-five (25) foot setback from the right-of-way and not be located within required landscaping or buffer. Stands shall also maintain a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from any driveway, and shall not be located within three hundred (300) feet of nursing homes, hospitals, day care facilities, schools, or residential districts. 
f.  Distance. Shall not be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of another Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Stand-Temporary or Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales Facility-Permanent, measured by the shortest distance between property lines. 
g.  Parking. A minimum of six (6) parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to the stand for the exclusive use of the operation. 
h.  Hours. The hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
i.  Signage. Shall be limited to the requirements set forth under Chapter XX. 
j.  Mobile Stand. It shall be unlawful to sell consumer fireworks from any motor vehicle or from a trailer towed by a motor vehicle. 
16.  P*16-Innovator Space. In the interest of economic development and to remain as competitive as possible, the Innovator Space Use is hereby established. Once a proposed use is classified as Innovator Space by the Zoning Administrator, it may proceed under these provisions, adhering to the following requirements: 
a.  The maximum floor area in a building used for innovator space shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet in DT-GC or DT-CMU or four thousand (4,000) square feet in DT-CBD or DT-RO. 
b.  An area of the building equal to a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the total square footage of the innovator space shall be dedicated to the retail sale of product made on premises, merchandise associated with the products and/or education about the processes utilized in the space. 
c.  Activities related to innovator space shall take place within an enclosed building and outdoor storage of materials, inventory, equipment, commercial vehicles or equipment is prohibited. 
d.  Activities related to innovator space shall not result in emissions of noise, smoke, fumes, heat, or odors that leave the innovator space. 
e.  No more than one (1) delivery or pick-up per day by vehicles exceeding thirty (30) feet in length. 
f.  Minimum parking requirement shall be one (1) space per employee plus one (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of customer sales or showroom area, but not less than one (1) parking space per five hundred (500) square feet of Gross Floor Area (GFA). 
g.  In the event that a proposed Innovator Space project requires rezoning, conditional use permit, or a variance from the Code, the applicant may request expedited approval by the City Council. Expedited approval means the requirement of only one public hearing before City Council and possibly a waiver of the public input meeting, as determined by the Community Development Department. All other public hearing requirements of the Land Development Ordinance shall remain. 
h.  City Council may modify any of these requirements with a conditional use permit. 
17.  P*17-Residential, Multi-Family, Rental uses shall have direct access from an A or C street, or if accessed by only B and/or D streets, there shall be a minimum of four (4) access points to B and/or D streets, each connecting to the existing transportation network outside the development and which are not dead end streets. Developments with more than thirty (30) units shall complete a sewer availability and capacity study, and shall submit a traffic study, at the time of site plan submittal. 
18.  P*18-Residential, Multi-Family, Fee Simple uses (also known as condominiums or townhomes) shall have direct access from an A, B, or C street, provided, however, projects with thirty (30) units or less may be developed with access only by D streets as long as the total number of Residential, Multi-Family, Fee Simple uses accessed by such D streets do not exceed thirty (30) units. See LDO Chapter XV, Section 15.305. Developments with more than thirty (30) units which have direct access from an A, B, or C street shall complete a sewer availability and capacity study, and shall submit a traffic study, at the time of site plan submittal. 
(Ord. of 12-15-2017(1), § 4; Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018; Ord. No. 5305-2018, § 7, 8-27-2018; Ord. No. 5503-2018, § 6, 11-26-2018; Ord. No. 5642-2019, §§ 2, 3, 2-25-2019) 
7.507. - Customary Home Occupation Performance Standards. 
A.  Customary Home Occupations shall be permitted in any residential zoning district or residential dwelling, provided that the following performance standards are met: 
1.  The occupation, profession or trade must be carried out wholly within the principal building; 
2.  Not more than thirty (30) percent of the floor area of the principal building can be used for the conduct of said home occupation; 
3.  No merchandise or articles shall be displayed in such a way as to be visible from outside the structure; 
4.  There shall be no alteration in the residential character of the building or premises; 
5.  No person who is not a resident of the premises shall be employed, with the exceptions stated herein. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
a.  EMPLOYEES: The occupation shall be conducted by members of the family who are living the residence and maximum of one (1) additional employee. 
b)  ON-SITE EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the home occupational license holder to perform the business related duties on the same premises/residence for which the occupational license is issued. 
c)  OFF-SITE EMPLOYEE: A person(s) may or may not be directly employed by the occupational license holder and does not perform duties on the same residence for which the occupational license is issued for. 
6.  The home occupation shall not create disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, radio or television interference, voltage fluctuations or unhealthy or unsightly conditions; (Whether the disturbance is sufficient to invoke the prohibition of this section shall be determined by comparing the occupation caused disturbance to noises, smoke, odors, etc., that are commonly found in a residential neighborhood, such as children playing, yard maintenance tools, etc.); 
7.  One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area devoted to the home occupation; 
8.  No mechanical equipment shall be installed or used except as is normally required for domestic purposes; (This shall allow for normal home office equipment, including but not limited to, fax machines, computers and other communications equipment.); 
9.  Accessory home occupations may not serve as headquarters or dispatch centers where employees come to the site and are dispatched to other locations; 
10.  Business or home occupation related group instruction, assembly, or activity shall be limited to five (5) persons at one (1) time only (day care excluded); 
11.  All home occupations shall be subject to the periodic inspections by the Community Development Department or its designee; 
12.  The Community Development Department must approve all Businesses/Occupational/Home Occupational Licenses which shall be re-certified annually; 
13.  Deliveries to the home occupation shall be made by passenger vehicles, mail carriers, or step vans (UPS, Federal Express, etc.) and must not restrict traffic circulations; 
14.  Deliveries to the home occupation through tractor-trailers or vehicle with over six (6) wheels shall be prohibited; and 
15.  No signs on the subject property, advertising, the permitted home occupation, shall be allowed. 
B.  Customary Home Occupation Use Standards. The following uses shall be permitted uses in a Customary Home Occupation provided they meet the above performance standards: 
1.  Instructional or tutoring services within an enclosed building, but limited to four (4) pupils at one (1) time. 
2.  Office facility of a salesman, sales representative or manufacturer's representative provided that there is no manufacturing, production, or storage provided on the premises, but limited to one (1) on site employee. Offsite employees will be limited to the equal number of off street parking spaces provided but limited to five (5). 
3.  Office facility of an Architect, Broker, Engineer, Land Surveyor, Lawyer, computer programmer, and similar or related professions, but limited to one (1) on site employee. Offsite employees will be limited to the equal number of off street parking spaces provided but limited to five (5). 
4.  Real estate broker, broker, real estate agent, appraiser, insurance agent, mortgage broker, or similar or related professions, but limited to one (1) on site employee. Offsite employees will be limited to the equal number of off street parking spaces provided but limited to five (5). 
5.  Arts and crafts, artistic studios, including painting, sculpture, composing, writing, and related crafts such as weaving, rug work, and lapidary. 
6.  Office service, including work processing, book keeping, transcribing, data entry, and telephone answering services. 
7.  Mail order wholesale or retail businesses provided there is no sale, shipment or delivery or merchandise on the premises. 
8.  Contractors, electrician, landscaping business/contractors, plumbing, air-conditioning/HVAC repair business/contractors, painting, cleaning, chimney cleaning and other related businesses but not including outside storage of equipment materials or vehicles. 
9.  Alterations and upholstery repair. 
10.  Barber and beauty shops, provided that the use is conducted by family members who live in the residence or only one (1) outside employee with only one (1) member residing in the property. The business shall consist of no more than one (1) beauty/barber chair, and no more than two (2) customers shall be permitted at one (1) time. Said business shall operate only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. All local and state licenses as well as any necessary permits must be obtained prior to the business being opened. There shall be no external evidence that a business is in operation inside the residence. Customer parking must be available on the same side of the street as the residence or paved parking must be provided on the side or rear of the property. Parking on the front of the property is prohibited. 
11.  Child day care center provided the following standards are met: 
a.  The child day care center must be located in a residential structure as a secondary use. The residential use of the structure must be the primary use of the structure. 
b.  The owner of the structure must obtain the approval for the day care use of his residence from seventy-five (75) percent of the property owners within five hundred (500) feet from his property, including the abutting residents. 
c.  The road giving access to the center must be of adequate capacity to handle the additional traffic and adequate off-street parking must be provided. 
d.  If the proposed center is not on sewer, the applicant must obtain a letter from County Sanitarian stating that the on-site septic tank system has the capacity to handle the proposed center. 
e.  The applicant must have a letter of conditional approval from the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
12.  Other similar uses as approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.508. - Live/Work Unit Use Performance Standards. 
1.  Live/Work Units shall only be permitted in the residential zoning districts listed in Section 7.505 of the Land Development Ordinance provided that the following performance standards are met: 
a.  The Live/Work unit shall be the primary dwelling of the occupant; 
b.  The residential and the commercial space must be occupied by the same tenant, and no portion of the Live/Work unit may be rented or sold separately; 
c.  All business activities must be wholly contained within each Unit; 
d.  The outdoor storage and/or display of merchandise, sundries, and equipment is expressly prohibited. This requirement excludes vehicles and trailers within delineated parking spaces, not otherwise prohibited by restrictive covenants; 
e.  The following limitations shall apply to all Live/Work Units based on the most current International Building Code: 
1.  The Live/Work unit shall not be greater than three thousand (3,000) square feet in area; 
2.  The nonresidential area shall not be more than fifty (50) percent of the area of each Live/Work unit; 
3.  The nonresidential area function shall be limited to the first or main floor only of the Live/Work unit; 
4.  Not more than five nonresidential workers or employees are allowed to occupy the nonresidential area at any one time; (IBC Reference: Sections 419.1-419.9) 
5.  The commercial portion of the unit shall be ADA compliant; (IBC Reference: Section 419.7) 
6.  The Live/Work Unit uses shall not create disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, radio or television interference, voltage fluctuations or unhealthy or unsightly conditions that would unreasonably interfere with residential uses. 
2.  The following uses shall be permitted uses in a Live/Work units provided they meet the above performance standards: 
a.  Bakery - Retail. 
b.  Barber Shop, Beauty Salon. 
c.  Child/Day Care Center. 
d.  Customary Home Occupation. 
e.  Florist-Retail. 
f.  Instructional Studios - Dance, Gymnastics Martial Arts. 
g.  Massage Therapy. 
h.  Office - Common Business, Medical, Professional Service. 
i.  Office - Contractor (R). 
j.  Office - Real Estate Sales/Associated Services. 
k.  Restaurant - Small café, coffee shop, ice cream and yogurt shops. 
l.  Retail Store - Common Merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.509. - Railroad District Use Standards. 
    In the RR Railroad District the only allowable uses are railroad infrastructure and signage, which signage is required by Federal, State or City law or regulation, utility infrastructure and easements and transportation infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.510. - Donation Containers. 
    Donation containers shall mean any attended or unattended container, receptacle, box, or similar device used for soliciting and collecting donations of any tangible personal property, money, or similar items for profit or charitable purposes. Vehicles, trailers, and similar conveyances, whether attended or unattended, are expressly prohibited for use as donation containers. 
1.  Donations Generally. Donations of tangible personal property or money without the use of a donation container shall only occur at permanent structures or suites designated for such use. The use of vehicles, trailers, and similar conveyances, whether attended or unattended, to solicit donations of any kind is prohibited. 
2.  Exemptions. Donation containers for the express purpose of collecting Americans flags for retirement are exempt from this section. Containers, receptacles, boxes, vehicles, trailers, and similar conveyances owned by federal, state, or local government are exempt from this section. 
3.  Permit Required, Implementation. No Donation container shall be installed without first applying for and receiving a permit from the City as governed by this section. The fee for the donation container permit may be established by City Council from time to time with resolution. No donation container placed on or after September 1, 2016 may be out of compliance with this Ordinance. Any donation container existing in place prior to October 1, 2016 shall have a period of six (6) months to obtain a permit and come in to compliance with this Ordinance. 
4.  Occupation Tax. Prior to the issuance of a donation container permit, the entity requesting the permit shall pay all occupation taxes due as provided by this Code with the issuance of a business license. 
5.  Application. Prior to delivery and/or installation of any donation container, an application shall be filed with the Community Development Department identifying the size, color and location of each donation container, as well as any signage proposed on the exterior of the donation container. Each application must also be accompanied by a letter from the owner of the property authorizing installation of a donation container on their property. 
6.  Zoning. Donation containers shall only be permitted on developed property within the GC, DT-GC, and DT-CMU zoning districts. 
7.  Location. Donation containers shall be located so as not to interfere with traffic sight lines or on-site circulation. Donation containers shall be installed on a paved surface, but may not be located within a designated parking space, drive aisle, loading area, or within any established buffer. No donation container shall be permitted within the front setback of any parcel and shall only be permitted behind the front building line of the principal structure. 
8.  Number and Size. No more than one (1) donation container shall be placed on any parcel of land. Donation containers shall not cover a ground surface area in excess of five (5) feet by five (5) feet, nor be more than six (6) feet in height. 
9.  Contact Information. The following contact information shall be required to be displayed on each donation container: name, address, and telephone number of the entity permitted to install the container along with a twenty-four (24) hour contact name, telephone number, and email address for the same entity. 
10.  Signage. No more than two (2) signs of no more than two (2) square feet shall be permitted on each donation container. 
11.  Cleanliness and Maintenance. The property owner and donation container owner shall be responsible for the maintenance, upkeep and servicing of permitted donation containers. Donation containers shall be maintained in good condition with no structural damage, holes, or visible rust. Donation containers shall be free of debris and shall be emptied regularly to prevent overflow of donations or accumulation of junk, debris, or other material. 
12.  Renewal of Permit. The term of the permit shall expire annually on December 31st. Permits may be renewed by submitting a renewal application and associated fee to the Community Development Department. No person to whom a permit has been issued shall transfer, assign, or convey such permit to another person. 
13.  Removal. Donation containers shall be removed upon permit expiration or when the property becomes vacant. 
14.  Revocation of Permit. Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this section may be subject to revocation for cause by the Director of Community Development or designee, including but not limited to, the failure to comply with this section or any other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.511. - Parking Performance Standards. 
    Off-street automobile parking shall be provided in accordance with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.512. - Plans Required. 
    A parking plan for all but single-family residential uses shall be submitted to the City with the building plans or with the occupation tax license in case of a change in use. The City shall review the proposed parking plan to insure its conformance with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.513. - Design Standards. 
    Except provisions for single-family residences, all parking facilities including entrances, exits and maneuvering areas, shall comply with the following provisions: 
1.  Shall have access to a street or alley. 
2.  Shall be graded and paved, and curbed, including access drive(s). 
3.  Shall have all spaces marked with paint lines, curb stone or other similar designations. 
4.  Standard vehicle parking spaces shall not be less than nine (9) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet deep, exclusive of interior drives. 
5.  Compact vehicle parking spaces may be provided up to twenty (20) percent of the total parking required. Compact vehicle parking shall be grouped together with no less than four (4) consecutive spaces in any one (1) location. The area(s) provided with compact vehicle parking shall be clearly identified by signage or other accepted marking. Compact vehicle spaces shall not be less than eight (8) feet wide and fifteen (15) feet deep, exclusive of interior drives. 
6.  There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a street. The following standards apply to interior drives: 
a.  One-way drive shall be twenty (20) feet wide. 
b.  Two-way drive with ninety (90) degree parking shall be twenty-four (24) feet wide. 
c.  Two-way drive with sixty (60) degree parking shall be twenty-two (22) feet wide. 
d.  Two-way drive with forty-five (45) degree parking shall be twenty (20) feet wide. 
7.  Shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties of public streets. 
8.  Shall be separated from sidewalks and streets in public rights-of-way by wheel bumpers and an adequate planted reserve strip. 
9.  Parking areas established for permitted non-residential uses shall be visually screened from adjacent residential uses. See Article IV, "Buffers" of this Ordinance for details. 
10.  The parking area including space and driveway arrangements shall conform to generally accepted geometric design standards. 
11.  Adequate lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night, such lighting shall be arranged and installed so as not to reflect nor cause glare on abutting properties. 
12.  Shall meet American Disabilities Act requirements for accessible parking facilities. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.514. - Tree and Landscape Standards. 
    For parking lot tree and landscape standards, refer to Chapter IX of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.515. - Location. 
    All parking facilities required space shall be provided on the same plot with the use it serves, except as provided herein: 
1.  Where provision of the required parking spaces involves one (1) or more parcels or tracts of land that are not a part of the lot on which the principal use is located, the developer shall submit with his application for a permit, an instrument which subjects said parcels or tracts to parking uses for the principal use it serves. The developer shall pay the necessary fee and the building inspector shall have said instrument registered in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
2.  Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located and maintained at a distance not to exceed three hundred (300) feet from the non-residential building served. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.516. - Joint Use of Parking Facilities. 
    Joint use of up to fifty (50) percent of the required spaces may be permitted for two (2) or more uses located in the same building, on the same parcel, or on adjacent parcels provided that the applicant or developer can demonstrate that the uses will not substantially overlap in hours of operation or in the demand of shared spaces. For shared parking on two (2) or more adjacent parcels, a written agreement shall be provided for review by the Community Development Department, and when approved, an easement shall be recorded in the deed records and cross referenced to the owner's deeds for each affected property. Additionally, shared spaces serving uses on more than one (1) parcel shall be clearly marked as such. If the easement is cancelled, expires or is otherwise voided, other parking shall be provided in accordance with this chapter. If the required parking is not provided for any use covered by the former agreement, such use shall be illegal. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.517. - Use of Area. 
    No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, and servicing or long term storage of any vehicle or equipment. No sales or the outdoor storage of items for sale shall be allowed within the parking areas required by the minimum standards within this Ordinance. Any outdoor storage of items for sale in areas abutting parking area as required under this Ordinance shall be separated and screened from view of the required public parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.518. - Required Spaces. 
1.  The number of parking spaces required for a particular use shall be as set forth in the table below. 
2.  Each use has minimum parking space requirements. The maximum allowable number of parking spaces per use is ten (10) percent over the stated minimum number. Single-family detached and single-family attached have no maximum. Where the DPC determines neighborhoods have residences abutting or close to the street, little or no on street parking or lack adequate space for visitor parking, new single-family attached and single-family detached developments shall have a minimum of 0.25 guest parking spaces for each residential unit. 
3.  In the event of exceeding the maximum allowable number, the parking spaces shall meet parking overage standards as set forth in Section 7.769, "Standards for Parking Spaces Exceeding the Maximum." 
4.  Uses marked with an asterisk (*), which do not have internal space on-site for loading and unloading, require at least one loading space in addition to the required parking spaces, to be designed as required by Section 7.521, Off-Street Loading Requirements. 
Use Parking Spaces *Automobile repair, including oil change 1.5 spaces per service bay *Automobile sales, not including service area and not including inventory storage 1 space per 1,000 square feet gross sales floor area Bank 3.33 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area Bed and breakfast 1 space per guest bedroom *Place of assembly 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of main assembly area. Funeral homes must have a minimum of 15 spaces. Day care center 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area Dance, gymnastics or martial arts school 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area Independent retirement living 1 space per dwelling unit *Furniture store 1 space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area *Gas station, including convenience store 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area *Grocery store 3.33 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area Golf course 4 spaces per each golf hole Golf driving range 1 space per practice tee box Health/fitness club 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area *Hospital Number to be determined by parking generation study funded by the applicant and approved by the Director of Community Development. *Hotel/motel (loading area required only if hotel includes banquet, assembly, or restaurant areas) 1 space per rental unit. Banquet, assembly, meeting, and restaurant areas shall be calculated separately, but shared parking shall be allowed as stipulated in Section 7.765. Library 1 space per 1,000 square feet gross floor area *Manufacturing 1 space per 2,000 square feet gross floor area, not including office functions *Museum 1 space per 1,000 square feet gross floor area *Full care facilities 1 space per 3 beds *Assisted living facilities 0.25 spaces per dwelling unit Professional office 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area *Medical or dental office 3.33 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area *Recreation and amusement centers without stadium seating or a spectator area including swimming pools, miniature golf, skating rink, bowling alley 1 space per 250 square feet gross floor or ground area devoted to such use Residential, detached single-family 2 spaces per unit Residential, attached single-family 2 spaces per unit Residential, multifamily 1 space per studio or 1 bedroom unit, plus 0.5 space per additional bedroom *Full service restaurant, bar, tavern, fast casual restaurant 7 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area *Restaurant, fast food 6 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area *Retail store 3.33 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area Elementary school 0.14 spaces per student of design capacity Middle school 0.07 spaces per student of design capacity High school 0.20 spaces per student of design capacity *Shopping center over 30,000 square feet 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area *Shopping center 30,000 square feet or less 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area *Stadium or arena Number to be determined by parking generation study funded by the applicant and approved by the Director of Community Development. Storage facility 0.25 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area *Transit terminals Number of spaces to be determined by Community Development staff *Warehouse (calculate any office spaces separately) 0.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area  
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.519. - Interpretation of Required Spaces. 
1.  The parking requirements in the chart do not limit other parking requirements contained in these regulations. 
2.  The parking requirements in the chart do not limit special requirements, which may be imposed. 
3.  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be constructed to be the next highest whole number. 
4.  The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed on the chart shall be the same as for a listed use of similar characteristics of parking demand generation. 
5.  Where parking structures are utilized, only spaces on the top level of any exposed structure shall be counted towards parking requirements. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.520. - Standards for Parking Spaces Exceeding the Maximum. 
    The maximum number of parking spaces may be exceeded by designing the parking to some of the standards set forth herein. The intent of these standards is to enhance the attractiveness and sustainability of the public realm by mitigating the effects of overparking. Each standard allows an extra percentage or number of parking spaces over the minimum number set forth in Section 7.767. More than one (1) standard can be used together, but in no case shall the number of spaces exceed two hundred (200) percent of the minimum number of spaces allowed. In situations where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces allowed shall be constructed to the next highest whole number, unless otherwise stated. Any standard employed shall be maintained by the property owner in perpetuity. 
1.  Install an electric vehicle charging station. One (1) space over the minimum shall be permitted for each electric vehicle charging station installed. Parking spaces with charging stations shall be designated for electric vehicle parking only. This standard shall be used for no more than six (6) spaces. 
2.  Construct extra spaces in permeable pavement. The plan shall include an underdrain with connection to the stormwater management facility if site plan review staff determines it is necessary. One (1) extra space allowed for each two (2) spaces constructed in permeable pavement (do not round up for fractional spaces). 
3.  Design the parking lot with bioretention areas, stormwater planters, or other alternative stormwater management techniques that handle the runoff from the entire parking lot surface area for the first one-half (0.5) inch of rainfall during a storm event. The plan for this standard shall be reviewed and approved by the Development Process Committee. One hundred fifty (150) percent of the minimum number of spaces allowed. 
4.  Use paving materials with a three (3) year aged solar reflectance (SR) value of at least twenty-eight one-hundredths (0.28). If three (3) year aged value information is not available, use materials with an initial SR of at least thirty-three one-hundredths (0.33) at installation. The paving material or coating must be maintained properly in perpetuity. One hundred twenty (120) percent of the minimum number of spaces allowed. 
5.  Employ a rainwater harvesting and storage system. This method will only be allowed after approval of a plan for the system by the Development Process Committee. The system should be sized based on the size of the contributing drainage area, local rainfall patterns, and the projected demand for the harvested rainwater. The plan should outline a dedicated use for the harvested rainwater. One (1) parking space for each three hundred (300) square feet of area where rainwater is conveyed into the system. Extra spaces shall only be awarded for each full three hundred (300) square feet of area, with no fractional spaces being rounded up. 
6.  Build a solar parking canopy over at least one-third (0.333) of the parking spaces. Placement of structure and parking lot screening shall be reviewed and approved by the Director of Community Development. Two hundred (200) percent of the minimum number of spaces allowed. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.521. - Off-Street Loading Requirements. 
    Off-street loading shall be established in accordance with all applicable provisions of this section. 
1.  Design Standards. One (1) or more off-street loading spaces shall be provided on the same or adjoining premises with the facility it serves, either inside or outside a building and shall: 
a.  Have a minimum dimension of thirteen and one-half (13.5) feet by sixty (60) feet by fourteen and one-half (14.5) feet overhead clearance. 
b.  Be drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, and surfaced with erosion resistant material. 
c.  Be located so as not to hinder the free movement of vehicles nor pedestrians over a street, sidewalk, or alley. 
2.  Use of Area. Loading space(s) shall be maintained in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee and not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling nor servicing of any vehicles, equipment, and materials or supplies. 
3.  Mixed Uses in a Building. Where a building is used for more than one (1) use or for different uses, loading space may be shared among uses, as permitted by the Director of Community Development. 
4.  Uses located in the Downtown District. Loading spaces for these uses in the Downtown District may not be required on a case-by-case basis, and a plan for shared or remote loading spaces may be accepted in lieu of providing loading space on-site, as determined by the Director of Community Development. Criteria used to evaluate whether loading spaces are needed follow: 
a.  Availability of loading spaces that could be shared on adjacent properties. 
b.  Volume of traffic on the primary access street. 
c.  Whether user has control of the premises outside the footprint of the structure. 
d.  Whether the applicant can establish proof that deliveries will occur from vehicles that could fit in a normally sized parking space. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE VI. - BUFFERS 
See Chapter XVII for Stream Buffer Requirements. 

7.600. - Buffer Description. 
    A buffer as referenced in this article is a land area reserved to provide a visual and noise barrier which is created by the use of plant or natural existing materials, alone or in combination with berms, fencing or walls. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.601. - Purpose. 
    Buffers are required to eliminate or minimize potential nuisances, such as dirt, litter, noise, lights, signs, structures or parking areas. Buffers provide the spacing necessary to reduce potentially adverse impacts. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.602. - Buffer Requirements. 
1.  General Buffer Requirements. 
Buffer Requirements Table R1 R2 R3 R4 GC NC LI HI OSI RD PUD DT SL R1 25 35 45 35 50 50 35 20 25 refer to Section 7.720 refer to Section 7.740 R2 25 35 45 35 50 50 35 20 25 R3 25 25 25 45 35 50 50 35 25 25 R4 35 35 25 45 35 50 50 35 45 25 GC 45 45 45 45 35 40 45 25 NC 35 35 35 25 35 40 35 25 LI 50 50 50 50 35 35 35 50 50 HI 50 50 50 50 40 40 40 50 50 OSI 35 35 35 35 35 40 35 25 RD 20 20 25 45 45 35 50 50 35 50 PUD 25 25 25 25 25 25 50 50 25 50 DT refer to Section 7.720 SL refer to Section 7.740  
*NOTE: A two and one-half-foot evergreen planted berm or zero visibility stockade fence may be substituted for up to five (5) feet of reserved space if approved as shown on the preliminary site plans except as specified herein. 
2.  Buffers are required on City of Woodstock properties that border unincorporated County properties. The Director of Community Development, or designee, shall enforce the buffer requirement found in the Buffer Requirements Table that most closely corresponds to the County zoning district adjacent to the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.603. - Location and Design Requirements, General Buffers. 
1.  Buffers shall not be located on any portion of an existing, dedicated, or reserved public or private street or right-of-way. Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending from the lot or parcel boundary line. Reserved buffers shall be established independently of building setbacks. Building setback requirements shall begin at the portion of a reserved buffer strip furthest from the property. 
2.  For new residential subdivisions with buffer requirements, buffers shall be located outside of individual residential lots, and shall be maintained by the Homeowner's Association. 
3.  Where a required drainage, utility or other easement is partially or wholly within a required buffer, the developer shall design the buffer to eliminate or minimize planting within the required easement. 
4.  Where a street or road separates different zones, the minimum specified buffers would be required, except where the right-of-way is one hundred (100) feet wide or greater. 
5.  Buffers shall be generally natural and undisturbed and free of encroachments, except with respect to matters required herein or by conditions of zoning. 
6.  Buffers required alongside property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required to observe the sight distance requirements contained in Chapter III of the Land Development Ordinance. 
7.  Buffers in which vegetation is non-existent or is inadequate to provide a year-round effective visual screen shall be planted with supplemental plantings. A buffer design shall be submitted for approval, specifying the type, size and location of all plantings and any non-vegetative screening mechanism (i.e., fence) proposed for use. Refer to the Buffer Planting Standards within Chapter IX of the Land Development Ordinance. 
8.  Species selected are to be ecologically compatible to the site and appropriate for design situation. 
9.  Protection during Land Disturbing Activities. Natural buffers shall be clearly marked in accordance with the standards within Chapter IX of the Land Development Ordinance and protected prior to commencement of and during authorized land disturbing activities and during construction. 
10.  Trees included in buffer plantings may be counted toward site density calculations as required by Chapter IX of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.604. - Use of Buffers. 
1.  A buffer may be used for some forms of passive recreation; it may contain trails built in accordance with the City's trail master plan, provided that: 
a.  The year round visual barrier is preserved, and 
b.  The total width of the buffer is maintained, and 
c.  In no event shall the following uses be allowed in buffers: creation of impervious surfaces outside of trails built in accordance with the City's trail master plan, play-fields, stables, swimming pools, tennis courts, or similar active recreation uses. 
2.  Buffer areas shall not be used for parking. 
3.  A required buffer may not include a storm water retention area. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.605. - Ownership of Buffers. 
    Buffers may remain in the ownership of the original owner (and assigns) of a land use. Buffers may be subjected to deed restrictions and subsequently be freely conveyed. They may be transferred to any consenting grantee, provided that any such conveyance adequately guarantees the protection of the buffer for the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.606. - Requirements for Maintaining Buffers. 
1.  Responsibility. The responsibility for maintenance of a required buffer shall remain with the owner of the property. Maintenance is required in order to ensure the proper functioning of a buffer as a reserved open area which reduces or eliminates nuisance. The owner shall be responsible for installing live, healthy plants. Replacement plants shall be provided for any required plants which die or are removed due to disease. 
2.  Maintenance. Maintenance shall consist of mowing, removal of litter and dead plant materials, and pruning as needed. Vegetation thus removed shall be replaced where necessary to meet the screening requirements contained herein. Natural water courses within a buffer shall be maintained as free flowing and free of debris. Stream channels shall be maintained so as not to alter flood plain. 
Where pedestrian or bicycle trails are allowed within a buffer, these trails shall be maintained to provide for their safe use. Such maintenance shall include pruning of plants to remove obstructions and removal of dead plant materials, litter, or other hazards provided minimal disturbance occurs. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.607. - Buffer Design. 
    Required zoning buffers shall include, at minimum, either a wall, a berm, or a fence to be designed to the standards below, except where buffers have been specifically designated as undisturbed. 
1.  Wall Standards. Walls shall be of masonry construction and a minimum height of six (6) feet. Walls shall be placed on the edge of the buffered area nearest the most intense land use. The plantings shall be made on the lesser intense use side of the fence. 
2.  Berm Standards. Earthen berms shall be a minimum of five (5) feet high and contain the required plantings, unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance. 
3.  Fencing Standards. The fencing materials shall be a pressure treated lumber, redwood or cedar. It shall be a picket or stockade design with one hundred (100) percent visual blockage. The fence shall be a minimum of six (6) feet high and placed on the edge of the buffered area nearest the most intense land use. The plantings shall be made on the lesser intense use side of the fence. 
4.  Buffer and Setback. All land development activity subject to this Ordinance shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Buffers shall not be located on any portion of an existing, dedicated, or reserved public or private street or right-of-way. Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel, extending from the lot or parcel boundary line. Reserved buffers shall be established independently of building setbacks. Building setback requirements shall begin at the portion of a reserved buffer strip furthest from the property. 
b.  Where a required drainage, utility or other easement is partially or wholly within a required buffer, the developer shall design the buffer to eliminate or minimize planting within the required easement. 
c.  Where a street or road separates different zones, the minimum specified buffers would be required, except where the right-of-way is one hundred (100) feet wide or greater. 
d.  Buffers shall be generally natural and undisturbed and free of encroachments, except with respect to matters required herein or by conditions of zoning. 
e.  Buffers required alongside property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required to observe the sight distance requirements contained in Chapter III. Land Development Standards of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.608. - Requirements for Development on Buffer Zone Properties. 
    Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
1.  A site plan showing: 
a.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
b.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
c.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
2.  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback. 
3.  Any other documentation that the Woodstock Community Development Department may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
4.  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
5.  The Public Works Department may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the Public Works Department in making such inspections. The City of Woodstock shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this Ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.609. - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Ordinance or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
1.  Notice of Violation. If the Woodstock Community Development Department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this Ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Ordinance without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this Ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Woodstock Community Development Department by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
2.  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Woodstock Community Development Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Woodstock Community Development Department may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties: 
a.  Stop Work Order. The Community Development Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. The Community Development Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The Community Development Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Community Development Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days (or such greater period as the Community Development Department shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the Community Development Department has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the Community Development Department may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this Ordinance, the Community Development Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Woodstock Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE VII. - DOWNTOWN DISTRICT STANDARDS 

7.710. - Purpose and Intent of the Downtown District. 
    The regulations set forth in the Downtown District are designed to: 
1.  Preserve, protect and enhance downtown's historic and future role as the civic and economic center of Woodstock. 
2.  Create an environment where residents and visitors can live, work, meet, and play. 
3.  Encourage a balanced mix of retail, professional, residential, civic, entertainment, and cultural uses. 
4.  Enhance the efficient utilization of parking facilities by encouraging shared, underground, and deck parking and alternative modes of transportation. 
5.  Provide safe and accessible parks and plazas. 
6.  Improve the aesthetics of street and built environments. 
7.  Promote pedestrian safety by ensuring sidewalk-oriented buildings and attractive street-facing facades that foster pedestrian activity and liveliness. 
8.  Provide accessible and sufficient parking in an unobtrusive manner. 
9.  Enhance Woodstock's historic quality by ensuring that new and rehabbed buildings are compatible with the character of buildings built between 1860 and 1920. 
10.  Provide increased vehicular and pedestrian access through a grid of streets that maximizes connections with and extensions of existing streets. 
11.  Maintain and enhance quality of life of existing neighborhoods. 
12.  Plan for and maintain first class sustainable neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.720. - Master Plan Required. 
    Prior to commencing any land development activities in the Downtown District, a master plan of a proposed development ("the Project") shall be provided to the Community Development Department for review. This master plan or illustrative project concept, shall at a minimum include the location of residential and commercial lots, structures, stormwater facilities, streams and floodplains, amenities, open space, parking, pedestrian facilities, buffers, landscaped areas, all applicable Downtown District standards, and any additional details necessary to complete the review, as required by the Director of Community Development. 
    A master plan is also required for any project proposed that requires rezoning, conditional use permit, or variances. The master plan must illustrate the details of the request and accompany the public hearing application. 
1.  Master Plan Standards. The Master Plan shall adhere to the following standards: 
a.  Six (6) copies, provided on sheets 11 × 17 or larger; 
b.  Scale of 1" = 40 feet or as prescribed by the City Engineer; 
c.  Digital copy on flash drive or by download; 
d.  Preliminary engineering, including conceptual utilities and conceptual grading plan; 
e.  Include calculations for total acreage, number of units, residential density, open space, and commercial square footage; 
f.  Identify adjacent property zoning districts, uses, and approximate structure locations; 
g.  Provide written consent from all property owners whose property is included in the Master Plan; 
h.  Illustrate the extension of any Greenprints Trail, as per the adopted Greenprints Trails Plan, now and as amended; 
i.  Illustrate the extension of any grid streets, as per the adopted grid streets plan, now and as amended; 
j.  Explain compliance with the adopted Woodstock Town Center (LCI) Plan, now and as amended, and the Woodstock Comprehensive Plan, now and as amended. 
2.  Master Plan Procedures. 
a.  Compliance Review. The Community Development Department will review the master plan, providing comments regarding compliance with the following: 
i.  Downtown District Standards. 
ii.  Land Development Ordinance. 
iii.  Woodstock Town Center Plan. 
iv.  Woodstock Comprehensive Plan. 
v.  All other ordinances and standards adopted by the City Council, in addition to other local, state, and federal laws. 
b.  Compliance Required. Should the master plan fail to comply with the provisions set forth in Section 7.720(2)a., the deficiencies will be listed and provided to the Applicant. The applicant may then elect to pursue rezoning or variances from City Council, or render changes to bring the master plan into compliance. 
Once the master plan complies with the provisions set forth in Section 7.720(2)a., the applicant will be notified and the master plan will be docketed on the agenda of the Development Process Committee (DPC) for review and consideration. Upon approval by the DPC, the applicant may then submit land development plans in accordance with Chapter III of the Land Development Ordinance. 
In the event the master plan is included with a public hearing application, the Community Development Departments will complete the review as set forth herein and the DPC will include the findings of said review in the recommendation to the Planning Commission and City Council. 
c.  Exemptions. Projects or proposals may be exempted from this section if they meet any one of the following conditions: 
i.  The project exclusively involves the renovation or replacement of an existing structure in the same location; or 
ii.  The project involves one (1) unit on one (1) lot in a platted subdivision; or 
iii.  If the project is proposed on a site of one (1) acre or less and in the judgement of the Community Development Director, is in compliance; 
The subdivision of property is prohibited to meet any of these requirements. 
d.  Disclaimer. Compliance with this Section is the responsibility of the Applicant. The Community Development Department makes a good faith effort to thoroughly review each master plan tendered. Should a master plan review omit or fail to acknowledge noncompliance with this Section, the Applicant and the Project are in no way exempted from the provisions set forth herein. 
3.  Appeals. Any Person aggrieved by a decision of the DPC may appeal in writing directly to City Council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter X of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.721. - General Requirements. 
1.  Density. Maximum density for each Downtown District zoning classification can be found in Section 7.301 Establishment of Districts. The maximum density allowable on any given lot in the Downtown District may not necessarily be achieved due to infrastructure requirements and Downtown District site design requirements. The high densities allowed in this district are designed to incentivize assemblages that can comply with the code, providing public amenities as necessary, and reach the maximum allowable density. For mixed-use projects, density can be calculated using the entire parcel/project area, including commercial areas, only if the commercial development is to be completed first or concurrently. See Section 7.721 2.b. below. If not, residential densities shall be calculated using only the residential portions of the parcel/project area. 
2.  Minimum Acreage Requirement. No new residential development shall be permitted on any parcel or assemblage of parcels in the Downtown District that have a total area of less than five (5) acres. 
a.  Construction that does not require the subdivision of property into more than three parcels, and does not require any new streets, are exempt from this requirement. 
b.  Mixed-use projects with at least thirty-five (35) percent of the land area, at ground level, dedicated to newly constructed, non-residential uses, not including Open Space areas, are exempt from the minimum acreage requirement. Commercial and residential components that are part of the same project must be constructed concurrently. All commercial buildings in a project must be completed and issued a Certificate of Occupancy, prior to eighty (80) percent of residential buildings receiving building permits. 
c.  For projects proposed on less than five (5) acres, including the addition of phases to existing developments, the applicant may pursue a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Land Development Ordinance. Additional criteria shall be considered during a CUP case for this exemption. Projects should be evaluated for uniqueness, character, access, and connection to existing streets, alleys, and trails. 
3.  Mix of Housing Types Required for Residential Development. All new residential development in the Downtown District without at least twenty (20) percent of the land area, at ground level, dedicated to non-residential uses, not including Open Space, shall provide a mix of housing types. 
Project Size Number of Housing Types Required 0-5 acres 2 types 5.01-10 acres 3 types 10.01-15 acres 4 types 15.01-30 acres 5 types 30.01 acres and above 6 types  
Housing Type Choices: 
a.  Large lot single-family detached - lots with a minimum square footage of 7,500 square feet. 
b.  Single-family detached - lots with less than 7,500 square feet. 
c.  Single-family detached with Accessory Dwelling Units. 
d.  Townhome. 
e.  Duplex. 
f.  Triplex. 
g.  Quad - condominium building with 4 units. 
h.  Small condo building - 5-20 condominiums per building. 
i.  Large condo building - over 20 units per building. 
j.  Multi-family, Rental (Conditional Use Permit required). 
k.  Residential over commercial. 
l.  Innovative housing type which fits into none of the categories above, as approved by the Director of Community Development. 
4.  Critical Mass for Redevelopment Requirement. Redevelopment of more than two (2) existing lots in a platted subdivision on the same Land Disturbance Permit is prohibited unless a critical mass of eighty (80) percent or more contiguous lots in the subdivision are acquired and assembled, leaving the remaining twenty (20) percent of the lots as one intact subdivision. For the purposes of this section, lots are considered contiguous if they share more than half of the length of the adjoining property line for each adjacent parcel that is to be considered contiguous. The phasing of redevelopment over several LDPs as a way to subvert this section is prohibited. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a platted subdivision is a subdivision of residential lots for which a subdivision plat has been recorded in the Superior Court Clerk's Office of Cherokee County. 
5.  Grading. Where future street connection locations exist within a new development, the temporary ends of these streets shall be graded in such a way that future connection is possible, as determined by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.722. - Definitions. 
    Accessory Dwelling Unit: A dwelling unit not greater than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet or forty (40) percent of the floor area of the primary dwelling unit, whichever is greater, located in an outbuilding and located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling. 
    Build-To Line: The build-to line is the line along which the building street facade is permitted to be located. The distance between the build-to line and the nearest street curb is equal to the sidewalk area width requirements, except where public or private open space is adjacent to the sidewalk area. The build-to line shall extend to the perimeter of such open space including the minimum street facade frontage of principal structures. 
    Downtown District: The area approved on the Downtown District map found on the official zoning map. 
    Greenway Trail: A concrete or asphalt trail with a width capable of accommodating pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles. The minimum width required is ten (10) feet, unless otherwise determined by the City Engineer. Boardwalks, bridges, and pervious concrete are permitted within the floodplain and stream buffers. 
    Historic Overlay District: An area shown on the official zoning map, which has specific requirements that supersede certain other requirements of the Downtown District as amended. 
    Multifamily: A building containing more than one (1) residential unit, excluding townhouses. 
    Open Space: Private open space and public open space appropriately improved for pedestrian use and amenity not including detention ponds and stream buffers without greenway trails or areas used for vehicles, except for incidental service, maintenance or emergency actions only open space shall be exterior and computed as the total square footage of said spaces. 
1.  Private Open Space: Open space that is private courtyards, lawns, gardens, terraces, or balconies, which restrict access to residents of adjacent development. 
2.  Public Open Space: Park, plaza, or greenway trail that is open to the public during normal city park hours and sidewalk area requirements. 
3.  Park: A public open space that provides recreation amenities and gathering places. A park shall have streets along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of its perimeter and shall have no more than twenty (20) percent of its area covered with impervious surfaces, with the exception of greenway trails. 
4.  Plaza: A public open space that is available for civic and commercial activities, but may have access limited for the purposes of providing outdoor dining areas. A plaza shall have streets along a minimum of fifty (50) percent of its perimeter and a landscape consisting of durable pavement, trees and other plant materials. 
    Residential Treatment: An architectural treatment that: 
1.  Is provided on the sidewalk level of a street facade. 
2.  Provides habitable space for a minimum of the first ten (10) feet in depth behind the street façade on primary frontages. 
3.  On primary frontages, provides equally sized vertical windows where the top of which and the bottom of which shall be no higher and no lower than to the top of the door frame and the bottom of door frame. 
4.  Provides windows for a minimum of thirty (30) percent of the length of the built portion of the street facade, with the facade of each unit being calculated independently. 
5.  Provides an entry stoop or porch at a primary pedestrian street facade entrance. 
    Sidewalk Area: Begins at the street curb and consists of a contiguous sidewalk landscape zone, sidewalk clear zone, and sidewalk supplemental zone including intervening driveways. 
1.  Sidewalk Landscape Zone: The portion of a sidewalk area adjacent to the street curb and reserved for the placement of trees, groundcover, and street furniture including utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, traffic control boxes, tree grates, newspaper boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
2.  Sidewalk Clear Zone: The portion of a sidewalk area that is reserved for pedestrian passage and is unobstructed by permanent objects to a height of eight (8) feet, including but not limited to, steps and stoops, traffic control boxes, and utility structures. The sidewalk clear zone shall be adjacent and between the sidewalk landscape zone and the sidewalk supplemental zone and shall have a consistent cross-slope not exceeding two (2) percent. 
3.  Sidewalk Supplemental Zone: The area between the back of the sidewalk clear zone and the build-to line. Adjacent to storefront treatments, sidewalk supplemental zones may be used for pedestrian amenity elements such as benches, merchandise display, potted plants, and decorative fountains. Outdoor dining is permitted only when adjacent to eating and drinking establishments. Elements that are prohibited in the supplemental zone include recreational areas and facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, fences and walls greater than forty (40) inches in height, service elements such as dumpsters, loading docks and similar elements, mechanical features, and parking. Public access may be restricted only for areas adjacent to residential treatment, and for outdoor dining areas when adjacent to storefront treatments. No element shall be attached to the sidewalk supplemental zone in any way, except for fences and walls. 
    Storefront Treatment: An architectural treatment that: 
1.  Is provided on the sidewalk level of a street facade of flat roofed buildings. Buildings with gabled roofs shall use residential treatment. 
2.  Provides habitable space for a minimum of the first twenty (20) feet in depth behind the street facade. 
3.  Provides a street level facade consisting of: 
a.  A non-glass base or knee wall below all windows beginning at grade and extending to a point no less than eight (8) inches but not more than twenty-four (24) inches above the sidewalk area at the build-to line knee wall may be waived when directly abutting a private patio. 
b.  A combination of glass display windows and doors covering a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the length of the built portion of the build-to line beginning at the top of the bulkhead or knee wall, to a height not less than ten (10) feet and not more than twelve (12) feet above said sidewalk area at the build-to line below the base of the window. Such glass shall provide views into display windows that have a minimum depth of two and one-half (2.5) feet into and are accessible from the building interior for retail uses only. 
c.  Primary pedestrian entrances on the street facade recessed a maximum of seven (7) feet from the exterior facade, remain unlocked during normal business hours, and have a surface area that is a minimum of seventy (70) percent glass. All other doors located along street frontage shall be of a character that matches with the surrounding downtown area. 
d.  A glass transom located along the street facade of a structure above the glass display window and entry door shall have a minimum height of twenty-four (24) inches and a maximum height of thirty-six (36) inches. 
e.  Provides no length of facade exceeding twenty (20) feet without intervening glass display windows or glass doors. 
4.  A non-glass sign band area located above the glass transom having a minimum height of thirty-six (36) inches. The sign band area is the area between the top of the transom window and cornice line. 
5.  A cornice line above the sign band a minimum height of eight (8) inches. 
6.  Street address numbers, a minimum of six (6) inches in height located above the primary pedestrian entrance. 
7.  Sidewalk level drop ceiling, if at a lower elevation than the top of the window, shall recess a minimum of eighteen (18) inches from the window opening for retail uses. 
8.  Finished ceiling height shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet. Exterior height of single story buildings shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet as measured at top of parapet. Parapet must enclose all sides of the roof. 
    Street Facade: The exterior wall of a building, not including extruding structures such as porches, stoops or bay windows, which is located along the build-to line or street without an intervening building or street wall. 
    Street Facade Frontage: The percent of street facade required along the build-to line. 
    Street Wall: A wall no less than seventy-five (75) percent opaque built along the build-to line and co-planer with the street facade, often for the purpose of masking a parking lot from the street. Street walls shall be a minimum of three and one-half (3.5) feet in height, and constructed of a material matching the adjacent street facade or dense evergreen hedge. Street walls shall be discontinued no more than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. The street wall shall have other individual openings not exceeding four (4) square feet in area at height of less than three and one-half (3.5) feet. 
    Townhouse: Attached single-family residential structure in which no residential unit is directly above or below another residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.723. - General Provisions. 
1.  Code Compliance Certificate Required. In order to ensure compliance with the requirements set forth in this section, a code compliance certificate (CCC) shall be required prior to approval of any building permit for any exterior and building façade additions, improvements, or renovations within any subarea of the Downtown District. A CCC application shall include a site plan, building floor plans, and elevations, drawn to scale, and shall be approved by the director of community development, or his designee, through the regular review process. In addition to building permit applications, a CCC is also required for the following in keeping with other requirements of the Downtown District open space development and maintenance agreements, paving in parking areas other than asphalt and concrete, off-site parking, shared parking, angled on-street parking, driveway curb cuts, new streets, sidewalk area requirements and improvements including special or decorative paving and plantings and street furniture location and type, and street wall requirements. 
2.  Legally Nonconforming Buildings. Existing buildings and building façades are considered legally nonconforming, until such time remodeling and renovations occurs in accordance with these provisions, except as exempted below: 
a.  The building and property shall comply with the Downtown District Standards once the total remodeling and renovation construction costs exceed fifty (50) percent of the total building value as shown on the current county tax assessor record within the most recent thirty-six (36) month period. The property owner may also submit an appraisal of the building value for consideration. 
b.  Remodeling and renovations shall occur in compliance with Downtown District Standards. In no case shall any legally non-conforming building or façade be expanded, extended, enlarged, or otherwise altered in any way which increases its non-conformity. 
c.  Any remodeling or renovation projects that violate the Downtown District Standards forfeit legally non-conforming status and Downtown District Standards, including but not limited to, street and sidewalk area, open space, parking, and street façade requirements. Internal renovations that do not alter the building façade or building footprint, and upgrades of building and construction materials, do not affect the legally nonconforming status. 
3.  Lot of Record Lot Exemption. A Lot of Record is exempt from the Downtown District Code under the following provisions: 
a.  For the purposes of this amendment, a Lot of Record means a Lot which is part of a Subdivision recorded in the Superior Court Clerk's Office, or a Lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the Superior Court Clerk's Office prior to the adoption of this amendment, September 10, 2018. Includes both residential lots with one (1) existing single family detached structure and a commercial business located in a structure formerly used as a single-family residence. "New construction," both residential and commercial, means construction on a vacant lot where no structure was previously constructed, or a newly planned structure proposed on a lot. 
b.  A lot cannot be subdivided to comply with this Code section. 
c.  Only one (1) structure with one (1) dwelling unit can be built per lot, excluding one (1) accessory dwelling unit or accessories structure; 
d.  Exclusively in DT-CBD and DT-RO, commercial uses may be included within a structure formerly uses as a single family residence or a newly constructed structure. 
e.  Renovations. All renovation/maintenance activities can occur as long as the structure is not expanded beyond thirty (30) percent of the gross floor area and the architecture either remains consistent with the current structure, an earlier appearance of the structure, or in compliance with the architectural provisions in the Downtown District Code. 
f.  Replica. An existing structure may be demolished and replaced as long as the new structure is substantially similar to the former structure. 
g.  New residential construction, structure and site. A new single family residence and accompanying site layout proposed with one (1) dwelling unit may be constructed as long as the new structure and site proposed is substantially similar to: the structure previously occupying the same lot, the structures on nearby and adjacent lots, or structures in the same subdivision. 
h.  New commercial construction, structure and site. The constructor of new commercial buildings must comply with the Downtown District Architectural Standards. 
i.  In the absence of other architectural standards, as detailed above, Downtown District Architectural Standards shall govern. Setbacks shall remain consistent with those recorded on the applicable subdivision plat or in effect at the time the lot was recorded. 
j.  The installation of planned infrastructure including the extension of grid streets, trails, and pedestrian projects with new construction projects is required. The dedication of right-of-way for the future expansion of planned public improvements is required with new construction. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018; Ord. No. 5360-2018, § 1, 9-10-2018) 
7.724. - Public Infrastructure and Standard Details. 
    In addition to Articles III and XV of the LDO, all downtown development shall comply with downtown standards as outlined in the downtown standards policy adopted by the Mayor and City Council with resolution from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.725. - Open Space Requirements. 
    All open space requirements shall be subject to a CCC. All developments shall be required to dedicate open space. Location of such open space shall be approved by the City either within the confines of the development or at a proximate location. The minimum requirement for open space is twenty (20) percent of the parcel area. 
    In addition to the definition requirements, open space shall be dedicated, designed and constructed pursuant to the following regulations: 
1.  Detention ponds and required stream buffers shall not be used in open space calculations. 
2.  The owner shall submit a maintenance agreement establishing a mechanism for maintaining open space dedication located within subject development. 
3.  Open space requirements shall be constructed or dedicated as part of the first phase of construction, in an amount equivalent to the first phase proportion of the total development. 
4.  Open space dedication shall be guaranteed through bonds, conservation easements, land donation to the City or permanent deed restriction. In lieu of open space dedication, a cash value contribution shall be provided to the City's open space bank, which contribution shall be equivalent to the square footage value of subject land multiplied times the square footage of such open space requirement. The value of the subject land shall be equal to the land value as determined by the county assessor on the most recent property tax statement. 
5.  Non-residential development shall provide public open space, which shall be open to the public during daylight hours and other hours as determined by the City. Residential development shall provide either public open space or private open space. 
6.  Where greenway trails are required along streams, there shall be public access along such greenway trails and there shall be a minimum seventy-five (75) feet natural buffer along such streams measured from top of bank, which may include such greenway trail and such natural buffer shall be calculated towards open space requirements. 
7.  Side setbacks, lot remnants, and areas not easily accessible to pedestrians are not to be considered open space to meet the minimum requirement. 
8.  Open Space privacy buffer option. Where new developments are adjacent to existing residential development, screening buffer areas may be used to meet up to twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum open space requirement (five (5) percent of the parcel area). To qualify, screening buffer areas must be at least seven (7) feet in depth, contain a wall or fence at least forty (40) inches in height, and contain dense plantings of evergreen trees and shrubs, to be approved by the Community Development Director or designee. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.726. - Street and Sidewalk Area Requirements. 
1.  Whenever a development three (3) acres or greater is to be developed or redeveloped, maximum block sizes requirements shall apply in each subarea as indicated on the downtown site limits table. For any new development that requires a street to be constructed, the right-of-way for such portion of said street shall be platted according to specified street requirements as indicated below and on the street type tables. The owner is responsible for the dedication of the right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of the "The City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance." The entire dedicated right-of-way shall be shown as such on a final survey plat that is submitted to and approved by the City. Measurements involving minimum lot standards shall be made at the edge of the full right-of-way. Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any new development on such lot, either the street shall be constructed or guaranteed through bonds to the standards established herein. Development permission that would have otherwise been allowed within such dedicated street right-of-way shall be allowed to be developed elsewhere on the site. 
2.  New streets within DT-VLR (very low-density residential) and DT-LR (low-density residential) shall be D1 (local residential) or D2 (give-way residential), within DT-MR-A (medium-density residential A), DT-MR-B (medium-density residential B), and DT-RO (residential/office) streets shall be D1 (local residential), D2 (give-way residential), or B (local mixed-use), and within all other subareas shall be B (local mixed-use) streets. See street type tables. All new and improved streets in the Downtown District shall use header curb with no gutter. 
3.  Planned grid streets and connections shall be installed as shown on the most recently adopted Woodstock Town Center LCI Plan. Grading at ends of grid streets shall be prepared for the easiest future connection by neighboring properties. 
4.  A sidewalk area shall be located along all streets and shall consist of a sidewalk landscape zone with street trees, an unobstructed sidewalk clear zone, and a supplemental zone with requirements as indicated on the street type table-sidewalk area and greenway trail requirements. Changes to the configuration of the sidewalk area may be granted by administrative waiver if there are existing trees, overhead or underground utilities, or existing buildings present in the required sidewalk area locations. Administrative Waivers shall be determined by the Development Process Committee (DPC). Any Person aggrieved by a decision of the DPC may appeal in writing directly to City Council in accordance with the provisions of Chapter X of the Land Development Ordinance. 
5.  Any paving including concrete, special or decorative paving within the sidewalk landscape zone, sidewalk clear zone, or sidewalk supplemental zone shall continue across any intervening driveway. 
6.  Dead-end and cul-de-sac streets are prohibited. 
    Prior to extending an existing street within the Downtown District, approval by City Council is required. An owner or applicant seeking to extend an existing street must first submit the request in writing to the Community Development Department. A public hearing will be scheduled before the City Council, adhering to the public hearing and public notice requirements outlined in Chapter XI, Zoning Policy and Procedures, of this Land Development Code. 
    Should a proposed street extension accompany a rezoning request, the street extension will be evaluated and considered in conjunction with the rezoning request, following the zoning process as outlined in Chapter XI, Zoning Policy and Procedures. 
7.  Within the sidewalk landscape zone. 
a.  Street trees are required as indicated in the street type table-sidewalk area and greenway trail requirements. Street trees shall be planted a maximum of fifty (50) feet on center and spaced equal distance between streetlights and in line with stripes of parallel parking spaces. All newly planted trees shall be a minimum caliper of three and one-half (3.5) inches measured twelve (12) inches above ground, shall be limbed up to a minimum height of seven (7) feet and shall have a minimum mature height of forty (40) feet. Trees shall have a minimum planting area of two hundred (200) square feet. As stated by Chapter IX Tree Preservation and Replacement Standards, if existing underground utilities are present, the Director of Community Development may allow alternative proposals on a case by case basis. In the event that existing overhead power lines prohibit the planting of required overstory trees, an appropriate understory tree species may be selected and approved for required inches according to accepted horticultural standards and as approved by the impacted utility. The criteria by which cases with underground utilities shall be evaluated includes the size, location, and depth of the existing underground utilities, and the size, type, location, and appropriateness of the plantings proposed as an alternative to the required street trees. 
b.  Within DT-VLR (very low-density residential) and DT-LR (low-density residential) shall be continuous trees and groundcover with exception of intervening driveways. Within all other subareas shall be groundcover, decorative paving, or tree grates with exception of intervening driveways. 
c.  All street furniture and pavers, where installed, shall have a location and type subject to approval including but not limited to the following benches, waste receptacles, bicycle racks, newspaper stands, tree grates, and street lights. Tree grates shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet by five (5) feet. Decorative pedestrian lights shall be placed a maximum of one hundred (100) feet on center and shall be spaced equal distance between required trees. All downtown standard details are on file with the community development department. 
d.  Street tree requirements within the sidewalk landscape zone may be met through landscape bulb-outs between on-street parking spaces on Main Street downtown, local mixed-use, and local residential streets that have on-street parking. The final placement of street or pedestrian lights shall be reviewed and approved by the Community Development Department. 
e.  Sidewalk area width requirements may be reduced for streets with entire total lengths of one hundred fifty (150) feet or less within DT-MR-A (medium-density residential A) and DT-MR-B (medium-density residential B). 
8.  Within the sidewalk supplemental zone: 
a.  Terraces, porches stoops, and stairs may encroach a maximum depth of sixty (60) percent of the total zone depth, and shall have a maximum finished floor height of twenty-four (24) inches above finished-grade. Such terraces, porches, and stoops shall not be considered street facade. 
b.  Balconies, awnings and bay windows may encroach a maximum depth of five (5) feet of the total zone width. 
c.  DT-RO (residential/office), DT-MR-A (medium-density residential A), and DT-MR-B (medium-density residential B) shall provide landscaping for a minimum of forty (40) percent of the zone's horizontal area adjacent to sidewalk level residential treatments. 
d.  Hardscaping shall be provided for a minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the zone's horizontal area adjacent to storefront treatments. 
e.  DT-VLR (very low-density residential) and DT-LR (low-density residential) shall provide a minimum of three (3) feet between the sidewalk clear zone and any structure such as stairs, terraces, porches, and stoops. 
f.  Buildings with no adjacent sidewalk supplemental zone that exist before March 2005 may have outdoor dining areas encroach a maximum of two (2) feet into the sidewalk clear zone, measured from the street facade. 
g.  Sidewalk supplemental zone width requirements may be reduced where the sidewalk landscape zone is increased to a minimum width of ten (10) feet for purposes of locating outdoor dining. 
h.  Sidewalk supplemental zone width requirements may be increased where taller buildings are proposed along narrow streets, at the discretion of the Director of Community Development. To determine the appropriate supplemental zone width, the Director shall consider the width of the street in proportion to the height of the structures proposed. 
Street Type Table-Sidewalk Area and Greenway Trail Requirements Required new streets and the streets shown on the Downtown District Regulating Plan shall be subject to the following requirements. Sidewalk Landscape Zone Minimum Width Sidewalk Clear Zone Minimum Width Sidewalk Supplemental Zone Minimum Width Street Trees in Sidewalk Landscape Zone Total Width Minimum/Maximum* A1 (Arterial with Median) 7 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 50 ft. o.c. 27 to 35 ft. A2 (Arterial with Optional Parking) 7 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 50 ft. o.c. 27 to 35 ft. A3 (Arterial) 7 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 50 ft. o.c. 27 to 35 ft. A4 (Main Street Downtown) 7 ft. 10 ft. 
(8 ft. adjacent to railroad r.o.w.) 5 ft. 50 ft. o.c. 22 to 30 ft. B (Local Mixed-Use) 7 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 50 ft. o.c. 22 to 30 ft. C (Highway Commercial) 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 50 ft. o.c. 30 to 38 ft. D1 (Local Residential) 7 ft. 5 ft. 5 to 20 ft. 50 ft. o.c. 17 to 32 ft. D2 (Give-Way Residential) 7 ft. 5 ft. 5 to 20 ft. 50 ft. o.c. 17 to 32 ft. E (Commercial Service) On-street parking bulb-outs 5 to 10 ft. None 50 ft. o.c. 5 to 10 ft. GW1 (Greenway Trail 1) 10 ft. 10 ft. NA** 50 ft. o.c./3 ft. from trail 19 to 24 ft. GW2 (Greenway Trail 2) 5 ft. both sides 10 ft. NA** 50 ft. o.c./3 ft. from trail 22 ft. *Total width includes Sidewalk Landscape Zone, Sidewalk Clear Zone, and Sidewalk Supplemental Zone. Measured from beginning of the Sidewalk Landscape Zone and ending at the street facade located along build-to line. Note: Rights-of-way wider than the standard fifty (50) feet may be required to fully encompass on-street parking and Sidewalk Clear Zone areas. Public right-of-way lines shall be set at least one (1) foot outside the back of sidewalk. **Where streets and greenway trails are adjacent, Sidewalk Supplemental Zone requirements shall be in addition to GW1 requirements.  
Street Type Table-Pavement Requirements Required new streets and the streets shown on the Downtown District Regulating Plan shall be subject to the following requirements. Number of Total Travel Lanes Maximum Lane Width On-Street Parking (Minimum Width) Median Optional (Minimum Width) Total Minimum Pavement Width (not including median if present) A1 (Arterial with Median) 4 10 ft. No Yes (4 ft.) 40 ft. A2 (Arterial with Optional Parking) 4 10 ft. Optional (8 ft.) Yes (4 ft.) 40 ft. (not including parking if present) A3 (Arterial) 2 to 4* 10 ft. No No 24 ft. A4 (Main Street Downtown) 4 10 ft. Yes-east side only (30 degree angled 17 ft.) No 57 ft. B (Local Mixed-Use) 2 to 4* 10 ft. Yes (8 ft.) No 35 ft. C (Highway Commercial) 4 to 6* 10 ft. No Yes (4 ft.) 40 ft. D1 (Local Residential) 2 9 ft.*** Yes (8 ft.) No 32 ft. D2 (Give-Way Residential) 2 9 ft.*** Yes-Give-Way No 22 ft. E** (Commercial Service) 2 9 ft.*** Yes (8 ft.) No 32 ft. *Not including center turn lanes. **Sidewalk area requirements do not apply to pedestrian alleys. ***If the road is required to be fire dept. access, lanes must be ten (10) feet. Give-way streets are not allowed when streets are required to provide fire department access.  
Street Type Table-Alley Requirements Required new streets and the streets shown on the Downtown District Regulating Plan shall be subject to the following requirements. Pavement Width Alley Shoulder Minimum Width R.O.W. Width Setback Minimum from Alley Right-of-Way Line Requirements F1 (Mixed-Use Service) 18 to 20 ft. 4 ft. 26 to 28 ft. None None F2 (Residential)* 12 to 20 ft. 4 to 6 ft. 20 to 32 ft. None Garage wall or other wall F3 (Residential)* 12 ft. 5 ft. 22 ft. 18 to 20 ft. with parking pad Continuous fence or wall along R.O.W. line and between parking pads * Alleys shall not be located within residential lots.  
;adv=6q>(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.727. - Parking, Garage, Driveway and Access Requirements. 
1.  No parking shall be permitted between a building and the street without an intervening building, except in DT-GC (general commercial) where the street facade frontage requirements have been met. 
2.  Developments are permitted a maximum of one (1) driveway curb cut per block face or one (1) curb cut per four hundred (400) linear feet of block face, whichever is greater. For the purposes of this section, two (2) curb cuts serving two (2) one-way driveways shall only be counted as one (1) curb cut. Curb cuts for a street and an alley may be installed closer than four hundred (400) linear feet, subject to final approval by the City Engineer. 
3.  No curb cuts, driveways or circular drives shall be permitted on Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, or Arnold Mill Road when access can be provided from a side or rear street. Circular drives are prohibited, with the exception of hotel and hospital uses, in the DT-CMU (commercial mixed-use) and DT-GC (general commercial) subareas. 
4.  Driveway curb cuts on streets shall be limited to a one (1) way maximum width of twelve (12) feet or a two (2) way maximum width of twenty-four (24) feet, alleyways are not included. 
5.  Parking and loading requirements shall be as established in section 7.760, parking performance standards, except that all multifamily residential uses, such as apartments/duplexes and condominiums, shall be required to provide one (1) space per bedroom, but not more than two (2) spaces. 
6.  Screening of Parking Areas. 
a.  Any parking not screened from the street by a building shall have a minimum seven (7) foot wide landscaped area between such parking and the street. Such landscaped area shall have a minimum of one (1) shade tree per fifty (50) linear feet, groundcover, and an evergreen hedge at a maximum of thirty-six (36) inches or decorative wall or fence with a minimum height of thirty (30) inches. Trees shall be planted and street lighting placed in line with the stripes of adjacent parking spaces. 
b.  Parking areas in new developments that are located within twenty-five (25) feet of existing residential development, if not entirely screened by an intervening building, shall have a continuous, visual screen from the residential development reaching a minimum height of six (6) feet. This screen shall consist of a compact evergreen hedge or other foliage screening, and a wall or fence. 
7.  Where the end of a parking space has a permanent concrete or masonry curb and abuts a landscaped area that is a minimum width of six (6) feet, the depth of such space may be reduced by two (2) feet. 
8.  Commercial parking lots are not permitted except where individual businesses lease spaces under a shared parking arrangement. 
9.  Paving materials used for parking and loading areas other than asphalt or concrete shall be subject to approval by administrative variance. 
10.  Required parking may be provided off-site within one thousand (1,000) feet of use except in DT-LRV (very low-density residential), DT-LR (low-density residential), DT-MR-A (medium-density residential A), and DT-MR-B (medium-density residential B). Public and on-street parking cannot be used to meet building requirements except for on-street parking directly adjacent to the subject property. Using on-street parking to meet parking requirements is optional. 
11.  Angled on-street parking on both sides shall be permitted. Forty-five (45) degree angled parking shall require parking space length of nineteen (19) feet and two (2) travel lanes width of ten (10) feet. Sixty (60) degree angled parking shall require parking space length of twenty (20) feet and two (2) travel lanes width of eleven (11) feet. Ninety (90) degree angled parking shall require parking space length of eighteen (18) feet and two (2) travel lanes width of twelve (12) feet. Parallel parking spaces shall be eight (8) feet deep and twenty-two (22) feet long. 
12.  Reduction of parking requirements may be permitted, subject to a shared parking arrangement under the following criteria: 
a.  The minimum number of parking spaces for a development where shared parking is proposed shall be determined by a study prepared by the applicant following the procedures of the Urban Land Institute (ULI) Shared Parking Report or Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Shared Parking Guidelines. The actual number of parking spaces required shall be based on well-recognized sources of parking data such as the ULI or ITE reports. If standard rates are not available or limited, the applicant may collect data at similar sites to establish local parking demand rates. If the shared parking plan assumes use of an existing parking facility, then field surveys shall be conducted to determine actual parking accumulation. If possible, these surveys shall consider the seasonal peak period for the combination of land uses involved; 
b.  All shared parking spaces shall be clearly marked as such; and 
c.  An applicant shall submit the following information as part of an application to reduce parking requirements and avoid conflicting parking demands. 
i.  A to-scale map indicating location of proposed parking spaces. 
ii.  Hours of business operation of non-residential parking users. 
iii.  Written consent of property owners agreeing to the shared parking arrangement (when provided off-site). 
iv.  Copies of parking lease agreement, easements for parking, or notarized letter or sworn affidavit as to the intent of lease agreement, including renewed leases, shall be filed with the Department of Planning and Economic Development. Lapse of a required lease agreement shall terminate approval for shared parking. 
13.  Rear alleys shall be provided to access townhouse and multifamily garages, single-family dwelling garages, and commercial loading and service areas, where such access is feasible. See Street Type Table-Alley Requirements. 
14.  All required off-street parking for townhouses and multifamily dwellings, excluding accessory dwelling units, shall be met in a private, on-site, enclosed garage or in a parking structure. 
15.  Bicycle or moped parking spaces are required as follows: All new non-residential uses shall provide one (1) such space for every twenty (20) automobile spaces and new multifamily uses shall provide one (1) such space for every five (5) units provided that no such uses shall have fewer than two (2) such spaces or be required to exceed thirty (30) spaces. Such spaces shall be located within the sidewalk landscape zone a maximum distance of one hundred (100) feet from the primary pedestrian entrance, or shall be located at least as close as the closest automobile space, except for handicapped parking spaces. Bicycle parking spaces shall include a bike rack with a metal anchor sufficient to secure the bicycle frame when used in conjunction with a user-supplied lock. 
16.  Garages and carports shall not face adjacent streets except where alley access is not feasible, in which case such garages and carports shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the street facade. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.728. - Site Limits. 
1.  Where such street facade frontage requirements are satisfied by existing principal buildings, additional principle buildings shall be exempt from these requirements. 
2.  Any balconies, awnings and bay windows may encroach into any sidewalk supplemental zone or required setback a maximum depth of five (5) feet. 
3.  Walkways with a minimum width of four (4) feet shall be provided from the closest public sidewalk clear zone to the primary entrance of all buildings and structures not built to the sidewalk area, including parking structures. 
4.  All developments must comply with the following site limits table: 
Downtown Site Limits Table Downtown District Subareas DT-CBD DT-CMU DT-GC DT-CI DT-RO DT-MR-A DT-MR-B DT-LR DT-VLR DT-OS DT-HO 3 Density maximum (Dwelling units per acre) 12 4, 5 12 4, 5 8 4 NA 8 4 9 12 6 2 NA NA Minimum lot area (square feet) NA 600 600 NA 800 1,200 1,000 3,500 7,500 NA 800 Minimum lot width (feet) NA 20 20 NA 16 16 16 35 50 NA 40 Street Facade Frontage 1 100% 100% 60% 100% 100% NA NA NA NA NA NA Rear setback (minimum feet) 0 With alley - 0 
No alley - 20 With alley - 0 
No alley - 20 With alley - 0 
No alley - 20 With alley - 0 
No alley - 20 Residential alley or No alley - 5 Residential alley or No alley - 5 Residential alley or No alley - 5 Residential alley or No alley - 5 0 Residential alley or No alley - 5 Side setback (minimum feet) 0 0 0 0 or 10 2 0 or 5 2 0 or 5 2 0 or 5 2 5 5 5 5 Block size (maximum feet) perimeter/block face 1,600/400 1,800/600 1,800/600 NA 1,600/600 1,800/600 1,800/600 2,000/600 2,000/600 NA 1,600/600 Served by alley to parking ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? 1 With the exception of driveway ingress/egress and public open space or residential courtyards. 2 Side setbacks of zero shall only be permitted between adjacent townhouse units, otherwise the larger setback shall apply. 3 Historic zone supersedes the subarea and street requirements. 4 All residential uses (except senior living), as governed by the use/zoning district matrix, Section 7.505, within the DT-CBD, DT-CMU, DT-GC, and DT-RO districts shall not front or provide direct access to an A or C street; except however within DT-HO. Residential uses are allowed on upper floors or in basements of a building fronting any street type. 5 For DT-CBD and DT-CMU, the base density of twelve (12) DU/ac can be increased up to forty (40) DU/ac maximum, using any combination of the following bonus incentive procedures: A. Vertical-mixed use structure-twenty (20) percent DU/ac increase; B. Provision of open space above the twenty (20) percent minimum requirement-one (1) percent DU/ac increase per one thousand (1,000) square feet of open space up to twenty thousand (20,000) square feet maximum or twenty (20) percent DU/ac increase; C. Structured parking with parking spaces available to the public at no charge-one (1) percent DU/ac increase per one (1) parking space; D. Professional office space-ten (10) percent DU/ac increase per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of professional office space; E. Mayor and City Council reserve the right to increase density above forty (40) DU/ac on a case by case basis, depending on the compatibility of the project with adopted plans, considering the following elements: economic impact, regional significance, amenities provided to the community, and public infrastructure improvements; F. Once site plans are submitted to the Community Development Department utilizing any one (1) of the above bonus incentives, the Community Development Director will brief the Mayor and City Council, reviewing the project plan at the next available City Council Meeting.  
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.729. - Street Facade Requirements. 
    Along the street facade of all new and renovated buildings and structures the following shall apply: 
1.  Sidewalk level uses shall have a primary pedestrian entrance, which faces, is visible from, and directly adjacent to required sidewalk area or adjoining open space, including but not limited to dwelling units, multifamily lobbies, and individual business establishments. 
a.  If the second level above the sidewalk level of a residential structure is the main living space, which includes the kitchen and main living room, a walkway and stairs shall connect the sidewalk to the front porch or stoop through the Supplemental Zone. 
b.  Where an individual use has a street facade on more than one (1) street, such entrance requirement shall apply along Main Street, or when on other streets, such requirement shall apply along the higher order of street shown on the Downtown District regulating plan, with "A" being the highest order and "E" being the lowest. Where both streets are the same order, entrance orientation may be to either street. 
c.  Units fronting on Open Spaces may only do so if a street borders the opposite side of the Open Space, and the primary pedestrian entrance shall face and be visible from the Open Space and street. 
2.  All buildings with more than four (4) sidewalk area level residential units along a single street shall have individual entrances to such units directly accessible from the required sidewalk area or adjoining open space except in the historic zone. All walkways providing such access shall be shared between no more than two (2) adjacent units. 
3.  The first two (2) stories of building facades shall be brick, cast stone, concrete siding such as hardiplank, natural wood or stone, with the exception of pedestrian entrances and windows. In DT-CBD (central business district) such requirements shall apply to the entire building facade along Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, and Arnold Mill Road and building facades seen from such streets. 
4.  Awnings shall be of fabrics, canvas, fixed metal, or similar material. Internally lit awnings and canopies that emit light through the awning or canopy material are prohibited. 
5.  Blank, windowless walls are prohibited. All building stories with the exception of storefront treatments shall have windows and doors that equal a minimum of thirty (30) percent of the total facade length with each story being calculated independently, gables are exempt. For secondary street facade frontages on corner lots, see Subsection 18. 
6.  All windows shall be vertically shaped with a height greater than width, including display windows but not transoms. Windows located inside gables are exempt. 
7.  Glass panels in windows and storefronts shall be clear and unpainted, and shall not be tinted such that views into the building are obstructed. False windows may be allowed by administrative waiver when warranted by the interior design of the structure, such as the presence of fireplaces or stairwells blocking window locations, and when not used excessively. 
8.  Entry facade window trim shall not be flush with the exterior wall and shall have a minimum relief of one-quarter (.25) inch from the exterior wall, except on brick and stone facades. A window detail showing these dimensions shall be present on all building plans for downtown structures. 
9.  Doors and windows that operate as horizontal sliders are prohibited. 
10.  Window frames shall be recessed a minimum of two (2) inches from the exterior facade. Window frames on other than masonry facades shall be trimmed with multi-dimensional trim with a minimum width of three inches and include header and apron trims. Multiple dimensions can accomplished by layering of trim or use of more detailed trim. Prior approval of details required. 
11.  Porches and stoops shall not be enclosed with screen wire or glass on primary frontages. 
12.  Porch and arcade columns shall be a minimum width of six (6) inches, unless otherwise determined by the Director of Community Development. 
13.  Residential porches shall be covered and have a minimum depth of five (5) feet, a minimum length of eight (8) feet and a minimum area of forty (40) feet. 
14.  Exterior entry steps shall have enclosed risers. 
15.  Building foundations shall be brick, stone, stucco, or concrete with similar appearance. 
16.  Parking structures shall conceal automobiles from visibility; shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building on all levels; shall be faced in brick, stone, cast stone, poured-in-place rubbed concrete, or pre-cast concrete faced in or having the appearance of brick or stone. 
17.  The minimum building height as measured along the build-to line shall be eighteen (18) feet in all subareas except DT-OS (open space), where there shall be no minimum building height. 
18.  Buildings on corner lots have two (2) street facades. The secondary frontage, or the facade without the primary pedestrian entrance, shall have the option, in lieu of providing minimum thirty (30) percent window coverage on each story, to provide, on a minimum of forty (40) percent of the facade on each story, a mixture of architectural elements that conform with this section, including porches, balconies, doors, a historic or unique brick pattern, or a mixture of materials and architectural accents such as ledges, moldings, millwork, and keystones. Proposals for this alternative shall be reviewed and approved by the Director of Community Development. 
19.  All buildings shall have street facades with continuous storefront treatment or residential treatment requirements as indicated in the building facade and materials requirements table. 
20.  See building facade and material requirements table for maximum building height requirements. 
Building Facade and Materials Requirements Table Downtown District Subareas DT-CBD DT-CMU DT-GC DT-CI DT-RO DT-MR-A and DT-MR-B DT-LR + DT-VLR DT-OS DT-HO 100% Storefront Treatment at Street Facade Frontage • (within 400' of Main Street, TLP, Arnold Mill Road) Residential Treatment • • • Storefront Treatment or Residential Treatment at Street Facade Frontage • • • • • (Limited Uses Only) Maximum building height 5 stories/85 ft. 8 stories/100 ft. 6 stories/85 ft. None 40 ft. above street grade 5 stories/85 ft. or 65 ft. above Main Street, whichever is less 40 ft. None 3 stories/40 ft. Height bonus for minimum of 65% of parking structured None 12 stories/150 ft. max. 10 stories/125 ft. max. None None 8 stories/100 ft. max. None None None Minimum ceiling height *(see Storefront Treatment) *14 ft. sidewalk level/9 ft. other *14 ft. sidewalk level/9 ft. other *14 ft. sidewalk level/9 ft. other 14 ft. sidewalk level/9 ft. other *12 ft. sidewalk level/9 ft. other *10 ft. sidewalk level/9 ft. other 9 ft. min. 9 ft. min. 10 ft. sidewalk level/9 ft. other Residential Treatment sidewalk level finished floor to finished ceiling NA 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 9 ft. 9 ft. 9 ft. 10 ft.  
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.730. - General Requirements. 
1.  Building Requirements. 
a.  The primary pedestrian entrance to all sidewalk level retail and eating and drinking establishments shall remain unlocked during business hours. 
b.  Primary sidewalk level pedestrian entrances to individual businesses and residential units shall be adjacent to required sidewalk area, park, plaza, or courtyard. 
c.  Building facade materials shall be combined only horizontally, with the heavier below the lighter. 
d.  Chimneys shall extend to the ground. 
e.  All roofs shall have a minimum twenty-five (25) year roof and no visible roll roofing. 
f.  Building mechanical and accessory features: 
i.  Shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure or on rooftops and shall be screened from any public open space or sidewalk area views. 
ii.  When located on rooftops shall be incorporated in the design of the building and screened with materials similar to the building. 
g.  Any parapet walls shall extend around all sides of the building. 
h.  On residential buildings, if rear decks or porches are visible from any streets, public sidewalks, public trails, or are adjacent to and visible from any Open Spaces, they shall be covered, and designed with materials to match the façade and/or trim of the building. 
2.  Site Requirements. 
a.  The height of fences and walls located between the street facade of principal structures and a street shall not exceed forty (40) inches and in other areas shall not exceed six (6) feet. 
b.  Fences and walls located along the alley right-of-way line shall be a maximum height of six (6) feet. For new development, where new alleys run along parcel lines of existing developments, a wall shall be required to screen the alley from the existing property or properties. The wall shall be four (4) to six (6) feet in height and shall be constructed with a brick, stone, or stucco veneer, or a combination of masonry materials that complement the theme of the property architecture and/or site design. 
c.  No barbed wire, razor wire, chain link or similar elements shall be visible from any public park, required sidewalk area, or sidewalk area level outdoor dining area. 
d.  Loading docks and dumpsters shall be entirely screened from view of any public open space or sidewalk area, with a dumpster pad enclosure. Dumpster pad enclosure is required, constructed of the same materials, and matching the architecture of the principal structure. Doors and gates shall be opaque and must remain closed while not in use. Chain-link is not an acceptable material. 
e.  Utilities shall be placed underground or in alleys wherever feasible. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.731. - Historic Overlay District (DT-HO) Requirements. 
    Buildings within the historic overlay shall be of a scale and character compatible with historic residential buildings as described below. Parcels within the historic zone are subject to the following regulations, in addition to other requirements of the Downtown District. 
1.  The required build-to line shall match the average distance between the primary structure and the curb of the nearest two (2) adjacent buildings on the same street built before 1945. 
2.  No parking shall be located between any structure and the street, and no parking shall be located to either side of any structure fronting an A or B street. 
3.  This district is intended for Detached Single-family homes, even if they have a commercial use. Multiple residential dwelling units within the same building are prohibited in DT-HO. 
4.  Detached and attached garages shall both be permitted. Attached garages shall have decorative doors which shall be located in an inconspicuous location, so as not to become the main architectural feature on structures on lots that are front-loaded. The architecture of detached garages shall match and compliment the primary structure. 
5.  All exterior facades except windows shall be brick, horizontal hardiplank, natural wood or stone. 
6.  Flat roofs shall be prohibited. 
7.  Parking decks shall be prohibited. 
8.  Roofs shall extend a minimum of eighteen (18) inches beyond exterior building walls. 
9.  Exterior street facade doors shall be wood panel or fixed glass in wood frame. 
10.  Primary structures shall have a residential treatment regardless of use. 
11.  All windows shall be either double-hung or fixed glass in keeping with the particular architectural style described below. 
12.  With the exception of stories partially contained within roofs, all above-ground stories shall be equal in floor area and shape. 
13.  All street facade porches that are not a required "accessible route into and through the dwelling unit", as established by Section 804 [42 U.S.C. 3604](3)(C)(iii)(I) of the Fair Housing Act, shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches above the grade of the sidewalk area. 
14.  Buildings shall be one (1) of the following five (5) architectural styles and shall meet all the requirements contained herein. 
a.  Craftsman, which shall provide: 
i.  A rectangular building footprint, with the short end facing a street. 
ii.  Gabled roofs having gables with a minimum pitch of twenty (20) degrees and a maximum pitch of forty (40) degrees from horizontal, with roof lines running parallel or perpendicular to the street. 
iii.  Decorative beams or braces under gables. 
iv.  Exposed roof rafters where roofs overhang. 
v.  Equal height windows along the entire street facade. 
vi.  A symmetrical or asymmetrical street facade. 
vii.  A front porch extending the entire width or one-half (0.5) the width of the building. Said porch shall include square columns not less than eight (8) inches thick that taper from bottom to top. Said columns shall be set atop stone or masonry bases extended to the ground. Square or rectangular balusters and handrails are optional. 
b.  Folk, which shall provide: 
i.  A building footprint that is rectangular or "L-shaped," with the end of the short leg of the "L" facing a street. 
ii.  Gabled roofs having gables with a minimum pitch of thirty (30) degrees and a maximum pitch of forty-five (45) degrees from horizontal, with roof lines parallel or perpendicular to the street. 
iii.  Ridge vents having a minimum size of one (1) foot by one (1) foot shall be provided along all gables facing a public street. 
iv.  Equal sized windows along the entire street facade. 
v.  A symmetrical street facade for buildings with rectangular footprints. 
vi.  A front porch extending the entire width of the building, except with an "L-shaped" footprint said requirement shall not apply to the short-leg of the "L". Said porches shall include turned columns, turned balusters, handrails, and optional lace-like spandrels. 
c.  Simple Queen Anne, which shall provide: 
i.  A building footprint that is rectangular or "L-shaped," which may include the circular base of a tower. 
ii.  Gabled roofs having steep pitch, which may be of irregular shape. 
iii.  An asymmetrical front porch that is one (1) story and wraps around one (1) or both sidewalls of the building. 
iv.  Porch columns that taper from the top to bottom, with decorative details at the top. 
d.  Colonial Revival, which shall provide: 
i.  A rectangular building footprint with the long side facing a street. 
ii.  A gabled, hipped, gambrel, or second story overhang roof. 
iii.  An accentuated entrance with a pediment supported by pilasters and/or an entry porch supported by slender columns. 
iv.  A symmetrical street facade with a centered door and balanced rectangular windows. 
v.  A cornice between the street facade and roof that extends around the entire roofline of the structure. 
e.  Gothic Revival, which shall provide: 
i.  A building footprint that is rectangular or "L-shaped," with the end of the short leg of the "L" facing a street. 
ii.  A symmetrical street facade for buildings with rectangular footprints. 
iii.  A steeply pitched centered gable, paired gable, front-gable, or asymmetrical roof. 
iv.  At least one (1) window with Gothic detailing. 
v.  A one (1) story front porch supported by column with Gothic detailing which either extends the entire width of the building or as an entry porch. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.732. - Illustrations. 
    The drawings within this section are graphic depictions of some of the requirements herein. Unless otherwise indicated, each is intended to specifically illustrate only the indicated requirement; all other suggestions of design, such as architectural style, tree shape and aesthetics, do not constitute a requirement of this section (refer to supplemental section entitled "Downtown District Graphics" provided separately at Appendix A at the end of this chapter). 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE VIII. - OTHER DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS AND OVERLAY ZONING 

7.800. - Ridgewalk Overlay District Ordinance. 
7.801. - Intent and Purpose. 
    The intent of the Ridgewalk Overlay District is to set a standard for the design, form, and use of properties in the Ridgewalk Parkway corridor that will provide an appropriate transition of density and intensity, which should be situated in a decreasing pattern, radiating outward from the interstate interchange. The Overlay is intended to support commercial development and protect the integrity of the existing neighborhoods by regulating scale and creating a consistent design language articulated through streetscape, trail connections, and architectural requirements. 
    The regulations set forth in the Ridgewalk Overlay District are designed to: 
1.  Produce well-designed, unique, and attractive commercial developments. 
2.  Respect existing residential development. 
3.  Produce commercial buildings that are reusable by future commercial users with different uses, and to discourage highly specialized buildings with common national brand architecture. 
4.  Provide a regulatory framework to maximize commercial productivity. 
5.  Result in developments that exhibit a consistent character which is unique to Woodstock and more specifically, to the Ridgewalk area. 
6.  Provide accessible and sufficient parking that is not concentrated in large parking lots. 
7.  Provide safe, comfortable, and unique pedestrian access complete with connected, effective transitions from one (1) property to the next. 
8.  Create and maintain an environment where commercial development can flourish and remain viable and visible in the Woodstock market. 
9.  Produce a consistent streetscape that is rich with aesthetic design elements such as brick piers, fences, hedges, decorative walls, ornamental trees, canopy trees, and decorative streetlights with wide sidewalks separated from traffic. 
(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.802. - Boundaries of Ridgewalk Overlay District. 
    The Ridgewalk Overlay District shall include those properties that are zoned GC or NC, which have property frontage along any portion of Ridgewalk Parkway and are identified on the most recently approved Zoning Map, which is on file with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.803. - Legally Non-Conforming Properties. 
    At the time of the adoption of this ordinance, all previously developed properties shall be deemed to be in compliance with this ordinance, until such time that any improvement which requires a land development or building permit is requested. Tenant finishes and minor repairs are excluded. Such permit shall only be granted if the improvements proposed meet the standards herein, and if the streetscape along any frontage adjacent to Ridgewalk Parkway is brought into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.804. - Definitions Related to this Overlay District. 
    Decorative: Requires the use of brick or stone veneer, complementing the primary structure. 
    Decorative Lighting: Outdoor lighting, including pole and fixture, meeting the specifications of the outdoor lighting installed on Ridgewalk Parkway at the time of adoption of this ordinance. 
    Decorative Walls/Fences: Those walls and fences with brick, stone, or wood veneer. 
    Façade, Primary: The street-facing façade of the building which includes the main building entrance or the primary pedestrian entrance, and which faces Ridgewalk Parkway or the most primary street. 
    Façade, Secondary: A building façade which faces a street or civic area, without another intervening building, which is not the primary façade. 
    Façade, Tertiary: A building façade which does not face a street, civic area, or open space. 
    Fountain: An ornamental structure in a body of water from which one (1) or more jets of water are pumped into the air. 
    Landscaping, Additional: Trees, shrubs, and permanent plantings installed twenty-five (25) percent beyond minimum Code requirements. 
    Office or Employment Use: A use where the primary purpose is an office use, as regulated by Section 7.505, or a use with the creation of fifty (50) or more full-time-equivalent jobs in key business sectors. Key business sectors are as determined by the City of Woodstock Economic Development Department. 
    Open Space: Property not intended for development or reserved for preservation as open space, including waterways, stream buffers, floodplain, steep slopes, or remnants. 
    Plaza, Corner: A small public gathering area, delineated with decorative pavers or concrete and may include street furniture on the corner of two (2) streets. 
    Pocket Park: A public space providing passive recreation. 
    Public Art: Sculptures of at least two (2) feet in height and murals of at least one hundred sixty-five (165) square feet. 
    Stormwater Feature: A water quality, detention, or retention design that exceeds minimum standards, as found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, creating an attractive amenity for the site. 
    Street Furniture: Includes benches, trash cans, and other pieces of equipment meeting City specifications as set forth in the plans for Transportation Enhancement Project PI Number 0010648. 
    Sustainability Measures: Measures found in Section 7.520 of the Land Development Ordinance or proposed by a developer and approved by the DPC. 
    Terminated Vista: A location containing a building or monument that stands at the end or in the middle of a road, so that when one is looking up the street, the view ends with the site containing the building or monument. A building located at a terminated vista is required to be designed in response to the context. 
    Transportation System Improvement: A public transportation project or donation in lieu to complete a public transportation project other than roadway and pedestrian improvements required by the LDO to serve the project. 
(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.805. - Site Development Standards. 
1.  For properties within the Ridgewalk Overlay District, minimum setbacks shall be as follows: 
Front Building Setback 50' adjacent to Ridgewalk Parkway; 
40' adjacent to other rights-of-way Side Building Setback 15' Rear Building Setback 30'  
2.  A forty-five (45) foot buffer shall be required along any property line that is adjacent to any property that is part of any of the following existing platted subdivisions: Brookshire, Meridian, Montclair, Whitfield, and the Magnolias at Ridgewalk. A fifty (50) foot buffer shall be required adjacent to any USACE-owned properties. Aside from these, no other zoning buffers shall be required on properties located in the Overlay. Buffers in the Overlay shall follow the design standards found in Article VI of this Chapter, Buffers. 
3.  Parking 
a.  Parking minimum and maximum requirements for number of spaces shall be as required by Chapter VII, Article V. 
Parking areas shall be distributed around the site, rather than being concentrated in large lots, unless these lots are screened from the public right-of-way by buildings. A maximum of two (2) rows of parking may be located between the primary structure and any streets. Smaller parking lots containing no more than four (4) rows or parking spaces are permitted to be located to the side of buildings, and larger lots are permitted to be located behind buildings, generally as shown below. 

(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.806. - Site Design Standards. 
1.  All development within the Ridgewalk Overlay shall adhere to the required standards set forth in the following points matrix. Using the matrix, each site proposed for development must a achieve a minimum score as follows: 
Acres Streetscape Minimum Site Minimum Total Minimum < 1 5 Points 2 Points 7 Points 1.1-5 5 Points 4 Points 9 Points 5.1-10 6 Points 4 Points 13 Points 10.1-15 7 Points 5 Points 15 Points 15.1+ 8 Points 7 Points 20 Points  
  
100 Required Ridgewalk
Streetscape Features Points
Max Provided Details 101 Sidewalk-5' or 10' wide 1 1 5' wide-northside, 10' wide-southside (of Ridgewalk Parkway only) 102 Decorative Lighting 1 1 100' o.c. 103 Brick/Stone Piers with Fence 1 1 Piers every 100' with fence 104 Landscape Strip-7' wide 1 1 7' behind curb 105 Street Trees 1 1 40' o.c. 106 Public Art 2 0 1 point per piece, as defined 107 Add'l Landscaping 1 0 Trees, shrubs, etc., as defined 108 Street Furniture 1 0 At least two pieces, as defined 109 Additional Landscape Zone 1 0 Beyond 7' behind curb for more than 50' linear 110 Corner Plaza 2 0 200 sq. ft. minimum, as defined 111 Open Space/Pocket Park 2 0 1,000 sq. ft. minimum, as defined 112 Monument Sign with Decorative Base 2 0 Masonry finish, as defined 113 Retaining Wall with Decorative Masonry 2 0 Terraced or seat level with decorative masonry finish, as defined      TOTAL 18 5 Deducts Reduced 10' Wide Sidewalk -1 0 Less than 10' wide for more than 50' linear Reduced or eliminated sidewalk -1 0 Due to hardship-site topo, depth, etc. Reduced Decorative Lighting -1 0 Less than 100' o.c. Reduced Brick/Stone Piers with Fence -1 0 Due to hardship-site topo, depth, etc. Reduced Landscape Strip -1 0 Due to hardship-site topo, depth, etc. Reduced Streets Trees -1 0 Due to hardship-site topo, depth, etc.      TOTAL DEDUCTS 0 0      Additional Site Points 2 0 Maximum from Site Features      GRAND TOTAL 20 5 200 Site Features Points
Max Provided Details 201 5' Wide Sidewalk 1 0 On both sides of each driveway/roadway and connecting to entrance 202 Pedestrian Connectivity 1 0 Complete connectivity through site (interconnectivity and no deadends) 203 10' Wide Sidewalk 2 0 Trail/wide sidewalk connectivity provided through site 204 Completion of Public Trail Segment 5 0 On site or off site public trail segment completion 205 Corner Plaza 1 0 At least 500 sq. ft. with pavers and street furniture 206 Pocket Park 2 0 1,000 sq. ft. or larger 207 Front Yard 1 0 At least 10' beyond the sidewalk, with grass or landscaping, not parking 208 Open Space 1 0 At least 1,000 sq. ft., passive 209 Interparcel Connectivity 1 0 Vehicular and pedestrian access 210 Decorative Walls/Fences 1 0 As defined 211 Terminated Vista 2 0 As defined 212 Terraced Retaining Wall 2 0 Over 8' tall; includes landscaping 213 Decorative Retaining Wall 2 0 Under 8' tall 214 Public Art 2 0 1 point per piece, as defined 215 Fountain 1 0 As defined 216 Sustainability Measures 3 0 1 points per measure, developer proposed (see also Section 7.520) 217 Civic Building/land donation 1 0 As defined 218 Stormwater Feature 1 0 As defined      SUBTOTAL 30 0      Additional Site Points 0 0 May deduct max 2 points eligible for streetscape features      GRAND TOTAL 30 0 Less two points transferred to streetscape features 300 Transportation System
Improvements Points
Max Provided Details 301 Transportation System Improvement 5 0 1 point per improvement, as defined      GRAND TOTAL 5 0 400 Additional Project
Features Points
Max Provided Details 401 Office or Employment Use 10 0 Primary use, as defined      GRAND TOTAL 10 0      GRAND TOTAL
     POINTS PROVIDED 65 5  
The DPC will review and approve the final score for each proposed development. No development shall receive a land disturbance permit (LDP) unit the final score is approved by the DPC. An applicant may appeal the DPC decision directly to the City Council. 
2.  Streetscape Requirements-At a minimum, each site developed must include the following: 
a.  Ridgewalk Parkway: 
i.  Sidewalk-Five (5) feet in width along the northside of Ridgewalk Parkway and ten (10) feet in width along the southside. 
ii.  Landscape Strip-Seven (7) feet between the back of curb and the sidewalk. 
iii.  Decorative lighting-Every one hundred (100) feet on center (o.c.) in the landscape strip. 
iv.  Street Trees-Every fifty (50) feet on center (o.c.) in the landscape strip. 
v.  Brick/Stone Piers-Every one hundred (100) feet on center (o.c.) with the decorative fence in between, as depicted below. 

b.  Other Streets. At a minimum, a five (5) foot sidewalk is required. 
i.  Parking must be screened if visible from streets by an evergreen hedge, minimum thirty-six (36) inches tall. 
ii.  Alterations in streetscape requirements may be achieved with the deducts found in the matrix. 
3.  Pedestrian Network: 
a.  A pedestrian network interior to the site shall be composed of minimum five (5) foot wide sidewalks which shall give access from the sidewalk or trail within the Streetscape, through any parking lots, to the primary entrance of each commercial or business establishment. These sidewalks shall be located outside of any drive aisles except where required to cross the drive aisle. 
b.  The pedestrian network shall give access from each primary building entrance through and to any side or rear parking areas intended to serve the establishment. Pathways through large rear parking lots shall be six (6) to ten (10) feet wide. 
c.  The pedestrian network shall connect each property to the next wherever there is a logical connection to be made, including connections to any open spaces or civic areas on the site or which border the site. 
4.  Other Site Design Standards: 
a.  Loading docks, service areas, and dumpsters shall not be located in any Front Yard or streetscape area and shall be screened if visible from the public right of way by a combination of fences, walls and landscaping, but not landscaping alone. Dumpsters shall be located in an enclosure designed to be consistent with the principal building in material, texture, and color, and shall have gates or doors which are to remain closed when not being accessed. 
b.  Terminated Vista locations shall be considered during site design. A Terminated Vista shall not terminate in a parking lot, to the side or back of a building, or any other unappealing area. Prominent buildings with enhanced architecture often with a vertical element, civic spaces, fountains, monuments, or sculptures are appropriate features for Terminated Vista areas. 
(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.807. - Architectural Standards. 
1.  The Primary Façade of a proposed building shall include the main building entrance and primary pedestrian entrance, and shall face Ridgewalk Parkway, or the most primary street. 
2.  The façade composition standards below shall apply to any street-facing building façade, and any building façade which faces a civic space. These are considered Primary or Secondary Façades. 
a.  Primary façades shall be articulated and designed to create additional visual interest by varying architectural details, building materials, the roof line, and building offsets. 
b.  Windows and doors shall be provided for at least fifteen (15) percent of the total façade area, with each story calculated independently, including spaces between floors. The maximum contiguous area without windows or doors shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height and twenty (20) feet in width. 
c.  Façades over fifty (50) feet in length shall incorporate wall projections or recesses a minimum of twelve (12) inches in depth. The combined length of said recesses and projections shall constitute at least twenty (20) percent of the total façade length. 
d.  Façades over two hundred (200) feet in length shall incorporate a major articulation at least every two hundred (200) feet of façade length. Said major articulation shall occur for a minimum length of twenty (20) feet and shall be accomplished through: 
i.  A change of façade material from the grade to the roof; or 
ii.  A change in façade composition from the grade to the roof; or 
iii.  Changes in storefront systems, varying setbacks, or similar means intended to convey the impression of separate buildings. 
3.  Tertiary Façades do not have window, door, or articulation requirements but shall incorporate a decorative pattern with varied materials and textures in lieu of windows or doors. For the purpose of satisfying this requirement, control and expansion joints shall not constitute a decorative pattern with varied materials and textures. 
4.  Façade material standards for Primary, Secondary, and Tertiary Façades shall be as follows: 
a.  Primary Façades shall be composed of a majority of Tier 1 façade materials, with twenty (20) percent or less of the façade area being composed of Tier 2 façade materials, and five (5) percent or less of the façade area being composed of Tier 3 materials (intended for trim and other small architectural features). 
b.  Secondary Façades shall be composed completely of Tier 1 or Tier 2 façade materials, and five (5) percent or less of Tier 3 materials. 
c.  Tertiary Façades shall be composed of Tier 1, 2, or 3 materials, with no more than eighty (80) percent of the façade being composed of Tier 3 materials. 
d.  Exposed neon or LED lighting outlining and detailing building features is prohibited. 
5.  Façade materials are as follows: 
a.  Tier 1 façade materials are brick, stone, cast stone, and natural wood. 
b.  Tier 2 façade materials are hard-coat stucco, quik brik and similar faux brick systems, and cementitious siding. 
c.  Tier 3 façade materials are Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS), metal, faux wood or wood composite, and concrete. EIFS shall not be used within six (6) feet of the foundation or slab. Other composite materials may be considered Tier 3 materials, as approved by staff. 
6.  Accessory structures shall be consistent with the principal building in material, texture, and color, and shall not be covered in only Tier 3 materials. 
7.  Foundations, where provided, shall be constructed as a distinct building element that contrasts with the façade materials. Exposed above-ground foundations shall be coated or faced in stucco, brick, cast stone, or natural stone to contrast with façade materials. Exposed cement surfaces may be approved by administrative waiver. 
8.  Flat roofs shall be screened from the view of public and private streets by a parapet with a cornice, which shall extend around all sides of the building. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment, vents, and stacks shall be screened from view from all sides. Roofing material and color shall be compatible with the building and its surroundings. 
9.  Optional Approval Process for architectural elevations. 
a.  The details of architectural elevations for any proposed building in the Ridgewalk Overlay must be approved by staff for compliance of this section, and for adherence to the intent and purpose of the Overlay. 
b.  In situations where the proposed architecture is not in compliance with these standards, but staff feels that with some changes, the intent and purpose of the Ridgewalk Overlay could be met, the Community Development Department reserves the right to engage an architect for review of the proposed building. 
c.  The applicant, architect, and staff shall work together to reach a design that conforms to the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, which shall then be voted on for approval by the DPC. 
d.  In the event that the DPC does not approve the proposed architecture, the City Council shall have the right to approve or deny architecture on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 5642-2019, § 4, 2-25-2019) 
7.808-7.839. - Reserved. 
7.840. - Specific Standards for Senior Living. 
7.841. - Purpose and Intent of Senior Living. 
    The regulations set forth in senior living are designed to: 
1.  Provide for the development of detached, attached, and multifamily dwelling units limited to those persons age fifty-five (55) and older as defined by the Fair Housing Act. 
2.  Locate these developments in areas where retail, professional, civic, and cultural uses are convenient for residents to access, preferably even when they can no longer drive. 
3.  Promote the concept of aging in place which provides a variety of living choices aimed at allowing residents to remain in their communities as they age. These include communities with a mix of housing type and size, active living communities, assisted living facilities and full care facilities. 
4.  Promote pedestrian safety by ensuring sidewalk-oriented buildings and attractive street-facing facades that foster pedestrian activity and liveliness. 
5.  Provide an adequate amount of meaningful open space within each development which creates areas for social interaction among neighbors, opportunities for recreation, and is easily accessible for all residents. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.842, 7.843. - Reserved. 
7.844. - Residential Density Bonus. 
    Density bonuses will be awarded to each senior living project which incorporates affordable units, assisted living units, and/or full care facilities. These bonuses are listed in the table and are based on a percentage of the total units by project, followed by a maximum allowed density in each subarea. 
Density Bonus Table Senior Living Subareas SL-A SL-B SL-C Base density 4 6 12 Affordable units (10%)* 2 2 8 Affordable units (30%)* 3 3 12 Affordable units (50%)* 4 4 18 Assisted living units (10%)* 8 Assisted living units (30%)* 12 Assisted living units (50%)* 18 Full care facility (100%)* 18 Maximum allowed density** 8 10 30 *Percentages are based on the total number of units in each development and are the minimum necessary to achieve bonus density. **Affordable and assisted living unit bonuses may be combined, but cannot exceed max density.  
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.845. - Location Requirements. 
    Any project in a SL category must adhere to the following location requirements. These requirements are calculated by measuring the walkable distance on an improved surface between the main entrance of the SL neighborhood or building to the front door of the commercial facility. 
1.  SL-A and SL-B must be located within a three-quarter (0.75) mile radius of commercial retail uses including but not limited to grocery stores, pharmacies, and/or medical service facilities. Projects must also maintain the scale and intensity of surrounding uses. 
2.  SL-C must be located within a one-quarter (0.25) mile radius of commercial retail uses including but not limited to grocery stores, pharmacies, and/or medical service facilities. SL-C projects may be exempt from these requirements if these uses are provided on-site. Projects must also maintain the scale and intensity of surrounding uses. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.846. - Site Planning Requirements. 
Senior Living Site Limits Table Senior Living Subareas SL-A SL-B SL-C Minimum lot width (feet) 35 16 N/A Build-to line (feet) Min - 5 
Max - 20 Min - 5 
Max - 10 Min - 5 
Max - 10 Rear setback (minimum feet) With alley - 0 
No alley - 20 With alley - 0 
No alley - 20 20 Side setback (minimum feet) 5 N/A N/A Buffer (feet)* R-1, R-2 N/A 25 25 R-3, R-4 N/A N/A N/A OSI, NC, GC N/A N/A N/A LI, HI 50 50 50 *Buffers apply only on property lines contiguous to adjacent zoning categories.  
    Any project in a SL category must adhere to each of the following site planning requirements: 
1.  The minimum requirement for open space shall be twenty (20) percent of the project area. Required infrastructure, detention facilities and mandatory stream buffers shall not be used in open space calculations. Not more than fifty (50) percent of the total open space requirement shall be provided in the form of private open space. 
2.  Each unit in SL-A and SL-B shall provide a minimum of one (1) parking space in a garage structure, not to exceed two (2) spaces. All garages must be accessed through the use of rear alleys. 
3.  No parking in SL-C shall be permitted between the building(s) and the main access street in order to facilitate pedestrian access to the street. Vehicular access to the building(s) shall be provided from the rear, side, underneath or a courtyard. In addition, a main pedestrian access to each building shall be provided on the side facing the street. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.847. - Street Design Requirements. 
1.  In order to promote a safe pedestrian environment, street design shall accommodate the use of landscape strips, a minimum six (6) foot wide sidewalk on both sides of the street, and dedicated on-street parking areas where appropriate. 
2.  When a SL project fronts an existing street, the above requirements are to be applied along the existing street along the entire frontage of the property. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.848. - Senior Living Zoning Category Requirements. 
1.  The total number of units zoned under any SL category shall not exceed more than twenty (20) percent of the total number of housing units within the city limits. The number of units that may be zoned SL will be updated as needed by the City. 
2.  All SL developments shall have development plans approved by the City within eighteen (18) months of receiving SL zoning or it shall revert to the previous zoning category. At its discretion, City Council may grant extensions. 
3.  In order to promote a pedestrian friendly environment, the following overlay standards are expressly waived in favor of the requirements in the SL site limits table lot sizes, lot widths, streetscape adjustments, setbacks, and buffers. Any overlay standards related to streetscape themes and architectural requirements shall be adhered to. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.849. - Senior Living General Requirements. 
1.  All other sections of the City's Land Development Ordinance shall be enforced including but not limited to tree preservation, stream buffer requirements, engineering requirements, and signage regulations. 
2.  Upgrades to existing adjacent infrastructure shall be required including but not limited to the installation or upgrade of crosswalks and sidewalks, pedestrian signalization including count down timers and audio notification for the visually impaired, and/or wheelchair compatibility. 
3.  The exterior of each dwelling unit and other buildings shall be brick, cast stone, concrete siding such as hardiplank, natural wood, hard coat stucco, and/or natural stone. 
4.  All residential units within SL shall incorporate applicable and "Easy Living Home" standards to include: 
a.  A step free entrance into the main floor at either the front or side of the structure, or through the garage. 
b.  A bedroom, kitchen, wheelchair friendly bathroom, and entertaining area all on the main floor. 
c.  Every interior door on the main floor provides a minimum thirty-two (32) inches of clear passage. 
d.  Blocking installed in the bathroom(s) on the main floor to facilitate the future addition of handrails or similar accessibility features. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.850. - Specific Standards for Conservation Subdivisions. 
7.851. - Definition and Purpose of Conservation Subdivisions. 
    A conservation subdivision is a residential zone that provides for the preservation of open space and greenspace for watershed protection and the nonstructural management of stormwater runoff. The purpose of the conservation subdivision is to provide flexibility of design in order to promote sustainable development of land in portions of the City already zoned for residential use. It permits the clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive lands which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. Appropriate use of the conservation subdivision can also: 
1.  Provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
2.  Provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
3.  Preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
4.  Permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
5.  Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.852. - Applicability. 
    The conservation subdivision option is available in the residential zoning district listed in Section 7.300. Unless specifically noted, the development must meet all applicable requirements contained in Chapter III of this Ordinance in addition to the guidelines of this section. Ownership of Development Site: The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.853. - Minimum Development Requirements. 
Minimum 6,000 square feet Minimum lot width 60 feet Front yard setback (dependent on right-of-way) Existing street 50 feet New street in subdivision 25 feet Side yard 10 feet Rear yard 15 feet  
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.854. - Housing Density Determination for Conservation Subdivisions. 
    The maximum number of lots in the Conservation Subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two (2) methods, at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: 
1.  Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The one hundred (100) year floodplain; 
c.  Bodies of open water over five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
2.  Yield Plan. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.855. - Standards to Determine Open Space. 
1.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least forty (40) percent of the gross tract area. 
2.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
a.  The regulatory one hundred (100) year floodplain; 
b.  Buffer zones of at least seventy-five (75) feet width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above twenty-five (25) percent of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
3.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one (1) acre contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight (8) inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five (5) acres contiguous area; and 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
4.  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the forty (40) percent minimum area requirement (exception historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
5.  At least seventy-five (75) percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
6.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.856. - Permitted Uses of Open Space. 
    Uses of open space may include the following: 
1.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
2.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
3.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
4  Passive recreation areas; 
5.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten (10) percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
6.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
7.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
8.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.857. - Prohibited uses of Open Space. 
1.  Golf courses; 
2.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
3.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
4.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.858. - Ownership and Management of Open Space. 
1.  The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners' association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
2.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the City may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowner's association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowner's association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. Should the homeowner's association go defunct responsibility falls to the actual homeowners. 
3.  Legal Instrument for Permanent Protection. The open space preserved as part of the conservation subdivision shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one (1) of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
i.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
ii.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this Ordinance. If the entity accepting the easement is not the City, then a third right of enforcement favoring the City shall be included in the easement; 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the City; 
d.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.859. - Conservation Subdivision Application Requirements. 
1.  Site Analysis Map Required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
c.  Topographic contours of no less than ten (10) foot intervals; 
d.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in Section 4 of this article; 
e.  General vegetation characteristics; 
f.  General soil types; 
g.  The planned location of protected open space; 
h.  Existing roads and structures; and 
i.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
2.  Open Space Management Plan Required. An open space management plan shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the City Council; and 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
3.  Instrument of Permanent Protection Required. An instrument of permanent protection, as described in [Subsection] (c)(6) of this section, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
4.  Other Requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.860. - Overlay Zoning Districts. 
7.861. - General to Overlay Districts. 
7.862. - Purpose Statement. 
1.  Overlay zoning serves as a development standard for specific areas identified within the City. These development standards provide for a uniform landscape and design theme in these areas. The specific design and land use policies are an extensive plan for these areas of the City. 
2.  Overlay zoning is intended to generate quality development through the use of design standards and other requirements specific to those areas defined within the specific overlay zoning districts. The use of overlay zoning is designed to promote economic, cultural, open space and safety features to aid the public's general welfare. This orderly planning system is intended to attract future development and provides for mixed use options to encourage development consistent with the comprehensive plan of the City. 
3.  The addition of overlay zoning to those areas identified within the City will be by subsequent zoning map amendment and will be in the form of an "overlay" zoning. Those properties located within these areas will retain the rights conferred by their existing zoning classifications. Moreover, new property rights will be conferred on those properties on the corridor that meet the criteria established herein. 
4.  Nothing in the Ordinance precludes the filing for a map amendment to any zoning classification allowed by the City of Woodstock Zoning Ordinance. However, it is the express legislative intent of the City that strip or single lot commercial development will undermine the objective sought through the adoption and implementation of this Ordinance. Accordingly, while this Ordinance seeks to confer additional rights without depriving any property of its existing rights, the passage of this Ordinance should not be interpreted as an endorsement of traditional commercial zoning. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.863. - Existing Conditions. 
    It is the desire of the City and its citizens and private property owners cooperating in the creation of this Ordinance to implement it as rapidly as possible and to do so in a fair manner. Existing conditions need not change immediately upon the adoption of this Ordinance. While this Ordinance will become effective immediately for new development, construction and renovation, some flexibility is provided in the implementation of the other elements. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.864. - Application of Overlay Standards. 
    After adoption by the Mayor and the City Council of the City, this Ordinance will apply to all applications for land disturbance and/or building permits submitted after the effective date of this Ordinance's adoption. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.865. - Exterior Renovations. 
    Exterior renovations to a building must comply with the Ordinance requirements. The structural aspects of this Ordinance will not be triggered by standard maintenance activities not requiring a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.866. - Continuation of a Non-Conforming Use. 
    The lawful use of any building structure or tract of land existing at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance or amendment of this Ordinance may be continued, even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this Ordinance, except that the non-conforming use shall not be: 
1.  Extended to occupy a greater area of land. 
2.  Extended to occupy a greater area of a building or structure unless, such additional area of the building or structure existed at the time of the passage or amendment of this Ordinance and was clearly designated to house the same use as the non-conforming use occupying the other portion of the building or structure. 
3.  Re-established after discontinuation for sixty (60) days within a non-residential district or re-established at all after discontinuance in a residential district. 
4.  Changed to another non-conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.867. - Continuation of a Building Occupied by a Non-Conforming Use. 
    A building occupied by a non-conforming use at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance or amendment of this Ordinance may be retained except that: 
1.  No building other than a single-family detached dwelling may be enlarged, altered, or rebuilt except in conformance with this Ordinance, but it may repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe and sanitary condition. 
2.  No building other than a single-family detached dwelling, when replaced within six (6) months, shall be rebuilt, altered, or repaired after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this Ordinance, provided that such damage occurred as a result of fire, flood, wind, earthquake, or other natural disaster. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.868. - Coordination with Other Ordinances. 
    These design guidelines supersede other ordinances, codes and laws of the City, only so far as they exceed the requirements of those documents or as specifically stated herein. Compliance with these guidelines does not negate any responsibility to comply with other ordinances and codes not superseded by this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.869. - Reserved. 
7.870. - Severability. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid, it shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.871. - Parkway Overlay District. 
7.872. - Legislative Purpose. 
    This Ordinance shall be known as the Parkway Overlay District Ordinance, and shall serve to encourage developing as one (1) project, tracts of land that are sufficiently large to allow a mixed-use development consisting of uses permitted under this article, and, when developed pursuant to this Ordinance, only such permitted uses, while maintaining compatibility with the existing areas and creating an attractive, efficient and stable environment. It encourages a mixture of prominently sited office/institutional, commercial establishments, civic or community buildings and housing types to provide a balanced mix of activities and public spaces. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.873. - Legislative Objective. 
1.  The Parkway Overlay District Ordinance serves as a development standard for the Highway 92 corridor. This development standard provides for a uniform landscape and design theme along this improved road. The specific design and land use policies are a comprehensive plan for the Highway 92 corridor of the City. 
2.  The Parkway Overlay District Ordinance calls for a pattern of commercial and office buildings constructed in eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles. The regulations recognize and are intended to protect and preserve the established residential areas located to the north and south of the improved road. The incorporation of buffering techniques seeks to assist in the preservation of adjoining residential areas by providing a unique transition zone rather than the traditional descending density theory. 
3.  The parkway overlay district ordinance is intended to generate quality development along the expanded Highway 92 thoroughfare while promoting economic, cultural, open space and safety features to promote the public welfare. This orderly planning system is intended to attract quality development as described in the permitted uses of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.874. - Establishment of Parkway Overlay District Boundary. 
    The boundaries of the parkway overlay district shall extend one thousand (1,000) feet to the north of the centerline of Highway 92 and one thousand (1,000) feet to the south of the centerline of Highway 92 from the eastern city limits to the western city limits. All parcels lying within the specified boundaries, except those listed in Section 7.925, shall be governed by the requirements set forth. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.875. - Parcels Split by Boundary. 
    Application may be made to extend the boundary of the parkway overlay district to include an entire parcel which is divided by the specified boundary of the parkway overlay district refer to Section 11.202 of the City of Woodstock's Land Development Ordinance for application procedures. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.876. - Exemptions from Parkway Overlay District Ordinance. 
    The following parcels are expressly exempted from the requirements of the parkway overlay district: 
• Parcels within the designated area and zoned pursuant to the downtown master plan (DTMP). 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.877, 7.878. - Reserved. 
7.879. - Site Development Standards. 
    All projects developed within the parkway overlay district shall meet the following minimum site development standards: 
Site Development Standards Project Type COM Commercial/Institutional Maximum density (units per acre) n/a Minimum project size (acres) n/a Minimum lot size (square feet) n/a Minimum lot width (feet) n/a Setbacks (feet) Front 20 Side 10 Rear 30 Buffer (feet) COM 5 SFD-A 75 SFD-B 75 SFA 75 COM 5 Maximum height (feet) 40  
1.  The intent of buffers is to provide a year-round visual screen, such as evergreen trees, between adjacent properties and new development, except for the five (5) foot buffer required between commercial/institutional uses which may be landscaped at the discretion of the property owner in compliance with other provisions of the Land Development Code. 
2.  Access to Highway 92 must comply with all city, county and state traffic access requirements established by the City Engineer and the Georgia Department of Transportation. Internal roadways or vehicular connections making developments accessible to each other shall be used whenever possible to discourage traffic congestion on Highway 92. 
3.  All utilities shall be located underground. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.880. - Streetscape Zone Standards. 
    All projects developed within the parkway overlay district shall meet the following streetscape zone standards: 
Streetscape Zone Standards* Project Type COM Commercial/Institutional Hwy 92 (feet) 40 Other ROW (feet) 40 *Measured from the edge of pavement  
1.  Streetscape zone requirements shall include landscaping along the entire property frontage, except where driveways may be required, for the minimum depth required. 
2.  Landscaping shall utilize fences, berms, connecting sidewalks, trees, and other plantings to comply with the requirements set forth. 
a.  A three (3) rail fence of appropriate style, white in color, shall be installed within two (2) feet of the right-of-way of Highway 92. 
b.  An approved street tree with a minimum three (3) inch DBH, as indicated in the Tree Preservation Ordinance, shall be required every forty (40) feet on center along the entire property frontage within the streetscape zone. 
c.  A landscaped berm of no less than three (3) feet in height or evergreen landscape plantings of no less than three (3) feet in height shall be provided to screen vehicular parking areas, loading areas, and dumpsters from view of Highway 92. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.881. - Architectural Standards. 
    All projects developed within the Parkway Overlay District shall meet the following architectural standards: 
1.  Buildings shall be designed to substantially resemble eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles. 
2.  Building mass shall be broken up to give the appearance of individual buildings or places of business, presenting a village appearance. 
3.  Large areas of uninterrupted brickwork shall be broken up through the use of trellises, arcades, blind windows, archways, or other patterns. 
4.  Window areas shall not extend down to the floor line. A wall of not less than two (2) feet in height shall separate the floor from the bottom of the window frame. 
5.  In a mixed use project all residential uses will be designed in traditional styles that will complement the office/commercial uses. 
6.  Buildings shall have no less than eight (80) percent of the non-glass area of three (3) exterior sides faced with brick or natural stone of a natural color and texture that simulates historic types of brickwork. If a building has more than four (4) planar areas, seventy-five (75) percent of these areas shall be faced in brick. 
7.  Multi-pane windows shall be used in individual window openings, rather than large glass sheets. 
8.  Mirrored glass with a reflection greater than twenty (20) percent and glass curtain walls are prohibited. 
9.  Paint colors shall be of traditional, historic types which are generally muted tones such as ivory, cream, beige, white, and pastel colors. Colors which are not permitted are bright or vibrant colors of orange, pink, purple, bright green, or violet, which are considered to be inconsistent with the district. The exterior color scheme shall be approved by the Director of Planning and Economic Development. 
10.  All buildings shall have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of four and one-half (4.5) inches vertical elevation per one (1) foot of horizontal distance, except as otherwise provided herein. 
11.  Commercial building styles without a pitched roof shall have a detailed parapet and cornice, in keeping with eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles. 
12.  All roofing materials shall be of a consistent style and pattern. Pitched roofs shall be finished in either architectural or dimensional shingles, or standing seam metal roofs. 
13.  Renovations to preexisting non-conforming buildings which require a building permit shall include monument signage and ivy on trellises on the exterior of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.882. - Technology Park Overlay District. 
7.883. - Legislative Purpose. 
1.  The Technology Park Overlay Ordinance serves as a development standard for the development of a mixed use office and technology park combined with commercial and residential uses along the Woodstock Parkway, Rope Mill Connector roadways. This Ordinance is designed to set a standard for development that fully integrates those uses that will create a vibrant activity center in a unique style that complements and enhances the natural environment and existing development pattern of the surrounding areas of Woodstock and Cherokee County. 
2.  The Technology Park Overlay District calls for a combination of light industrial, technology oriented commercial, office uses, and a mixture of low, medium and high density residential uses combined with natural preserve areas in a style that uses modern forms and patterns with influences based upon historic styles and models. The technology park overlay district is oriented towards an exclusive office park environment targeted toward long term corporate clientele, with an emphasis toward corporate clientele, with an emphasis toward corporate headquarters and campuses. The technology park overlay is intended to maintain the natural surroundings and give the appearance and feel of an area completely unique to the City. This Ordinance is intended to provide for mixed use options to encourage development consistent with the City's comprehensive plan. 
3.  Nothing in the ordinance precludes the filing for a map amendment to any zoning classification allowed by the City of Woodstock Zoning Ordinance. While this Ordinance seeks to confer additional rights without depriving any property of its existing rights, the passage of this Ordinance should not be interpreted as an endorsement of the traditional commercial zoning. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.884. - Establishment of Technology Park Overlay District Boundary. 
    The general boundaries of the technology park overlay district shall be those properties that are currently zoned light industrial that are located along Old Highway 5/Canton Highway, Woodstock Parkway, Rope Mill Road and Ridgewalk Parkway. The specific boundaries are drawn on the approved map by the City Council and the approved map resides with the City Clerk and Department of Planning and Economic Development. These boundaries shall not include any properties zoned for and used as a general commercial use. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.885. - Permitted Use Standards. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, in addition to those uses permitted under light industrial zoning (LI) within any development permitted pursuant to this Ordinance: 
1.  Eating and drinking establishments, including coffee shop, ice cream and yogurt shops, restaurant-sit down, restaurant-fast food, restaurant with alcoholic beverages, small cafe. 
2.  Institutional, including auditorium, assembly hall, civic center, community center, cultural facility, government building, library, museum, park and recreation facility, school facility. 
3.  Medical, including group care facility, hospital, hospice, medical office, residential board/care facility. 
4.  Residential, including single-family home, fee simple townhome, independent retirement living, residential condominium over commercial. 
5.  Retail local, including bakery-retail store only, florist-retail store only, grocery store [limited to fifty-five thousand (55,000) square feet], retail store-common merchandise, news stand. 
6.  Services local, including bank and financial institutions, barber and beauty shop, clinic-public/private, carpet/rug sales and storage, day care facility, equipment supply, dry cleaning-pick up/drop off, dry cleaning-on premises, hotel. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.886. - Prohibited Use Standards. 
    Any uses not specifically listed in Section 7.885 shall not be permitted within the Technology Park Overlay District and in addition, the following uses shall be prohibited: 
1.  Adult video/novelty shop, advertising display/sales, agricultural business-cooperation, amusement park, automobile garage/repair shop including oil and lube, automobile sales-new/used, automobile salvage lot/scrap yard, billiard parlor, boat sales/service/repair facility, bottled gas/storage/distribution center, bottling plant, builder supply-storage, cesspool builder-service, check cash service, communication towers, contractor equipment/material storage, curio/souvenir shop, drive-in theater, electric substation, farm equipment sales/service, gas regulation station, go kart/motor bike track, kennel-commercial, manufacturing facility, meat processing facility, mini-warehouse facility, manufactured home sales, nude/semi-clothed dancing establishment, pawn shop, petroleum products-bulk storage, planned industrial park, produce stands, recreational vehicle sales/service/repair facility, storage yard, truck terminal, tire sales/repair shop. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.887. - Residential Development Standards. 
1.  The intent of this overlay is to allow for a variety of different housing types. Housing above and immediately adjoining office and retail space, creating a lively mix of uses and a twenty-four (24) hour community is encouraged. The ideal inclusion of residential uses is within a building that also contains commercial and/or residential uses. A mix of low density, medium density, to high density residential housing shall be permitted immediately adjoining these mixed use buildings. A low density shall be designed up to three (3) units per acre, a medium density shall be up to six (6) units per acre, and a high density shall be up to twelve (12) units per acre. Higher densities shall be governed by the adjacent land use and a logical transition of land use from a more intense use to a less intense, low density residential use. For purposes of determining a logical transition the depth of the property as measured between commercial and other residential uses shall be divided into proportionate parts. The section nearest commercial may have the higher density and the section nearest other residential will be the least density. 
a.  The total number of residential units will not exceed two thousand (2,000). The gross land area allocated to residential use will not exceed forty-two (42) percent of the total land area in the Technology Park Overlay at the time of site plan application. 
b.  Residential uses are not to be of a density less than two (2) units per acre, with a total density not more than twelve (12) units per acre. 
2.  The orientation of residential and mixed use buildings should be along public roads and nature preserves with only one (1) side or face of the building overlooking a parking area. The creation of courtyards and enclosed parking area are strongly encouraged. The architecture of any mixed use or purely residential building should conform with the design standards previously set forth in this Ordinance. 
3.  Residential units shall not be separated from office and or retail uses but fully integrated as part of a greater whole. Separation would include but not limited to the fencing or enclosing of a residential area with restricted vehicular or pedestrian access to any residential area. This restriction of separation is not designated to endanger any resident or impair the security of any resident. Rather than creating a fortress-like residential environment, security can and should be provided at the entrance points to buildings or in enclosed secure parking areas that are restricted from public view. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.888. - Site Development Standards. 
1.  Setbacks shall not be less than ten (10) feet from any right-of-way. Other setbacks shall be per Article IV, Zone District Performance Standards of Chapter VII, Zone District Standards of the Land Development Ordinance of the City for the underlying zoning classification or the most closely related category for the proposed use. 
2.  Impervious surface in the technology park overlay zoning district, not including street parking, shall not exceed seventy (70) percent of the total lot area. This calculation must be included on the site plan provided for the addition of off-street parking spaces. 
3.  A plan for any additional outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and approved by the Department of Planning and Economic Development to ensure that unnecessary glare shall not be cast on adjacent property. Unnecessary glare shall be defined at one-tenth (0.1) foot candle at the property line between the commercial and residential property. 
4.  A berm or hedgerow type evergreen landscape feature, no less than three (3) feet in height, shall be provided to shield vehicular parking area from view of any publicly accessible area. This screening is not designed to restrict safe viewing areas or driving lanes. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.889. - Streetscape Zone Standards. 
1.  The streetscape zone shall include broom finished sidewalks with hand troweled joints directing pedestrian connections to the main entrance of existing or new buildings Landscaping utilizing fences, berms, connection sidewalks, trees and other plantings, well maintained from landscape area, appropriate landscaping, mature trees, hedgerow plantings, brick piers, period style lighting, and the minimization of parking and driveway areas to comply with the City's comprehensive plan. The streetscape zone is measured from the edge of pavement. 
a.  Front yard landscaping areas along the Woodstock Parkway/Rope Mill Connector shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet in depth along the entire property frontage except where driveways or other openings may be required. 
b.  A major tree not less than two (2) inch DBH as indicated in the Tree Ordinance shall be planted every twenty (20) feet on center along the entire roadway frontage of the property within the landscape strip. 
2.  An upgraded sidewalk shall be added from the street to the main entrance of all structures on Woodstock Parkway. Upgraded sidewalks should incorporate brick, stone or other material that will tie in and compliment the building architecture and landscape. The intent is to eventually have sidewalks fronting any structure along Woodstock Parkway. The project design shall provide pedestrian connectivity through sidewalks and/or multiuse trails, to the other activities centers such as, but not limited to, library, city hall, downtown and school to the maximum possible extent. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.890. - Architectural Standards. 
    All projects developed within the Technology Park Overlay District shall meet the following architectural standards: 
1.  Building mass shall be broken up to give the appearance of individual buildings or places of business, presenting a village appearance. 
2.  Large areas of uninterrupted brickwork shall be broken up through the use of trellises, arcades, blind windows, archways, or other patterns. 
3.  Window areas shall not extend down to the floor line. A wall of not less than two (2) feet in height shall separate the floor from the bottom of the window frame. 
4.  In a mixed use project all residential uses will be designed in traditional styles that will complement the office/commercial uses. 
5.  Buildings shall have no less than eighty (80) percent of the non-glass area of three (3) exterior sides faced with brick or natural stone of a natural color and texture that simulates historic types of brickwork. If a building has more than four (4) planar areas, seventy-five (75) percent of these areas shall be faced in brick. 
6.  Multi-pane windows shall be used in individual window openings, rather than large glass sheets. 
7.  Mirrored glass with a reflection greater than twenty (20) percent and glass curtain walls are prohibited. 
8.  Paint colors shall be of traditional, historic types which are generally muted tones such as ivory, cream, beige, white, and pastel colors. Colors which are not permitted are bright or vibrant colors of orange, pink, purple, bright green, or violet, which are considered to be inconsistent with the district. The exterior color scheme shall be approved by the Director of Planning and Economic Development. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.891. - Gateway District Ordinance. 
7.892. - Legislative Purpose. 
1.  The Gateway District Ordinance serves as a development standard for the areas along Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, Eagle Drive, and Arnold Mill Road. The specific design and land use policies are an extensive plan for the areas of the central business district of the City, including the Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, Eagle Drive, Arnold Mill Road corridors. 
2.  The Gateway District calls for a pattern of commercial and office buildings constructed in a style reminiscent of nineteenth and early twentieth century architectural styles. The gateway district is intended to generate quality development along the Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, Eagle Drive, and Arnold Mill Road thoroughfares while promoting economic, cultural, open space and safety features to aid the public's general welfare. This orderly planning system is intended to attract future development and provides for mixed use options to encourage development consistent with the comprehensive plan of the City. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.893. - Establishment of Gateway District Overlay Boundary. 
    The general boundaries of the gateway shall be those properties along Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, Eagle Drive, and Arnold Mill Road within the limits of the City. The specific boundaries are drawn on the approved map by the City Council and reside with the City Clerk and Department of Planning and Economic Development. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.894. - Exemptions from Gateway District Ordinance. 
    The following parcels are expressly exempted from the requirements of the gateway overlay district: 
• Parcels zoned within the downtown master plan (DTMP). 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.895, 7.896. - Reserved. 
7.897. - Site Development Standards. 
    All exterior buffers and setbacks will be in accordance with Article VI of Chapter VII of the Land Development Ordinance of the City. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.898. - Streetscape Zone Standards. 
1.  The appearance for this area shall incorporate sidewalks, brick piers, period style lighting and other appropriate elements to establish a consistent look along these road frontages. 
2.  Landscaping shall utilize hedgerow plantings, picket fences, trees and other methods to comply with the City's streetscape theme. Where parking area front the roadway, a planted berm or evergreen landscaping shall be provided to screen vehicular parking areas, loading areas, and dumpsters from the view from the thoroughfare or streets stated herein. 
3.  The width of this landscaped area shall not be less than five (5) feet. 
4.  This buffer area should include piers not less than three (3) feet in height constructed of brick or stone placed no less than forty (40) feet on center. 
5.  Fencing that approximate the look of wrought iron fencing should connect the piers if a hedgerow is not used. 
6.  Trees shall not be disturbed to any maximum possible extent than absolutely necessary to construct any building or other improvements in the opinion of the Director, Planning and Economic Development. 
7.  Existing (undisturbed) land forms and other elements such as berms with asymmetrical clumps of plants, trees and shrubs indigenous to the area and region of Georgia are preferred for the landscape area. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.899. - Architectural Standards. 
    All projects within the gateway overlay district shall meet the following architectural standards: 
1.  Buildings shall be designed to substantially resemble eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles with the exception of single-family detached residential development. 
2.  Building mass shall be broken up to give the appearance of individual buildings or places of businesses, presenting a village appearance. 
3.  Large areas of uninterrupted brickwork shall be broken up through the use of trellises, arcades, blind windows, archways, or other patterns. 
4.  Window areas shall not extend down to the floor line. A wall of not less than two (2) feet in height shall separate the floor from the bottom of the window frame. 
5.  Buildings shall have no less than eighty (80) percent of the non-glass area of three (3) exterior sides faced with brick or natural stone of a natural color and texture that simulates historic types of brickwork. If a building has more than four (4) planar areas, seventy-five (75) percent of these areas shall be faced in brick. 
6.  Multi-pane windows shall be used in individual window openings, rather than large glass sheets. 
7.  Mirrored glass with a reflection greater than twenty (20) percent and glass curtain walls are prohibited. 
8.  Paint colors shall be of traditional, historic types which are generally muted tones such as ivory, cream, beige, white, and pastel colors. Colors which are not permitted are bright or vibrant colors of orange, pink, purple, bright green, or violet, which are considered to be inconsistent with the district. The exterior color scheme shall be approved by the Director of Planning and Economic Development. 
9.  All buildings shall have a pitched roof with a minimum pitch of four and one-half (4.5) inches vertical elevation per one (1) foot of horizontal distance, except as otherwise provided herein. 
10.  Commercial building styles without a pitched roof shall have a detailed parapet and cornice, in keeping with eighteenth and nineteenth century architectural styles. 
11.  All roofing materials shall be of a consistent style and pattern. Pitched roofs shall be finished in either architectural or dimensional shingles, or standing seam metal roofs. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, APPEALS 

7.910. - Non-Conforming Uses. 
7.911. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this Ordinance to recognize that the elimination, as expeditiously as is reasonable, of the existing buildings and structures or uses that are not in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance are as much a subject of health, safety, and welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of new uses that would violate the provisions of this Ordinance. It is also the intent of this Ordinance to so administer the elimination of non-conforming uses, buildings, and structures as to avoid an unreasonable invasion of established private property rights. 
    Lawful non-conforming uses, buildings, and structure existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto shall be allowed to remain subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Change of Use. An existing non-conforming use of a building may be changed to a conforming use or to another non-conforming use of the same or higher classification, providing, however, that the establishment of another non-conforming use of the same or higher classification shall be subject to the written approval of the City Council and subject to such conditions as the City Council may require in order to protect the area. 
2.  Enlargement Prohibited. A non-conforming use of land shall be restricted to the area occupied by such use as of the effective date of this Ordinance. A non-conforming use of a building or buildings shall not be enlarged to either additional land or buildings after the effective date of this Ordinance. 
3.  Discontinuance. When a non-conforming use of any structure or land ceases to operate as defined in Section 7.932(4), it shall not be reestablished or changed to any use not in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. Immediately upon their removal or vacation of a structure non-conformity of such structure and use of land shall lapse. 
4.  Damage. Any non-conforming building or non-conforming use, which is damaged by fire, flood, wind, or other acts of God or man, may be reconstructed and used as before, if it be done within six (6) months of such damage, unless damage to the extent of more than sixty (60) percent of its fair market value immediately prior to damage, in which case any repair or reconstruction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
5.  Structural Alteration. A non-conforming building or building housing a non-conforming use shall not be structurally altered except in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. This provision shall not be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repairs or alterations required for structural safety. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.920-7.929. - Reserved. 
    It is the intent of this Ordinance to place the function of the previous Zoning Board of Appeals of the City with the Council. Whenever in the Code or Land Development Ordinance the Zoning Board of Appeals is referenced, it shall hereafter be deemed to refer to the Council as hereinafter defined. The Clerk of the City is hereby authorized to replace the name "Zoning Board of Appeals" with City Council wherever it appears in the Code or Land Development Ordinance of the City. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.930. - Non-Conforming Use Regulations for Conditional Uses. 
7.931. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to apply certain protections to property owners whose property is properly zoned and used by a business operating with a valid conditional use permit or is classified as a legally nonconforming conditional use establishment. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.932. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
1.  The term "legally nonconforming" means legitimately operating in the City while noncompliant with the current Code due to predating the Code(s). 
2.  The term "property owner" means persons, companies, corporations, partnerships or other business entities that own property within a zone designated as commercial by the City. 
3.  The term "business operating with a valid conditional use permit" means any company, corporation, partnership or other business entity located in a commercial zone of the City which meets all of the following conditions: 
a.  The business, if of a type commonly registered with the Office of the Secretary of State of the State of Georgia must be currently registered and in good standing, or the business, if not of a type commonly registered with the Office of the Secretary of State of the State of Georgia must maintain on file with the City evidence of the type of business entity they are operating; and 
b.  The business must have a valid and current occupational tax license issued by the City; and 
c.  The business must have a valid and current conditional use permit issued by the City or fall under the exception granted by this section. 
4.  The term "ceases to operate" shall mean a business that meets one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Where the interior area of the business structure is designated as patron or retail space meant for public use and more than seventy (70) percent of that area has not been continuously occupied by said use for a period of thirty (30) days or more; or 
b.  Where the exterior areas and grounds of the business structure constitute necessary and customary use in the conduct of the business, and more than seventy (70) percent of that area has not been continuously occupied by said use for a period of thirty (30) days or more; or 
c.  The City Council declares the business to be non-existing, deemed abandoned or out of business and notifies the property owner; or 
d.  The occupational tax license for the business has expired; or 
e.  The conditional use permit for the business has expired. 
5.  The term "same conditional use" means a business that operates in such a manner as to require a conditional use permit from the City that is identical to the type of conditional use permit required by the previous business that is deemed to have ceased to operate. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
7.933. - Conditional Use Permit Expiration. 
    All property owners whose property is zoned for and used by a business operating with a valid and current conditional use permit, or a conditional use business classified as legally nonconforming shall have a maximum of sixty (60) days from the date that business ceases to operate to use said property for a new business with the same conditional use without the new business having to obtain a conditional use permit from the City. After the sixty (60) day period expires, any non-conforming property and/or business must come in full conformance with all relevant zoning. 
(Ord. No. 4958-2018, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-2018) 
Appendix A. - Downtown District Graphics 































Chapter VIII - STANDARDS FOR WATER AND SEWER 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL INFORMATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), repealed the former Art. I, §§ 8.110-8.134, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 2009 publication. 

8.110. - Preface. 
    The intent of these standards is to provide a basis for guiding construction and development in a rational and orderly manner. In this respect they should be viewed as a minimum criteria and in no way replace the obligation of sound engineering judgment. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
8.120. - Definitions. 
    Wherever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated, which shall be applicable to both the singular and plural thereof: 
    Contractor: The person, firm or corporation with whom the Owner/Developer has executed the Agreement to perform Work associated with the Project. 
    Director: The Public Works Director for the City of Woodstock, or its designated representative. 
    Drawings: Documents which show largely through graphical presentation the characteristics and scope of the Work to be performed and which have been prepared or approved by the Engineer. 
    Engineer: The person, firm or corporation named as the engineering representative of the Owner/Developer. 
    Owner/Developer: A public or quasi-public body or authority, corporation, association, partnership, or individual for whom the Work is to be performed. 
    Project: The undertaking to be performed by the Contractor. 
    Subcontractor: An individual, firm or corporation having a direct contract with the Contractor or with any other Subcontractor for the performance of a part of the Work at the site. 
    Work: All labor necessary to produce the construction required by the Project, and all materials and equipment incorporated or to be incorporated. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
8.131. - Referenced Standards. 
    All material and workmanship specified by number, symbol, or title of referenced standard shall comply with the latest edition or revisions thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
8.132. - Inspections. 
    The Director and/or his representatives will at all times have access to the Work. The Owner/Developer will provide proper facilities for such access and observation of the Work and also for any inspection, or testing thereof. Inspections may also be made at the factory or fabrication plant of the source of material or equipment supply. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
8.133. - Utility Locations. 
    All underground utilities shall be installed outside the roadbed, whenever possible. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
8.134. - Final Acceptance. 
1.  Upon completion of all work items in the Project including water lines, sanitary sewer lines, force mains, and lift stations; streets, storm sewers, and all other utilities, the Owner/Developer shall notify the City, whereupon the City in company with the Director shall make a formal inspection of the project. Should the entire Work appear to be complete and in conformance with the Drawings, the Director shall issue a certificate that the Work has been accepted, provided all other applicable terms of the contract have been satisfied. If the Work does not entirely meet requirements of the Drawings at the time of inspection, the Director shall in writing notify the Owner/Developer of these items which require completion or correction. After completing or correcting deficiencies noted by the Director together with any additional deficiencies which appear, the Owner/Developer shall again notify the City. The inspection and completion or correction process shall then be repeated until the entire Project at the time of inspection shall appear to be in conformance with the Drawings. In the event that any Work is damaged or discovered to be deficient after an initial inspection but prior to final acceptance, such work shall have been completed or corrected at the time of final acceptance, but this requirement shall not extend to repair of Work damaged by the City. 
2.  Upon satisfactory completion of any discrepancies noted during this inspection, the Owner/Developer will begin the twelve-month maintenance period required for all phases of the development. 
3.  At the end of twelve (12) months, the City will re-inspect the entire development. All deficiencies will be addressed as outlined above in Section 1. When all discrepancies have been corrected, the City will issue an acceptance letter and will begin perpetual maintenance of the Project. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
8.135. - Inspection Requirements for All Storm and Sanitary Sewer Lines. 
1.  All storm and sanitary sewer lines, public or private, shall have a televised inspection completed after installation of said lines (hereinafter the "Mains"). These inspections must be copied to DVD and approved by the City of Woodstock Public Works Department both 1) prior to the final approval by the City of any plat of the property upon which said storm and sanitary sewer lines are located and 2) prior to final acceptance of the storm and/or sanitary sewer system(s), or, in the case of the private system(s), at such time the storm and/or sanitary system(s) is turned over to a private property owner or group (i.e., home owners association). 
2.  Prior to televising the mains, the Mains shall be flushed with water so that sags are apparent. 
3.  For sanitary sewer systems this inspection shall include all Mains, man holes and laterals leading from the six-inch clean out to the tie in point at the Main. For storm sewer systems, the inspection shall include all manholes, junction boxes, inlets and pipes twelve (12) inches in diameter or greater. 
4.  The Mains shall be televised in segments identified by the approved manhole ID numbers shown on the approved construction plans. The lateral inspections will be identified by the street address. If no street address has been assigned at the time of inspection Lot Numbers can be used. 
5.  The video shall be stored on DVD and two (2) copies shall be delivered to the City Public Works Department. A report shall also be submitted summarizing the findings of the inspection and detailing any faults found with the footage of such faults noted on the report. This footage shall match up to the footage on the DVD. The inclination for all lines shall be documented in this report. 
6.  Any faulty pipe (i.e., sagging pipes, broken pipes, bad joints, etc.) identified during the inspection must be repaired. All repair techniques must be approved by the Director, in writing, before the repairs are made. All repairs shall be made within fifteen (15) working days after written technique approval is given by the Director. Note that internal grouting is not an allowable repair technique. After all repairs have been completed, the subject line must be televised again until all faults are identified and repaired. 
(Ord. of 4-9-2012, §§ 1, 2(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 

8.200. - Design Criteria. 
1.  Residential Water Supply. Use the following table and at a minimum pressure of twenty (20) psi. 
MINIMUM INSTANTANEOUS WATER DEMANDS FOR RESIDENTAIL AREAS 
Total # of 

Residences Served GPM per 

Resident Total # of 

Residences Served GPM per 

Resident 5 8.0 90 2.1 10 5.0 100 2.0 20 4.3 150 1.6 30 3.8 200 1.3 40 3.4 300 1.2 50 3.0 400 0.9 60 2.7 500 0.8 70 2.5 750 0.7 80 2.2 1,000 0.6  
2.  State Approval. All water system developments must obtain approval from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources before beginning construction. 
8.210. - Fire Protection. 
    All fire/water lines shall be 8-inch ductile iron pipe. 
1.  Fire Hydrants. Provide spacing of fire hydrants as follows: 
a.  Single Family Residential (detached) - Space fire hydrants not more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart with additional fire hydrants located as necessary to permit a maximum hose lay distance of five hundred (500) feet from the hydrant to the most distant building served by that hydrant. Fire hydrants shall normally be located at all intersections. 
i.  Fire hydrants must be in place prior to beginning construction on proposed structures. 
b.  All other uses. Space fire hydrants not more than six hundred feet (600) apart with additional fire hydrants located as necessary so that all portions of the building can be reached by a hose lay of not more than three hundred (300) feet in length. 
i.  Fire hydrants must be in place prior to beginning construction on proposed structures 
c.  Submit GIS coordinates for all new and relocated hydrants along with the flow test data in an approved electronic format to the Fire Marshal's office prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Horizontal locations should be referenced to the US State Plane coordinate system, NAD 83 (2011), GA West Zone, US Survey Feet. Vertical locations should be referenced to the NAVD88 datum, GEOID12A, US Survey Feet. 
2.  Accessibility for Fire Fighting Equipment. 
a.  Provide reasonable accessibility to and around all buildings for fire fighting equipment, including fire department ground ladders on multiple-story projects. (Minimum of ten (10) feet on all sides and a customary turning radius of twenty-five (25) feet). 
b.  Minimum widths of access driveways excluding parking, to be twenty (20) feet. The customary turning radius of a fire department access road is twenty-five (25) feet. 
c.  Where the number of dwelling units in a project exceeds one hundred (100), provide two (2) entrances to the projects where road frontage is adequate for two (2) entrances, as determined by the Rules and Regulations for the Control and Protection of State Highway rights-of-way. 
d.  Maintain accessibility for fire fighting equipment throughout all stages of construction and occupancy. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
8.220. - Location of Water Lines and Fixtures. 
1.  Locate water lines on existing County and City roads on the south and west side of the road, six (6) feet from the edge of pavement with a minimum bury of forty-two (42) inches. 
2.  Locate fire hydrants on existing County and City roads between the right-of-way and the water line and within five (5) feet of the right-of-way. 
3.  Locate water lines on new streets on the south and west side of the street, five (5) feet from the back of the curb with a minimum bury of forty-two inches. 
4.  Locate fire hydrants on new streets between the water line and the street right-of-way and within five (5) feet of the right-of-way. 
5.  Locate service laterals with a minimum bury of forty-two (42) inches within the right-of-way and shallowing to a bury of eighteen (18) inches at the water meter location. 
6.  Locate water meters at the edge of the street right-of-way. 
7.  Locate water valves at intersections behind the curb. The number of valves shall equal the number of street in the intersection minus one. 
8.  Provide a gate valve and a minimum of thirty-six (36) feet of pipe with a removable plug at the end of all lines for phased developments. Provide ductile iron pipe in the following locations: 
a.  Over all cross drains; 
b.  Under and over all stream crossings; 
c.  Under all road crossings; 
d.  At all designations specified by the City Engineer; 
e.  Under all paving or surfaces likely to be paved. 
9.  All metal pipe shall be fully coated when used within the right-of-way. 
8.230. - Line Extension Requirements. 
1.  Developers are required to extend all mains along their entire property frontage if the existing main is adjacent to the proposed development. The size of the extension will be at least the size of the existing main and may be larger according to the City's requirements. The over-sizing may be eligible for reimbursement under a prior agreement specified in the following paragraph. Lines larger than those required to serve the development may be eligible for a portion of the cost being paid by the City. 
2.  If an existing main must be extended to serve a particular development, Owner/Developer may be required to pay all the initial costs. If the main extension would serve other developments within a three-year period the City may negotiate with the Owner/Developer for pro rata share participation from future Owner/Developers who wish to tie on during the three-year period. This three-year period would begin upon completion of the extension and acceptance by the City for perpetual maintenance. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR SANITARY SEWERS 

8.300. - Types of Sewers. 
    Design gravity sewers and force mains as separate sanitary sewers only in which rainwater from roofs, streets, and other areas and groundwater from foundation drains are excluded. Do not permit overflows from sewers. 
8.310. - Design Factors. 
1.  Consider the following factors in determining the required capacities of sanitary sewers: 
a.  Maximum hourly sewage flow; 
b.  Additional maximum sewage or waste flow from industrial plants; 
c.  Ground water infiltration; 
d.  Topography of the area; 
e.  Depth of excavation. 
2.  Design new sewers on the basis of an average daily flow of sewage of not less than four hundred (400) gallons per household per day. Design gravity sewers to carry the per peak capita flow when flowing one-half full. Normally, design all sewers with a peaking factor of not less than two and one-half (21/2); this may be increased upon the direction of the City Engineer. When deviations from the foregoing per capita rates are demonstrated, include a description of the procedure used for design. 
3.  Design sewage lift stations for peak flow with one (1) pump off-line. 
4.  Design sewer systems for the estimated ultimate tributary population. Tributary population is considered to be all areas upstream of the discharge point of the system being designed. Design and install sewers to the uppermost property line of the development being served. 
    Consideration should be given to the maximum anticipated capacity of institutions, industrial parks, etc. 
8.320. - State Approval. 
    All sanitary sewer developments must obtain approval from the Georgia Department of Natural Resources before beginning construction. 
8.330. - Details of Design and Construction. 
1.  Size. No gravity sewer less than eight (8) inches after leaving the uppermost property line to be served. The minimum acceptable force main diameter shall be three (3) inches. 
2.  Depth. Provide four (4) feet of cover at the inlet end of all service laterals at the street right-of-way, and over any part of the main or service within the street right-of-way. 
3.  Slope. 
a.  Design and construct all gravity sewers to give mean velocities, when flowing full, of not less than two (2.0) feet per second based on Kutter's formula using an "N" value of 0.013. The following are the minimum slopes to be provided; however, slopes greater than these are desirable: 
SEWER SIZE MIN. SLOPE IN FEET PER 100 FEET 8 inch 0.40 10 inch 0.29 12 inch 0.22 14 inch 0.17 15 inch 0.15 16 inch 0.14 18 inch 0.12 21 inch 0.10 24 inch 0.08 27 inch 0.07 30 inch 0.06 36 inch 0.05  
b.  These minimum slopes will be used only when sufficient flows are expected to maintain a velocity of two (2.0) feet per second and maintain a cleaning action in the line. Place sewers with uniform slope between manholes. Use case iron or ductile iron pipe sewers on twenty (20) percent slope or greater and anchor securely with concrete anchors to prevent displacement by erosion or shock. Build the inverts of manholes connecting grades of twenty (20) percent or more with close fitting concrete block. Limit maximum slope of sewers to thirty (30) percent and design at less than twenty (20) percent whenever possible. 
4.  Provide three (3) feet minimum cover for any sewers on off street easements unless cast iron or ductile iron pipe is used. Filling over the pipe to obtain minimum cover is not allowed, if the fill will impede the natural flow of surface water or will cause an erosion problem. 
5.  Service connections shall be made to gravity sewers, manholes or pump station wet wells. Under no circumstances will manifolded connections to force mains be permitted. 
8.340. - Force Mains. 
    For all sewage force mains use ductile iron pipe, cast iron pipe or PVC pipe with joints and fittings rated for the maximum theoretical pressure plus a fifty (50) percent safety factor. Use ductile iron pipe or cast iron pipe for the same conditions where required for potable water lines and within ten (10) feet horizontally of a potable water line. Provide thrust blocking at all fittings. 
8.350. - Manholes. 
1.  Location. Install manholes at the end of each line; all changes in grade, size, or alignment; at all intersections; and at distances normally not greater than three hundred fifty (350) feet. Spacings for eight-inch sewer scan be more then three hundred fifty (350) feet but not more than four hundred (400) feet and will be allowed only in isolated cases when, in the opinion of the City Engineer, it is impractical to install an additional manhole and when the extra distance will not impede maintenance of the line. Manholes spacing in sewers ten (10) inches and larger will conform to Ten State Standards. In no circumstances will a spacing of greater than three hundred (300) feet be allowed when the slope exceeds ten (10) percent. Cleanouts may be used only for special conditions and shall not be substituted for manholes not installed at the ends of laterals greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet in length. 
2.  Drop Manholes. Provide a drop pipe for a sewer entering a manhole at an elevation of more than one (1.0) foot above the manhole invert. Use cast iron or ductile iron materials for all drops and use at least one (1) piece of cast iron or ductile iron pipe on the incoming line to reach a solid, unexcavated formation. Provide thrust block poured below all outside ninety-degree elbows. 
a.  Use outside drop manhole on the construction plans at any time the drop exceeds one (1.0) foot. 
b.  Where the difference is elevation between the incoming sewer and the manhole invert is less than one (1.0) foot, slope the invert to prevent solids deposition. 
c.  Construct the flow channel through manholes to conform in shape and slope to that of the sewers. Minimum drop through a manhole to be one (1.0) foot. 
8.360. - Protection of Water Supply and Other Utilities. 
1.  Do not allow physical connections between a public or private potable water supply system and a sanitary sewer which would permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply. 
2.  Related to Water Mains - Whenever possible, lay sewers at least ten (10) feet horizontally from any existing or proposed water main. Should conditions prevent a separation of ten (10) feet, lay the lines in separate trenches. In either case, construct the elevation of the crown of the sewer at least eighteen (18) inches below the invert of the water main. 
a.  When sewers cross under water mains, lay the sewer so that the top of the sewer is at least eighteen (18) inches below the bottom of the water main. Install the two (2) pipes such that a full length of pipe will be centered over the crossing so that all joints will be separated as much as possible. Install cast iron or ductile iron pipe for both mains when the crossing is at less than two (2) feet separation. 
b.  Whenever conditions prevent the proper horizontal and vertical separation of the lines, construct the water main of cast iron or ductile iron pipe. 
c.  When sewers are laid within public streets, construct the manholes and lines along the center of the street at the depth of not less than six (6) feet from where surface to the top of the pipe. In curves and other areas where this is not possible install the lines and manholes within the confines of the curb to avoid conflict with the curb and other utilities. 
d.  Use cast iron or ductile iron pipe for sewer lines crossing storm sewers at less than two (2.0) feet and at other times when directed by the City Engineer. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER PLAN REQUIREMENTS 

8.400. - Water Requirements. 
8.401. - Preliminary Plans. 
1.  Five (5) copies of preliminary plans will be prepared and submitted for review. 
2.  Preliminary plans shall include the following: 
a.  Portion of the County Tax Maps highlighting the land to be developed; 
b.  Type of development; 
c.  Number of units; 
d.  Tie-in location and the general plan for water supply; 
e.  Name, Address and Telephone Number of the Developer or his representative; 
3.  Questions relating to adequate fire protection, multiple feeds, water supply and proposed location of connection(s) should be resolved at this stage before proceeding with detailed planning. 
4.  The submittal for preliminary review must include all land to be developed although the land is to be developed in several phases or units. Adequacy determinations of the existing water supply system will be made for the entire project. 
8.402. - Construction Plans. 
1.  Construction plans shall be submitted to the City of Woodstock. 
2.  All plans for Water Main Projects shall include the following: 
a.  A suitable Title showing the Name of the Project; 
b.  Scale in feet; 
c.  The North Arrow; 
d.  Date; 
e.  Detailed Project Location Map 
f.  Owner/ Developer's Name, Address, Telephone Number, and Fax Number; 
g.  Design Professional's Name, Address, Telephone Number, and Fax Number; 
h.  Design Professional's Signature and his/her Registration Stamp. All Design Professionals preparing Construction Plans and Specifications must be registered in the State of Georgia as a Professional Engineer or a Registered Land Surveyor. 
i.  If the project requires a water line extension of more than five hundred (500) feet to reach the project; a registered Professional Engineer must Design and Stamp the Line Extension. 
j.  Include the Funding Source if State or Federally funded; 
3.  The plans shall be clear and legible. They shall be drawn to a scale which will permit all necessary information to be plainly shown. Plans shall be submitted on 22" x 36" drawing sheets and shall be submitted concurrently in an "Autocad" drawing electronic format. 
4.  The following shall be provided: 
a.  A sheet index shall be provided, as well as a legend of symbols used; 
b.  Horizontal locations shall be referenced to Georgia State Plane Coordinates (West Zone feet); 
c.  Vertical locations shall be shown referenced to Mean Sea Level; 
d.  Reference all horizontal locations to the NAD83/94 (latest adjustment) datum and reference all vertical locations to the NAVD88 datum; 
e.  All orthometric locations shall be referenced to Geoid 99; 
f.  All points are subject to verification by the City of Woodstock; 
g.  Water line locations shall be shown on plans and submitted in ASCII text electronic format for each point. 
5.  The construction plans shall require that the Contractor place a vertical piece of two-inch-diameter PVC pipe on top of the pipe at all bends, fittings, valves, elevation transitions and every fifty (50) feet along the length of the water main for the purpose of enabling the surveyor to determine the elevation of the water main for "As-Builts". 
6.  The Contractor will then be responsible for removing the vertical PVC sections after the as-built locations have been verified by the City of Woodstock. 
7.  The information submitted electronically for water mains, including locations of the water main at fifty-foot intervals, fire hydrants, valves, fittings, main line taps, master meters, and fire line meters, shall include the following: 
a.  Point ID (see City of Woodstock staff) 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Ground Elevation 
e.  Top of Pipe, Valve or Hydrant Elevation 
f.  Point Description (Pipe, Fitting or Valve Type and Size) 
8.  Construction Plans shall consist of the following: 
a.  Site plan showing the water layout only with project name, streets, street names, topography with contour lines at two-foot intervals, location map, lot layout (if subdivision) or building location (multi-family, commercial or industrial site), land lots, district and north arrow. Lot numbers shall run in consecutive order and there shall be no duplicate lot numbers within the project. Note if any other utilities are existing. Plan scale shall be a minimum of 1"=100'. 
b.  Proposed pipe materials, sizes, lengths and alignment. 
c.  Proposed service lateral locations. 
d.  Location, type and size of water valves and air release valves (to be installed at highest points of system). 
e.  Thrust blocks where used. 
f.  Fire hydrant locations. 
g.  Water system materials. 
h.  Location and sizes of existing water lines surrounding project, with nearest line valve in each direction from proposed connection. 
i.  Detail of connection to existing water lines. 
j.  Proposed meter sizes and locations. 
k.  Detailed plan of fire line meters, detector meters, compound meters, backflow preventers, etc. if applicable. 
l.  Any other items incidental to the proposed system. 
m.  Details of special water line installations such as stream crossings, elevated lines on piers, bridges, pipe bedding, special highway crossings, railroad crossings, etc. 
n.  Show all right-of-way widths, easement widths and pavement widths. 
o.  Plan and profile sheets shall be prepared with a horizontal scale of 1"=50' and a vertical scale of 1"=10'. These scales also apply to any profile view of sanitary sewers. 
p.  The vertical datum used should be the elevation above mean sea level. 
q.  A sheet index shall be provided, as well as a legend of symbol used. 
r.  Each plan sheet should include a note stating "The Contractor must call the Utilities Protection Center 'Call Before You Dig' Telephone number (1-800-282-7411) four (4) days before excavation". 
s.  Each set of Construction Plans shall include a reproduction of the following information (Detail W729) from the Utilities Protection Center. 
t.  Identify the location where Water Service crosses perpendicular to a street by Chiseling initial "w" in the curb. 
8.410. - Sewer Requirements. 
8.411. - Preliminary Plans. 
1.  Five (5) copies of preliminary plans will be prepared and submitted for review. 
2.  Preliminary plans shall include the following: 
a.  Portion of the County Tax Maps highlighting the land to be developed; 
b.  Type of development; 
c.  Number of units; 
d.  Amount of Sewage that is expected to be generated; 
e.  Location and the General Plan for Sewage Collection; 
f.  Name, Address and Telephone Number of the Developer or his/her representative; 
g.  Questions related to adequate remaining capacity and proposed locations of connections to the existing system should be resolved at this stage before proceeding with detailed planning; 
3.  The submittal for preliminary review must include all Land to be Developed although the land is to be developed in several phases or units. 
4.  Adequacy determinations of the existing Sanitary Sewer System will be made for the entire project. 
8.412. - Construction Plans. 
1.  Construction plans shall be submitted to the City of Woodstock. 
2.  All plans for Sanitary Sewer Projects shall include the following: 
a.  A suitable Title showing the Name of the Project; 
b.  Scale in feet; 
c.  The North Arrow; 
d.  Date; 
e.  Detailed Project Location Map 
f.  Owner/ Developer's Name, Address, Telephone Number, and Fax Number; 
g.  Design Professional's Name, Address, Telephone Number, and Fax Number; 
h.  Design Professional's Signature and his/her Registration Stamp. All Design Professionals preparing Construction Plans and Specifications must be registered in the State of Georgia as a Professional Engineer or a Registered Land Surveyor. 
i.  If the project requires a water line extension of more than five hundred (500) feet to reach the project; a registered Professional Engineer must Design and Stamp the Line Extension. 
j.  Include the Funding Source if State or Federally funded; 
3.  The plans shall be clear and legible. They shall be drawn to a scale which will permit all necessary information to be plainly shown. Plans shall be submitted on 22" x 36" drawing sheets and shall be submitted concurrently in an "Autocad" drawing electronic format. 
4.  The following shall be provided: 
a.  A sheet index shall be provided, as well as a legend of symbols used; 
b.  Horizontal locations shall be referenced to Georgia State Plane Coordinates (West Zone feet); 
c.  Vertical locations shall be shown referenced to Mean Sea Level; 
d.  Reference all horizontal locations to the NAD83/94 (latest adjustment) datum and reference all vertical locations to the NAVD88 datum; 
e.  All orthometric locations shall be referenced to Geoid 99; 
f.  All points are subject to verification by the City of Woodstock; 
g.  Water line locations shall be shown on plans and submitted in ASCII text electronic format for each point. 
5.  The information submitted electronically for gravity sewer lines shall include: 
a.  Manhole ID (City of Woodstock staff will assign manhole ID number during plan review. The manhole ID numbers shall be shown on the revised construction plans submitted for final review before the plans are stamped. The same ID numbers shall be used for as-builts. 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Center of Manhole (Lid) Elevation 
e.  Invert (In and Out) Elevations 
f.  Each Manhole point shall include pipe(s) entering and leaving manhole. Pipe(s) size, Pipe Invert, Material, Type (i.e. Sewer line, service line or force main). 
6.  The information submitted electronically for sewer force mains shall include: 
Force Mains shall be located at fifty-foot intervals (ground and top of pipe). All fittings, valves, and air release valves shall also be located. All vertical locations shall be finished ground and top of pipe. The Contractor shall place a vertical piece of two-inch-diameter PVC pipe on top of the pipe at all bends, fittings, valves, elevation transitions and every fifty (50) feet along the length of the force main for the purpose of enabling the surveyor to locate the force main for "As-Builts". The Contractor will then be responsible for removing the vertical PVC sections after the as-built locations have been verified by the City of Woodstock. The rim elevation, top of pipe and the manhole invert elevation of all air release valve manholes shall be located. The size and material of all pipes shall be recorded. 
Force Main Pipe Lines, Fittings etc... 
a.  Point ID (see City of Woodstock staff) 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Ground Elevation 
e.  Top of Pipe Elevation 
f.  Point Description/Fitting Type and Pipe Size 
Air Release Valves (Manholes) 
a.  Manhole ID (City of Woodstock staff will assign manhole ID number during plan review. The manhole ID numbers shall be shown on the revised construction plans submitted for final review before the plans are stamped. The same ID numbers shall be used for as-builts. 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Center of Manhole (Lid) Elevation 
e.  Invert Elevation 
f.  Top of Pipe Elevation 
g.  Each Air Release Valve Manhole point shall include Pipe Size and Material. 
Plans for sanitary sewers shall include a site plan, plan and profile sheets, the General Notes for Sanitary Sewer System Construction, sections and supplementary views, erosion and sediment control plan, and detailed design drawings for all special fixtures. 
8.413. - Site Plans. 
1.  The site plan shall show the following: 
a.  Land lots; 
b.  District; 
c.  North Arrow; 
d.  Lot Layout and existing and proposed building locations 
e.  Lot numbers shall run in consecutive order and there shall be no duplicate lot numbers within the project; 
f.  Show all Existing and Proposed Streets and their Names; 
g.  All Streams, Water Courses, Storm Drains and the Discharge Points for all drainage structures; 
h.  Show the Topography with Contour Lines at suitable intervals; 
i.  Show the Sewer Layout with Existing and Proposed Lines, Manhole Numbers, Line Designation and Direction of Flow; 
j.  Show the Size of all Lines and the Location of Proposed Services. 
2.  The Design of Cross-country Sewer Lines and Force Mains shall be based on field-run surveys. The Site Plan for Cross-country Sewer Lines and Force Mains need not show Contour Intervals, but the profiles shall be based on Mean Sea Level Elevation. Site Plans for Lift Stations shall show Existing and Proposed Contours. 
3.  In the event the Subdivision is Developed in Phases, the Final Construction Plans for Sewers may be submitted in phases or units. However, at the time the first phase is submitted, the Engineer will submit one (1) copy of the Preliminary Layout of the Entire Sewer System. This layout will show all Lines required to serve any lots to be Developed and any surrounding property that may be served through the Property. The Site Plans for each phase or unit shall contain a Location Drawing showing the relationship of the phase or unit to the total Project and to the surrounding Streets and Sewer Outfalls. 
8.414. - Plan and Profile Sheets. 
1.  Profiles should have a Horizontal Scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch for Cross-country Lines and fifty (50) feet to the inch for Congested Areas, and a Vertical Scale of not more than ten (10) feet to the inch. The Plan view should be drawn to a corresponding Horizontal Scale. The Plan view should normally be shown on the same sheet as the profile. In any case both the Plan and Profile view should have Line Designations, Station Numbers, Manhole Numbers and any other indexing necessary to easily correlate the plan and profile view. Match lines shall be provided where necessary. 
2.  Plans and Profiles shall show: 
a.  Location of Streets, Sanitary Sewers and Drainage Easements; 
b.  Profile of Ground Surface, the Grade of the Sewer between each two (2) adjacent Manholes, Size and Material of Pipe, Length between Manholes, Invert of Sewer in and out of each Manhole, and Surface Elevation at each Manhole. All manholes shall be numbered (City of Woodstock ID No.) on the Plan and correspondingly numbered on the Profile. Station Numbers will be shown for each Manhole. The Profile of adjacent parallel Stream Beds and of adjacent Lake Surfaces, Low Buildings, and Low Lots shall be shown on the Profile. When a Body of Water is located adjacent to a Project, indicate the one-hundred-year Flood Zone Elevation of the stream/river and/or the high water/winter pool elevations of lakes or reservoirs. 
c.  Locations of all special features such as connections to existing Sewers, Concrete Encasements, Collar Walls, Ductile Iron Pipe sections, Elevated Sewers, piers, special Manhole Covers such as vented Outfall Covers or Sealed Covers, etc. 
d.  All known existing structures both above and below ground which might interfere with the proposed construction, particularly Water Mains, Gas Mains, Storm Drains, Utility Conduits, Retaining Wall Footings, etc. 
e.  Identify the location where Sewer Service crosses perpendicular to a street by Chiseling initial "r" in the curb. 
8.420. - As-Built Requirements. 
8.421. - Water As-Built Requirements. 
    At the completion of the water line installation and when requesting the final project inspection, the contractor shall present three (3) sets of printed as-built plans and electronic data prepared in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Attached to the As-Builts shall be a completed Project Information Form (Exhibit B), which includes the Name of the Project, the Project Location, the Developer's Name and Telephone Number, the Contractor's Name and Telephone Number, the Street Names, the Water Main Size for each Street, the length of the water main for each street, the pipe material used on each street, the cost of the water facilities for each street, and the work start date and work completion date for each street. (A copy of a blank Project Information Form is attached at the end. Exhibit "B") 
2.  Five (5) sets of "As-Built" plans shall be submitted to the City of Woodstock Director of Planning and Economic Development. The plans shall show all water information "As-Built" in the field and any field changes made to the approved plans. In the event "As-Builts" cannot be made available at the completion of the line, the Director of Public Works may authorize the continuation of the construction; however, the final inspection cannot be conducted and the conditional approval letter cannot be written until "As-Builts" are received. In the event that the designer does not perform the field staking, the contractor must furnish certification from a licensed engineer or surveyor attesting to the accuracy of all as-built information presented. This certification and the certification of the engineer / land surveyor preparing the "As-Builts" must be shown on the drawings. "As-built" drawings shall include a site plan, plan and profile sheets, and any supplementary drawings and shop drawings. The "As-Built" drawings shall meet the same requirements as the plans for review. The printed version of the As-Built water plan shall show the location of water mains at fifty-foot intervals, fire hydrants, fittings, tap location(s), valves, meters, and lot services. 
As-Built plans shall be submitted on 22" x 36" drawing sheets and shall be submitted concurrently in an "Autocad" drawing electronic format. The monumentation and the calculations used to reference and determine the coordinate system for locations shall be supplied at the same time that As-Built plans are submitted. As-Built information for utility locations shall be shown on plans and submitted in ASCII text electronic format for each point. 
The Contractor shall place a vertical piece of two-inch-diameter PVC pipe on top of the pipe at all bends, fittings, valves, elevation transitions and every fifty (50) feet along the length of the water main. Horizontal locations shall be referenced to Georgia State Plane Coordinates (West Zone feet) and accurate to within ±0.05'. Vertical locations shall be shown referenced to Mean Sea Level and accurate to within ±0.05'. Reference all horizontal locations to the NAD83/94 (latest adjustment) datum and reference all vertical locations to the NAVD88 datum. All orthometric locations shall be referenced to Geoid 99. All points shall be verifiable by the Cherokee County Water and Sewerage Authority control network. All Horizontal and Vertical locations shall have no translation, rotation or angle adjustment. All points are subject to verification by the City of Woodstock. 
The information submitted electronically for water mains, including locations of the water main at fifty-foot intervals, fire hydrants, valves, fittings, main line taps, master meters, and fire line meters, shall include: 
a.  Point ID (see City of Woodstock staff) 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Ground Elevation 
e.  Top of Pipe, Valve or Hydrant Elevation 
f.  Point Description (Pipe, Fitting or Valve Type and Size) 
The following are specific guidelines for the preparation of the printed version of the "as-built" drawings: 
a.  Water "As-Built" shall be a separate plan. 
b.  No contour lines. 
c.  Location of service, meter and backflow preventer should be shown. 
d.  Road names shall be on plans. 
e.  The center of all fire hydrants shall be located horizontally and vertically as described above. 
f.  All lots are to be numbered. 
g.  Printed "As-Builts" are to be clear and legible. 
h.  Roads shall be shown on all plans. 
i.  "As-Built" is to be in large clear print on plans. 
j.  Drawings sheet shall be no larger than 22" x 36". 
k.  Scale no larger than 1"=20', no smaller than 1"=100' for cross-country lines and 1"=50' for congested areas. 
l.  When a phase of a subdivision is completed, a location sketch of the entire subdivision with said phase outlined shall appear on plans. 
m.  Ground water and solid rock encountered during construction will be noted on "As-Builts". 
3.  As-Built water plans for commercial, multi-family, school and industrial sites shall show the following at a minimum scale of 1" = 100': 
a.  Location, size and elevation of all existing and proposed water, sanitary sewer, and fire lines and of any easements required. 
b.  Location and size of all fire mains and location of all fire hydrants. 
c.  Location, size and number of dwelling units and buildings. 
4.  The As-Builts presented to the Inspector must be printed from the Autocad files supplied to the City of Woodstock concurrently with the As-Builts. These plans shall have been corrected to show all field changes made to the approved drawings. Hand marked copies prepared by the contractor will not be accepted for "As-Builts". 
5.  As-Built drawings shall include the site plan, construction plan sheets, and any supplementary drawings and shop drawings. Plan of fire meters or detector meters should be shown if applicable. "As-Builts" is to be stamped in large clear print on plans. 
6.  The City of Woodstock shall have the right to withhold water meters until the "As-Builts" have been submitted as required. 
7.  The conditional approval letter will not be issued until "As-Builts" have been completed and submitted to the City of Woodstock. 
EXHIBIT "B" 
CITY OF WOODSTOCK PROJECT INFORMATION FORM 
WATER SYSTEM FACILITIES 
Project Name: Location: Developer: Telephone No: Contractor: Telephone No: Street Name: Water Main Size: Length: Material: Cost: Start Date: Completion Date: Street Name: Water Main Size: Length: Material: Cost: Start Date: Completion Date: Street Name: Water Main Size: Length: Material: Cost: Start Date: Completion Date: Street Name: Water Main Size: Length: Material: Cost: Start Date: Completion Date:  
8.422. - Sewer As-Built Requirements. 
    At the completion of the sanitary sewer lines and when requesting the final project inspection, the contractor shall present three (3) sets of printed as-built plans and electronic data prepared in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Attached to the As-Builts shall be a completed Project Information Form (Exhibit B), which includes the name of the project, the project location, the Developer's name and telephone number, the Contractor's name and telephone number, the street names, the sewer main size for each street or cross-country line, the length of each sewer main by street or segment, the pipe material used for each street or segment, the cost of the sewer facilities for each street or segment, and the work start date and work completion date for each street or segment. (A copy of a blank Project Information Form is attached at the end. Exhibit "B") 
2.  Five (5) sets of "As-Built" plans shall be submitted to the Director of Planning and Economic Development. The plans shall show all sewer information "As-Built" in the field and any field changes made to the approved plans. In the event "As-Builts" cannot be made available at the completion of the line, the Director of Public Works may authorize the continuation of the construction; however, the final inspection cannot be conducted and the conditional approval letter cannot be written until "As-Builts" are received. In the event that the designer does not perform the field staking, the contractor must furnish certification from a licensed engineer or surveyor attesting to the accuracy of all elevations, grades, manhole locations, and service locations. This certification and the certification of the engineer / land surveyor preparing the "As-Builts" must be shown on the drawings. "As-built" drawings shall include a site plan, plan and profile sheets, and any supplementary drawings and shop drawings. The "As-Built" drawings shall meet the same requirements as the plans for review. 
As-built plans shall be submitted on 22" x 36" drawing sheets and shall be submitted concurrently in an "Autocad" drawing electronic format. The monumentation and the calculations used to reference and determine the coordinate system for locations shall be supplied at the same time that As-Built plans are submitted. As-built information for utility locations shall be shown on plans and submitted in ASCII text electronic format for each point. 
Horizontal locations shall be referenced to Georgia State Plane Coordinates (West Zone feet) and accurate to within ±0.05'. Vertical locations shall be shown referenced to Mean Sea Level and accurate to within ±0.05'. Reference all horizontal locations to the NAD83/94 (latest adjustment) datum and reference all vertical locations to the NAVD88 datum. All orthometric locations shall be referenced to Geoid 99. All points shall be verifiable by the Cherokee County Water and Sewerage Authority control network. All Horizontal and Vertical location shall have no translation, rotation or angle adjustment. All points are subject to verification by the City of Woodstock. 
The information submitted electronically for As-Builts of gravity sewer lines shall include: 
a.  Manhole ID (City of Woodstock staff will assign manhole ID number during plan review. The manhole ID numbers shall be shown on the revised construction plans submitted for final review before the plans are stamped. The same ID numbers shall be used for As-Builts. 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Center of Manhole (Lid) Elevation 
e.  Invert (In and Out) Elevations 
f.  Each Manhole point shall include pipe(s) entering and leaving manhole. Pipe(s) size, Pipe Invert, Material, Type (i.e. Sewer line, service line or force main). 
The information submitted electronically for sewer force mains shall include: 
Force Mains shall be located at fifty-foot intervals (ground and top of pipe). All fittings, valves, and air release valves shall also be located. All vertical locations shall be finished ground and top of pipe. The Contractor shall place a vertical piece of two-inch-diameter PVC pipe on top of the pipe at all bends, fittings, valves, elevation transitions and every fifty (50) feet along the length of the force main. The rim elevation, top of pipe and the manhole invert elevation of all air release valve manholes shall be located. The size and material of all pipes shall be recorded. 
Force Main Pipe Lines, Fittings etc. 
a.  Point ID (see City of Woodstock staff) 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Ground Elevation 
e.  Top of Pipe Elevation 
f.  Point Description/Fitting Type and Pipe Size 
Air Release Valves (Manholes) 
a.  Manhole ID (City of Woodstock staff will assign manhole ID number during plan review. The manhole ID numbers shall be shown on the revised construction plans submitted for final review before the plans are stamped. The same ID numbers shall be used for As-Builts. 
b.  Northing 
c.  Easting 
d.  Center of Manhole (Lid) Elevation 
e.  Invert Elevation 
f.  Top of Pipe Elevation 
g.  Each Air Release Valve Manhole point shall include Pipe Size and Material. 
The following are specific guidelines for the preparation of the printed version of the "as-built" drawings: 
a.  Sewer "As-Built" shall be a separate plan. 
b.  No contour lines. 
c.  Approximate depth of lateral should be shown. 
d.  Any lateral that does come out at a ninety-degree angle shall show its distance from property pins. 
e.  Road names shall be on plans. 
f.  All measurements of laterals should be kept between manholes and both sides shall add up to the distance between manholes. 
g.  The center of all manhole rims shall be located horizontally and vertically as described above. 
h.  All lots are to be numbered. 
i.  Printed "As-Builts" are to be clear and legible. 
j.  Profiles are to be included in all "As-Builts". 
k.  Roads shall be shown on all plans. 
l.  "As-Built" is to be in large clear print on plans. 
m.  Drawings sheet shall be no larger than 22" x 36". 
n.  Scale no larger than 1"=20', no smaller than 1"=100' for cross-country lines and 1"=50' for congested areas. 
o.  When a phase of a subdivision is completed, a location sketch of the entire subdivision with said phase outlined shall appear on plans. 
p.  Line designation shall be used for correlation between profiles and plan view. 
q.  Ground water and solid rock encountered during construction will be noted on "As-Builts". 
r.  Force Mains shall be located as described above. 
4.  As-Built sanitary sewer plans for commercial, multi-family, school and industrial sites shall show the following at a minimum scale of 1" = 100': 
a.  Location, size and elevation of all sanitary sewer lines and of any easements required. 
b.  Location, size and number of dwelling units and buildings. 
5.  The As-Builts presented to the Director of Planning and Economic Development must be printed from the Autocad files supplied to the City of Woodstock concurrently with the As-Builts. These plans shall have been corrected to show all field changes made to the approved drawings. Hand marked copies prepared by the contractor will not be accepted for "As-Builts". 
6.  As-Built drawings shall include the site plan, construction plan sheets, and any supplementary drawings and shop drawings. Plan of lift stations or other special features should be shown if applicable. "As-Builts" is to be stamped in large clear print on plans. 
7.  The City of Woodstock shall have the right to withhold water meters until the "As-Builts" have been submitted as required. 
8.  The conditional approval letter will not be issued until "As-Builts" have been completed and submitted to the City of Woodstock. 
EXHIBIT "B" 
CITY OF WOODSTOCK PROJECT INFORMATION FORM 
SEWER SYSTEM FACILITIES 
Project Name: Location: Developer: Telephone No: Contractor: Telephone No: Street or Segment Name: Sewer Main Size: Length: Material: No. of Manholes: Start Date: Completion Date: Street or Segment Name: Sewer Main Size: Length: Material: No. of Manholes: Start Date: Completion Date: Street or Segment Name: Sewer Main Size: Length: Material: No. of Manholes: Start Date: Completion Date: Street or Segment Name: Sewer Main Size: Length: Material: No. of Manholes: Start Date: Completion Date:  
ARTICLE V. - TRENCHING AND BACKFILLING 

8.500. - Description of Work. 
    Trenching and backfilling operations include, but are not limited to all earthwork associated with installation, modification, or abandonment of underground utilities and appurtenances, and restoration of damaged improvements. 
8.501. - Sampling and Testing. 
    The City Engineer may perform sampling, surveying inspection or testing activity during construction for his use, but such activity does not relieve the Owner/Developer from his responsibility to achieve specified results. 
8.502. - Trenching. 
1.  [ Generally. ] Trenching consists of removal and disposal of material encountered to obtain required subgrade elevations incidental to installation or modification of underground pipelines and appurtenances. 
2.  [ Unauthorized trenching. ] Unauthorized trenching consists of removal of materials beyond indicated subgrade elevations or dimensions without specified authorization of the City Engineer. 
3.  Stability of Elevation. Slope sides of excavations to comply with local codes an authorities having jurisdiction. Shore and brace where sloping is not possible either because of space restrictions or stability of material excavated. Maintain sides and slopes of excavations in a safe condition until completion of backfilling. 
4.  Shoring and Bracing. Provide materials for shoring and bracing, such as sheet piling, uprights, stringers and cross-braces, in good serviceable condition. 
a.  Maintain shoring and bracing in excavations regardless of time period excavations will be open. Carry down shoring and bracing as excavation progresses. 
b.  Provide shoring and bracing to comply with local codes and authorities having jurisdiction. 
5.  Dewatering. Perform earthwork in a manner to prevent surface water and minimize subsurface or ground water from flowing into excavations, and to prevent water from flooding project work and surrounding area. 
a.  Do not allow water to accumulate in excavations. Remove water using dewatering methods which will prevent softening of foundation bottoms, undercutting footings, and soil changes detrimental to stability of subgrades and foundations. Provide and maintain pumps, sumps, suction and discharge lines, and other dewatering system components necessary to convey water away from excavation. 
b.  Limit opening of additional trench length to that which can be dewatered with available equipment or methods. 
c.  Do not use trench as temporary drainage ditch. 
6.  Material Storage. Locate and retain materials away from edge of trench. 
a.  Dispose of excess soil material and waste materials such as unsatisfactory excavated soil materials, trash and debris, as specified hereinafter. 
7.  Excavating. Do not extend excavation below or wider than that which is necessary to construct work except as otherwise provided herein. Repair any unauthorized trenching as necessary to obtain an adequate subgrade as determined by the Engineer. 
a.  Limit open trench excavation to a maximum of three hundred (300) feet or distance between manholes ahead of completed backfill. 
b.  Where specific utility system elevations or depths are indicated on the Drawings or elsewhere herein, accurately conform with such requirements. Otherwise, achieve a minimum earth and/or pavement cover of thirty-six (36) inches above top of underground utilities being constructed unless a greater cover is made necessary by easement or permit requirement, by maintaining a minimum clearance of eighteen (18) inches below an existing or proposed structure or channel or by achieving proper alignment with existing or proposed facilities. 
c.  Confine trench width from an elevation of one (1) foot above top of underground pipe to the trench bottom, to that minimum which is necessary to pipe laying operations, but not exceed maximum trench width determined by pipe foundation requirements. 
d.  Remove rock, masonry and concrete material to a distance of at least six (6) inches from all parts of pipe and appurtenances being installed. Backfill and thoroughly compact to proper trench bottom elevation with select excavated material. 
e.  Do not mix excavated rock, masonry or concrete with backfill material placed within two (2) feet of installed pipe, or within one (1) foot of finished grade. 
8.  Pavement Removal. Where authorized by the City, remove all pavement, including curb and gutter, sidewalk and the like, which must be disturbed by trenching operations. 
a.  Saw cut edges of bituminous pavement. For concrete pavement, saw cut edges or remove and replace to nearest joint. 
b.  All sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and the like, remove entire width of damaged sections. 
c.  Extend pavement removal to the width required to accomplish trenching operations without damage to edge of remaining pavement. Correct any edge damage which occurs as requested by the City Engineer. 
9.  Removal of Unsatisfactory Soil Materials. Where removal of unsatisfactory soil material is due to fault or negligence of Contractor in his performance of shoring and bracing, dewatering, material storage or other specified requirements, excavate resulting unsatisfactory soil material and replace with satisfactory soil material. 
8.503. - Compaction. 
1.  General. Control soil compaction during construction providing minimum percentage of density specified for each area classification. 
2.  Percentage of Maximum Density Requirements. Achieve not less than the following percentages of maximum density of soil material compacted, at optimum moisture content for each layer of soil material-in-place as determined by ASTM D 698 (Standard Proctor) test procedures: 
a.  Right-of-Ways. Conform with the more stringent requirements of the permit issuing authority and the requirements herein. 
b.  Roadways. Under and within five (5) feet horizontal distance of traffic using surfaces, compact each layer of backfill and fill material to ninety-five (95) percent of maximum dry density. 
c.  Walkways. Under and within two (2) feet horizontal distance of paved walks, compact top six (6) inches of subgrade and each layer of backfill and fill material to ninety-five (95) percent of maximum dry density. 
d.  Driveways and Parking Lots. Under and within two (2) feet horizontal distance of traffic using surfaces, compact each layer of backfill and fill material to ninety-five (95) percent of maximum dry density. 
e.  Lawn or Unpaved Areas. Compact each layer of backfill or fill material ninety (90) percent of maximum dry density. 
f.  Spoil Areas. Compact each layer of backfill or fill material to eighty-five (85) percent of maximum dry density. 
3.  Moisture Control. Where a layer of soil material is too dry to achieve required compaction, uniformly apply water to layer in such manner as to prevent excessive free water from appearing on surface during or subsequent to compaction operations. 
    Remove, dry and replace, or scarify and air dry in place, soil material that is too wet to achieve required compaction. 
8.504. - Backfill and Fill. 
1.  General. Place acceptable soil material in uniform layers, to required elevations. Backfill excavations as promptly as work permits. 
2.  Backfill and Fill Materials. Use acceptable trench excavated soil material, free of stumps, trees, roots, muck, trash and other objectionable matter. 
3.  Placement and Compaction. Place backfill and fill materials in layers not more than eight (8) inches in loose depth. Before compaction, moisten or aerate each layer as necessary to provide the optimum moisture content. Compact each layer to required percentage of maximum density for each area classification. Do not place backfill or fill material on surfaces that are muddy, frozen, or contain frost or ice. 
    Commence backfill and fill operations close behind utility laying operations. Take care to prevent wedging action of backfill or fill against structures by carrying the material uniformly around structure to approximately same elevation in each lift. 
8.505. - Grading. 
1.  General. Uniformly grade areas within limits of earthwork, including adjacent transition areas. Smooth and compact finished surface within specified tolerances, with uniform levels or slopes between points where elevations are shown, or between such points and existing grades, or between existing grades. 
2.  Grading Outside Structures. Grade finished areas adjacent to structures to drain away from structures (except drainage inlets), and to prevent ponding. Finish surfaces free from irregular surface changes, and as follows: 
a.  Grassed or Landscaped Areas. Finish areas to within not more than 0.10 feet above or below the required elevations. 
b.  Walks and Pavement. Shape surface of areas under walks and pavements to line, grade and cross-section, with finish surface not more than one-half-inch above or below the required subgrade elevation. 
c.  Compaction. After grading, compact subgrade surfaces to the depth and percentage of maximum density for each area classification. 
8.510. - Site Information. 
1.  Existing Utilities. Locate all existing underground utilities in the areas of work including verification of nature and exact location of any utility indicated on Drawings. If utilities are to remain in place, provide adequate means of protection during earthwork operations.Should unexpected piping or other utilities be encountered during excavation, consult the utility owner immediately for directions. Cooperate with Owner and utility companies in keeping respective services and facilities in operation. Repair damaged utilities to satisfaction of utility owner. 
2.  Traffic Control. Schedule and conduct Work in a manner which will minimize inconveniences to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Provide flagmen, barricades, warning signs, warning lights, and other warning means as appropriate. Maintain traffic on all roads and streets which must be crossed by trenching by making two (2) separate cuts so that at least one (1) traffic lane is open at all times. Cover open trenches with steel plate between work phases. Perform construction work where crossing roads and streets within time period between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.. 
3.  Subgrade Compaction. After the storm drainage and other underground utilities have been installed and the backfill in all such ditches thoroughly compacted, the subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grades and cross section shown on the planes. The contractor shall then submit a subgrade compaction test made by an authorized testing company to the City. 
    If any sections of the subgrade are composed or unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the authorized representative of the City and replaced with suitable, thoroughly compacted material. 
8.520. - Protection of Persons and Property. 
1.  Barricade open excavations and post warning lights for safety of person. Operate warning lights during hours from dusk to dawn each day. 
2.  Protect structures, utilities, sidewalks, pavements, and other facilities immediately adjacent to excavations, from damage caused by settlement, lateral movement, undermining, washout and other hazards. 
3.  Take precautions and provide necessary bracing and shoring to guard against movement or settlement of existing improvements or new construction. Contractor is entirely responsible for strength and adequacy of bracing and shoring, and for safety and support of construction from damage or injury caused by the lack thereof or by movement or settlement. 
4.  Use work methods and provide temporary facilities as necessary to prevent washing, erosion, siltation or dust damage, or hazard to persons and property, within and outside the work area. 
5.  Place excavated material compactly alongside of the trench, and keep such material trimmed up so as to present the least practicable inconvenience to the public. Where necessitated by traffic conditions, remove from the roadway the first material excavated from a working length of trench so that further excavation is immediately used for backfilling, and thereby avoid stockpiling of material upon the roadway. Afterward, return first excavated material if needed for final backfilling. 
6.  Maintain all streets, sidewalks, crossings, fire hydrants, water and gas valves, fire alarm boxes, and other utilities accessible for their intended use except while the work is steadily advancing in the immediate vicinity of each such facility. 
7.  Keep every drain, gutter, culvert, sewer, and surface drainage route encountered, open for both temporary and permanent flow unless other effective provision for drainage is made. 
8.  Do not permit any hazardous condition to result from trenching and backfilling operations. 
8.521. - Use of Explosives. 
1.  Do not bring explosives onto site or use in work without prior written permission from authorities having jurisdiction. 
2.  Use explosives only as legally permitted and when other work methods are impractical. 
3.  Do not permit explosives on the project site other than during the least practicable use period. 
4.  Assume sole responsibility for handing, storage, and use of any explosive material. 
8.530. - Maintenance. 
1.  Protection of Graded Areas. Protect newly graded areas from traffic and erosion, and keep free of trash and debris. 
2.  Repair and re-establish grades in settled, eroded, and rutted areas to specified compaction and tolerances. 
3.  Reconditioning Compacted Areas. Where completed compacted areas are disturbed by subsequent construction, adverse weather, traffic, or other cause, scarify surface, re-shape, and compact to required density prior to further construction. 
8.531. - Disposal of Excess and Waste Materials. 
1.  Disposal of Excess Excavation. Transport excess excavated material, including unsatisfactory soil material, to the designated spoil areas, and spread as specified in the approved plans and specifications otherwise remove from the project work area and legally dispose of such material which cannot be acceptably distributed within project work area. 
2.  Disposal of Waste Material. Remove trash, debris, and waste materials from the project work area and legally dispose of such material. 
8.532. - Restoration. 
1.  Plan and execute total work so as to minimize damage to property. Restore all surface materials, shrubbery, fences, lawns, walls, structures and other improvements to a condition no less desirable than that which existed before construction operations began. 
2.  Where necessary to temporarily remove or damage improvements of any significance, take professional quality photographs of such improvements before disturbing the. Make copies of such photographs available to the City Engineer on request. 
3.  Restore work area and accomplish site cleanup immediately after backfilling and fill operations. 
8.540. - Accessibility and Maintenance. 
1.  Construction operations shall be scheduled and executed in such a manner as to cause minimal inconvenience to owners of abutting property. Convenient access to all property, roads, highways, sidewalks and driveways along the line of Work shall be maintained. Routes normally used by vehicular traffic shall be safely negotiable without slipping, sliding or loss of traction. Maintenance operations are to be performed on a day to day basis as necessary to provide access at all times. Once construction operations have begun, access shall be maintained until final Project acceptance. 
2.  For the convenience of the public, Work shall be so conducted as to offer the least possible obstruction and inconvenience. No work shall be under construction than the amount which can prosecute properly with due regard to the rights of the public. 
3.  No material or equipment shall be stored where it will interfere with the free and safe passage of public traffic. At the end of each work day, and at other times when construction operations are not in progress for any reason, all equipment and other obstructions shall be removed from that portion of a roadway intended for public use. 
4.  Access to fire hydrants and fire alarm boxes shall be maintained throughout the prosecution of the Work. Hydrants, alarm boxes, and standpipe connections shall be kept clear of obstructions and visible at all times. If visibility cannot be maintained, actions shall be taken to provide clearly visible signs showing the location of the fire hydrant, fire alarm box, or standpipe connection. 
5.  Utility companies and public agencies having facilities within the limits of the Work shall have access to their facilities at all times for inspection and repair. 
ARTICLE VI. - TUNNELING 

8.600. - Discription of Work. 
1.  Tunneling pertains to the installation of carrier pipe and tunnel liner below ground by means other than open cut excavation. 
2.  Use appropriate size and type of tunnel liner and construction methods as necessary to provide a complete tunnel liner installation. 
3.  Related Work Specified Elsewhere - Trenching and Backfilling, Article V; Water System, Article VIII; Sanitary Sewer System, Article IX. 
8.601. - Carrier Pipe. 
    When carrier pipe is installed without tunnel liner by tunneling methods, conform with carrier pipe material specifications unless otherwise indicated. 
    Installation - Provide adequate support for carrier pipe to prevent vertical deflection and maintain proper alignment, seal end of casing to carrier pipe with masonry and cement or other approved materials. 
8.602. - Pipe Tunnel Liner. 
1.  Where tunnel liner is installed using jacking or boring construction methods, comply with the following material specifications for tunnel liner: 
a.  Steel Pipe Tunnel Liner, four (4) inches and smaller - Conform to ASTM A120 material specifications. Use galvanized steel, Schedule 40. 
b.  Steel Pipe Tunnel Liner, larger than four (4) inches - Conform to ASTM A53 or A139 material specifications, except hydrostatic testing is not required. Join pipe sections with full strength welds in accordance with procedures approved by the American Welding Society. 
2.  Unless otherwise indicated on the Drawings, use pipe meeting the following thickness requirements: 
Nominal Diameter (inches) Minimum Wall Thickness (inches) 12 or smaller 0.188 14-16 0.282 18 0.313 20 0.344 22 0.375 24 0.407 26 0.438 28-30 0.469 32 0.501 34-36 0.532 28-42 0.563  
8.610. - Inspection. 
    Examine areas and conditions under which tunneling is to be done, and notify City Engineer in writing, of conditions detrimental to proper and timely completion of Work. 
8.611. - Quality Assurance. 
1.  Codes and Standards. Comply with applicable provisions of the following, unless otherwise indicated: 
a.  AASHTO, "Design Specifications for Tunnel Liner Plate". 
b.  AISC, "Specifications for the Design, Fabrication and Erection of Structural Steel for Buildings", including the Commentary. 
8.620. - General. 
    Carry out Work in a safe manner, taking all necessary precautions and measures necessary to maintain a stable construction system which does not weaken existing earth or structures. 
    When tunneling operations are carried out under railroad tracts, highways, streets, or any other existing thoroughfare, perform operations in such manner as not to interfere with normal operations of such thoroughfares. 
1.  Excavation. 
a.  The following requirements are supplemental to the excavation section(s) of these specifications. 
b.  When required, excavate suitable pits or trenches for tunneling operations. Provide all necessary bracing, sheeting and/or other temporary means to insure safety or persons and property. 
c.  Maintain excavation free from water, mud and debris which will interfere with an efficient tunneling operation. Neatly dry-excavate material of whatever nature encountered within the tunnel. Do not use sluicing or jetting excavation techniques. 
d.  Limit excavation to the minimum diameter required for tunnel liner installation. 
e.  Pressure grout all excessive voids which may develop about the tunnel liner exterior. 
f.  Promptly backfill all pits and trenches. 
2.  Jacking. 
a.  When installing tunnel liner by jacking method, use guide rails or other jacking frame structure to effectively maintain tunnel liner at proper line and grade. Force tunnel liner into place with suitable jacks which apply uniform pressure around the tunnel liner end section. Excavate at the lead end of the tunnel as the jacking operation progresses, but do not excavate more than six (6) inches in front of tunnel liner. Remove excavated material through the tunnel liner. 
b.  Perform tunneling such that the final tunnel liner position is within the following limits: 
1.  Lateral Alignment. Within two (2) percent of tunnel liner length. 
2.  Vertical Elevation. With one (1) percent of tunnel liner length, provide that the final grade of flow line is in the direction indicated on the Drawings. 
3.  Boring. 
a.  Mechanically bore by use of a cutting head on a continuous auger. Install tunnel liner in hole by jacking or other suitable methods. Accomplish boring of hole and tunnel liner installation simultaneously. Boring shall not proceed more than one (1) foot in front of tunnel liner. 
b.  Perform tunneling such that the final tunnel liner position is within the following limits: 
1.  Lateral Alignment. Within two (2) percent of tunnel liner length. 
2.  Vertical Elevation. Within one (1) percent of tunnel liner length, provided that the final grade of flow line is in the direction indicated on the Drawings. 
4.  Abandonment. Should it become necessary to abandon a tunnel for any reason, pressure grout the abandoned hole to prevent damage to surrounding earth and structures. When the tunnel liner is retained, pressure grouting may be limited to eighteen (18) inches from each end of the tunnel, and any voids about the tunnel liner exterior. 
5.  Tunnel Locations. Locate tunnels as indicated on the Drawings. To facilitate construction, changes in tunnel location may be permitted. Proposed changes must be submitted for approval. Changes in location must be acceptable to the City Engineer and any utility company having jurisdiction over the location. 
6.  Permits. Georgia Department of Transportation and railroads may require special permits and design standards within their respective rights-of-way. Owner/Developer is responsible for same. 
ARTICLE VII. - PAVEMENT PATCHING 

8.700. - Description of Work. 
1.  The extent of pavement patching consists of the repair of all pavement removed or damaged in the course of constructing the Project. 
2.  Pavement patching includes repair of paved roads, streets, highways, walkways, driveways, patios, slabs on grade, and parking lots together with walls, curbing, gutters and headers, and other pavements and appurtenances designated by the Design Engineer. Pavement referred to under this section, refers to asphaltic, cementious, brick, cobble or other large stone pavement materials together with underlying construction, irrespective of its composition. 
8.710. - Job Conditions. 
1.  Traffic Control. Schedule and conduct Work in a manner which will minimize inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Provide flagmen, barricades, warning signs, warning lights, and other warning means as appropriate. Perform construction work crossing streets and roads within the time period between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.. 
2.  Weather Limitations. Conduct all operations during weather conditions appropriate to the Work being performed. 
3.  Grade Control. Establish and maintain lines and elevations which will assure finished pavement patch having desirable appearance, function and strength. 
4.  General. Use materials and gradations which have locally exhibited a satisfactory record or previous usage, and which for finished visible surfaces will permit obtaining appearance, color and texture reasonably matching remaining; adjacent pavement of the same type. 
5.  Inspection. Areas and conditions under which pavement patching will be conducted, giving special attention to stability of sub-base. Do no proceed with pavement patching work until unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected in a manner acceptable to personnel and subcontractor doing the paving work. 
6.  Preparation. Saw cut any edges of existing pavement, or in the case of concrete work, remove existing pavement to nearest joint. Remove all loose material from underlying and adjacent surfaces. 
7.  Strength and Stability. Use materials and construction techniques as necessary to obtain strength, stability and durability of pavement patch at least equal to that of remaining adjacent pavement of the same type. As a minimum, conform with pavement patch details, and where such details are not provided, accomplish pavement patching utilizing strengths, thicknesses, etc. not less than that of remaining adjacent pavement of the same type. 
8.  Placing. Construct pavement using methods and equipment in general sue for the type of work being performed. 
9.  Finish. Accomplish pavement patching using materials and techniques which result in visible, finished surfaces having appearance, color, and texture reasonably matching remaining adjacent pavement of the same type. Do not permit the finished surface to have dips, objectionable roughness or discontinuity or non-draining areas. Do not create any unsafe pavement condition. 
10.  Repairs. If pavement patch or adjacent pavement settles or shows evidence of other distress resulting from the Work, cut pavement out, repair subgrade, and reconstruct patch. Do not place additional pavement material on top of unsatisfactory previously repaired surfaces. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WATER SYSTEM 

8.800. - Description of Work. 
    Water system work includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Foundation preparation. 
2.  Furnishing and laying water pipe. 
3.  Furnishing and installing water line appurtenances. 
4.  Furnishing and laying services and accessories. 
5.  Cleaning and sterilizing constructed work. 
6.  Testing constructed work. 
7.  Related Work Specified Elsewhere: 
Trenching and Backfilling, Article V 
Tunneling, Article VI 
Pavement Patching, Article VII 
8.810. - Job Conditions. 
1.  Traffic Control. Schedule and conduct Work in a manner which will minimize inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Provide flagmen, barricades, warning lights, and other warning means as appropriate. Maintain traffic on all roads and streets which must be crossed by water lines. 
2.  Connection to Existing Pipework. Where it is required that connection be made to existing pipework, expose existing piping and obtain the exact fittings and/or other appurtenances necessary to make the connection prior to starting work. Connections to existing pipework indicated on drawings (if any) are shown only for the purpose of illustrating the general type of connection desired, and no assurance exists that such illustration can be followed precisely. Notify the City Engineer at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of starting connection work so that they may be present to observe the work. 
3.  Weather Limitations. Conduct all operations during weather conditions appropriate to the Work being performed. 
8.820. - Quality Assurance. 
1.  Manufacturer. Furnish manufactured items, fittings, valves and fire hydrants, from manufacturers having regularly produced such items as specified herein which have proven satisfactory in actual-service, over at least a two-year period, as determined by the City Engineer. 
2.  Imperfections. Irregardless of tolerances permitted by industry standards specified herein, the City Engineer may reject pipe or appurtenances at the manufacturing plant of project site, which have cracks, chips, blisters, lack of smooth interior or exterior surface, evidence of structural weakness, porosity, joint defect, significant variation from theoretical shape, or other imperfection which might, in the opinion of the City Engineer, contribute to a reduced functional capability, accelerated deterioration, or reduced structural strength. 
3.  Repairs. Do not use patched or repaired pipe or appurtenances unless each individual length or element has been approved and marked for repair by the City Engineer at the manufacturing plant. Repairs, other than at the manufacturing plant, are not permitted. 
8.830. - Materials. 
    Provide all materials, products and accessories required for complete, properly functioning system. Use only those pipe, fitting and accessory materials that are free of qualities which impart taste, odor or toxicity to potable water. Refer to Drawings for locations of specific piping systems, valves and accessories required to be used in the Work. 
8.840. - Ductile Iron Piping Systems. 
    Ductile Iron Piping System Type 1 (DIPW-1) 
1.  Pipe. Ductile cast iron pipe conforming with ANSI A21.51 for wall thickness not less than required by ANSI A21.51 using Tables 50.5 and 50.12 for minimum 250 PSIG rated working pressure, laying condition two (2), and depth of cover two and one-half (21/2) or five (5) feet, whichever requires the greater wall thickness. 
2.  Pipe Lining. Provide standard cement mortar pipe lining complying with ANSI A21.4, and standard bituminous coating over lining and pipe exterior. Do not use any material which imparts taste or odor to potable water, or which is toxic to humans. 
3.  Fittings. Use gray or ductile iron fittings complying with ANSI A21.10 for two hundred fifty (250) PSI pressure rating, lined and coated same as connecting pipe. 
4.  Joints. For pipe fittings and valves, use the following joint types indicated for the specified locations, unless otherwise specified or shown. 
a.  Flanged Joint (FJ). Flanged joint complying with ANSI B16.1 or standard one-hundred-twenty-five-pound drilling, unless two-hundred-fifty-pound drilling is indicated on Drawings or is required for connecting valves. Use corrosion resistant alloy bolts, and either rubber or asbestos composition gaskets complying with manufacturer recommendations. Provide flanged joints for normally visible piping. 
b.  Mechanical Joint (MJ). Mechanical joint complying with ANSI A21.11, use corrosion resistant alloy bolts. Provide mechanical joints for direct burial piping or concealed piping within structures, for piping installed in tunnel liner, or, at Contractor option, for direct burial piping outside structures. 
c.  Push-on Joint (POJ). Push-on type joint complying with ANSI A21.11. Provide push-on joints for direct burial piping outside structures. 
d.  Grooved Joint Coupling (GJC). Where indicated on the Drawings provide bolted couplings utilizing grooved and shouldered pip ends, and suitable for not less than one hundred fifty (150) psig working pressure while permitting angular and restrained longitudinal flexibility of connecting pipe. Fabricate body of malleable iron, coupling gasket of molded synthetic rubber, and bolting of corrosion resistant steel alloy. Cut piping grooves as recommended by coupling manufacturer. 
e.  [ Products in compliance. ] Firms offering coupling products complying with these specifications include the following: 
Victaulic (Style 31) 
Aeroquip, Gustin-Bacon Division (100 Series) 
    Ductile Iron Piping System Type 2 (DIPW-2) 
1.  Pipe (Ball Joint) . Ductile iron pipe conforming with ANSI A21.51, suitable for minimum two hundred fifty (250) PSIG water working pressure and with wall thickness not less than tabulated below: 
Nominal Pipe Dia.-Inches Min. ANSI A21.51 Wall Thickness Class 4, 6 54 8, 10 55 12, 14 56 16 57 18 58  
a.  Provide non-floating pipe with additional wall thickness, which with accessories and cement lining results in at least ten (10) percent negative buoyancy when pipe is under water and full of air. 
2.  Pipe Lining. Provide cement mortar pipe lining complying with ANSI A21.4 and standard bituminous coating over lining and pipe exterior. Do not use any material which imparts taste or odor to potable water, or which is toxic to humans. 
3.  Joints. Boltless, flexible type joints permitting deflections of up to fifteen (15) degrees without damage to pipe or joint. Construct joints of high strength, corrosion resistant, alloyed cast steel or ductile iron with flexible gasket which safely permits high end-pull forces required for handling and installing pipe. Utilize joint design which under actual service conditions is free of measure leakage of water into or out of piping installation. 
8.850. - Copper Piping Systems. 
    Copper Tubing System (CuTW) 
1.  Tubing. Copper tubing complying with ASTM B88, Type K suitable or working pressures up to 200 PSIG at 200F water temperature. For underground direct burial installations, sue soft annealed or hard drawn tubing and for all other installation, use hard drawn tubing. 
2.  Fittings. For hard drawn tubing, use solder or brazing type wrought copper or cast bronze pressure fittings complying with ANSI B16.22 or B16.18. For soft annealed tubing use solder or brazing type wrought copper or cast bronze pressure fittings complying with ANSI B16.22 or B16.18 or flare type cast bronze fittings complying with ANSI B16.26. 
3.  Joints. Soldered, silver brazed or flared as appropriate and suitable for the following conditions: 
Maximum working pressure: One hundred fifty (150) PSIG 
Service Temperature: One hundred (100) Degrees F 
8.860. - Non-Metallic Piping Systems. 
    Polyvinyl Chloride Piping System Type 1 (PVCPW-1): Two and one-half-inch to eight-inch Diameter Sizes ONLY: 
1.  Pipe. Non-toxic, polyvinyl chloride compound meeting ASTM D1784, Class 12454-A or B material specification, and further meeting requirements of the National Sanitation Foundation. Must conform with requirements of ASTM D2241 for pressure rated pipe of the following class: 
Class 200 (SDR 21)- Furnish Pipe with each section continuously and permanently marked with the following identifying data: 
a.  Nominal size and outside diameter. 
b.  Material code designation. 
c.  Dimension ratio number (SDR or DR). 
d.  Pressure class. 
e.  ASTM or AWWA specification designation. 
f.  Manufacturer's name or trademark and production record code. 
g.  National Sanitation Foundation Seal (NSF) verifying suitability of pipe material for potable-water service. 
2.  Fittings. Ductile iron fittings complying with ANSI A21.10 or A21.11 for two hundred fifty (250) PSI pressure rating. Provide cement mortar interior lining complying with ANSI A21.4, and manufacturer's standard bituminous coating over lining and fitting exterior. Do not use any lining or coating which imparts taste or odor to potable water, or which is toxic to humans. 
3.  Joints (PVC Pipe). Unless otherwise required, use flexible elastomeric seals conforming to ASTM D3139 and ASTM F477. Provide compatible gaskets or adapters as required when joining to different type pipe material. 
4.  Joints (D.I. Fittings). Comply with ANSI A21.11 and unless otherwise required, use at Contractor's option push-on type joint or mechanical joint utilizing corrosion resistant alloy bolts. Provide gaskets or adapters compatible with connecting pipe as required. 
8.870. - Valves and Accessories. 
1.  Gate Valves. 
a.  Gate Valve Type 1 (GVW-1). Cast iron, bonze mounted AWWA C500 gate valves, rated for two hundred (200) PSIG working pressure, with counterclockwise opening, manual operator unless another type operation is shown or specified. Equip gate valves over sixteen-inch size with valved bypasses. Provide gate valves with the following features depending upon installed location of valve. 
1.  Direct burial locations. Mechanical joint ends, non-rising stem, two-inch square opening, 0-ring seals, and square wrench operating nut. Provide one (1) operating wrench for each ten (10) valves furnished, or fraction thereof. Where depth of valve is too great for operations by standard wrench, provide suitable, permanently installed valve stem extension and guide. For valves sixteen-inch size and larger, include enclosed gearbox operator for horizontal valve installation. For each valve, furnish two (2) piece, cast iron or plastic roadway valve box with five and one-quarter-inch minimum shaft size, cast iron top ring and drop type lid with "stay-put" features, and extensions as necessary to adjust top to finished grade. 
2.  All except direct burial locations. Flanged ends, outside screw, conventional and operating handwheel. 
3.  Firms offering products to comply with these requirements including the following: 
a.  M&H Valve and Fittings, Division of Dresser Industries, Inc. 
b.  Mueller A-230-20-MJ. 
b.  Gate Valve Type 2 (GVW-2). Cast iron, resilient seated, AWWA C509 gate valves, rate for two hundred (200) PSIG working pressure, with counterclockwise opening, manual operator unless another type operator is shown or specified. Provide gate valves with the following features depending upon installed location of valve. 
1.  Direct burial locations. Mechanical joint ends, non-rising stem, 0-ring seal and square wrench operating nut. Provide one (1) operating wrench for each ten (10) valves furnished, or fraction thereof. Where depth is too great for operation by standard wrench, provide suitable, permanently installed valve stem extension and guide. For each valve, furnish two (2) piece, cast iron or plastic roadway valve box with five and one-quarter-inch minimum shaft size, cast iron top ring and drop type lid with "stay-put" features, and extensions as necessary to adjust top to finished grade. 
2.  All except direct burial locations. Flanged ends, non-rising stem, 0-ring seal, and operating handwheel. 
2.  Butterfly Valves (BFVW). Rubber seated, bubble-tight closing butterfly valves complying with AWWA C504 Class 150B, suitable for throttling service, and further suitable for both frequent operation and for applications where valve operation occurs after long periods of inactivity. Furnish valves of design and metallurgy such that 18-8 stainless steel or Ni-Resist alloy cast iron forms mating seat against rubber seat, all retaining devices are constructed of corrosion resistant material, valve discs rotate to become streamlined with fluid flow in the full open position, and shaft seals are permanent self-adjusting type. Unless otherwise shown or specified, provide enclosed gear manual operators. Provide butterfly valves with the following features depending upon valve installed location: 
a.  Direct burial locations. Mechanical joint ends with fully gasketed, permanently sealed operating gear box suitable for underground service and submergence in water to twenty-five (25) feet, and equipped with square wrench operating nut. Provide one (1) operating wrench for each ten (10) valves furnished, or fraction thereof. Where depth of valve is too great for operation by standard wrench, provide suitable, permanently installed valve stem extension and guide. For each valve, furnish two (2) piece, cast iron or plastic roadway valve box with five and one-quarter-inch minimum shaft size, cast iron top ring and drop type lid with "stay-put" features, and extensions as necessary to adjust top to finished grade. 
b.  All except direct burial locations. Flanged ends, with gear ox and handwheel operator. 
3.  Check Valves (CV/WL). Iron body, bronze mounted, full opening check valves with flanged ends and outside weight and lever. Provide one hundred twenty-five (125) PSIG flanges (unless two hundred fifty (250) PSIG is indicated on Drawings or is required for connecting work) suitable for one hundred seventy-five (175) PSIG working pressure. Firms offering products to comply with these requirements include the following: 
a.  M&H Valve and Fittings, Division of Dresser Industries, Inc. 
b.  Clow Corporation. 
c.  Mueller. 
4.  Tapping Sleeves and Valves (TSVW). 
a.  Mechanical joint split sleeve and gate valve assembly suitable for working pressure up to two hundred (200) PSI. Use split sleeve having flanged valve connection. Furnish gate valve complying with preceding gate valve specification except provide one (1) valve end flanged as required for attachment to tapping sleeves. 
b.  Firms offering products to comply with these requirements include the following: 
1.  M&H Valve and Fittings, Division of Dresser Industries, Inc. 
2.  Mueller Company. 
3.  Clow Corporation. 
5.  Flexible Coupling (FCW). Bolted couplings utilized plain pipe ends, and suitable for not less than one hundred fifty (150) PSIG working pressure while permitting angular flexibility without longitudinal restraint of connecting pipe. Fabricate body of welded rolled high strength steel of cylindrical shape with malleable or ductile iron flanges, coupling gaskets of molded synthetic rubber and bolts of corrosion resistant steel alloy. Use couplings compatible with pipe and fittings shown on Drawings. Firms offering products complying with these specifications include the following: 
a.  Dresser (Style 38). 
b.  Smith-Blair, Inc. (Type 411). 
6.  Fire Hydrants (FH). 
a.  Post style, one hundred fifty (150) PSI working pressure, traffic model ("breakable"), compression type, dry barrel fire hydrant complying with AWWA C502. Furnish hydrants with one (1) four and one-half-inch pumper connection and two (2) two and one-half-inch hose connections conforming with National Standard Fire-Hose Coupling Screw Thread. Supply cast iron cap and cap to hydrant securing chain for each connection. Provide cast iron body with harnessing lugs for optional reaction bracing, and with six-inch size inlet connection compatible with connecting pipe. Shop paint hydrant above grade with silver enamel. Apply one (1) field finish coat of bright silver enamel to hydrant barrel. Select depth of bury appropriate to actual hydrant installation (forty-two (42) inches minimum unless otherwise indicated). Provide positive shut-off main valve whose minimum orifice diameter is at least four and one-quarter (41/4) inches, and whose operation is accomplished by means of counter-clockwise opening stem fitted with National Standard pentagon operating nut. Utilize 0-ring stem seals. Furnish one (1) operating wrench for each ten (10) hydrants furnished, or fraction thereof. For standardization with existing system, furnish hydrants from one (1) of the following manufacturers or City approved equal: 
1.  M&H Valve and Fittings Division 129-T Model. 
2.  Mueller Company. 
b.  Blue reflectors shall be installed following pavement application, in the center of the travel lane adjacent to all fire hydrants. 
7.  Water Meter Type 1: Three-quarter-inch (WM-1). 
a.  Cold water meter suitable for one hundred fifty (150) PSIG working pressure, complying with AWWA C700. Use either bronze, split style main case or one (1) piece bronze main case with cast iron bottom cap. Use bronze or brass couplings for connecting pipe or tubing, and brass, bronze composition, or stainless steel external nuts, bolts, and waters. Include vulcanized hard rubber nutating disc, non-ferrous strainer to protect meter from damage by any solid particles contained in the water, and hermetically sealed, easily read register with one hundred (100) equal part test index circle and pointer. Use register which is removable, without breaking water seal or interrupting customer service. 
b.  Provide register reading in U.S. gallons. 
c.  Firms offering products to comply with these requirements include the following: 
1.  Rockwell. 
8.  Water Meter Type 2: Larger than three-quarter-inch (WM-2). 
a.  Current type cold water meter suitable for one hundred fifty (150) PSIG working pressure and complying with AWWA C701. Use flanged, cast iron or bronze main case with bronze top cover and register housing. Use brass, bonze composition or stainless steel external nuts, bolts, and washers. Provide non-ferrous strainer to protect meter from damage by any solid particles contained in the water. Use hermetically sealed register which is removable without breaking water seal or interrupting customer service. Use easily read register with one hundred (100) equal part test index circle and pointer. 
b.  Provide register reading in U.S. gallons. 
c.  Firms offering products to comply with these requirements including the following: 
1.  Rockwell. 
9.  Pipe Detection Wire. Minimum size fourteen (14) gauge solid copper wire which can be readily detected by electronic pipe locator instruments in general use. 
10.  Coarse Granular Material for Pipe Bedding. Crushed stone, crushed gravel, natural gravel, crushed shell, or similar material complying with ASTM C33, and having No. 67 gradation (three-quarter-inch to No. 4 sieve.) 
11.  Piping Support. Factory fabricate hangers and clamps necessary to securely support pipework without excessive sag or vibration at all non-direct burial locations. 
12.  Service System Components. 
a.  Corporation Stops. Cast brass or bronze with end threads conforming with AWWA C800, and consisting of precision tapered, and individually lapped, key and body surfaces. Shop test each stop for leak-proof shutoff at specified working pressure. Firms offering products to comply with these requirements including the following: 
1.  Ford Meter Box Company. 
b.  Service Saddles for Ferrous Pipe. Extra heavy, hot dipped galvanized malleable iron bodies with galvanized or cadmium plated double straps and nuts, retained neoprene gasket, and outlet threads mating those of corporation stops used. Provide assemblies suitable for five hundred (500) PSIG cold water working pressure. Firms offering products to comply with these requirements include the following: 
1.  Mueller Company. 
c.  Service Saddles for Non-Ferrous Pipe. Heavy cast bronze or water-works brass body and straps, bronze, brass or stainless steel screws or nuts, and bolts, retained 0-rings seal, and outlet threads mating those of the corporation stop used. Provide assemblies suitable for two hundred (200) PSIG cold water working pressure. Firms offering products to comply with these requirements include the following: 
1.  Ford Meter Box Company. 
d.  Curb Stops. Brass of bronze body with resilient plug, permanently non-grease lubricated, and with end connections appropriate to connecting tubing, or pipe. Use stops rated not less than one hundred seventy-five (175) PSIG working pressure eighteen (18) degrees F-. Firms offering products to comply with these requirements include the following: 
1.  Ford Meter Box Company. 
e.  Meter Boxes. High density, reinforced plastic body with one (1) piece cast iron lid, unless otherwise indicated on the Drawings. Provide box of size and height appropriate to installation of meter and accessories required. 
8.880. - General Design Standards. 
1.  [ Changes due to field conditions ] The Drawings are generally schematic. Extend and/or modify construction details, as approved by the City Engineer, when field conditions necessitate such changes to achieve a safe and properly functioning system. 
2.  [ System to be free of breaks and leakage. ] Construct and, if necessary, reconstruct water system work as necessary to obtain system free of breaks or excessive leakage. 
3.  [ Compliance with Methods for Pipe Laying. ] Unless otherwise indicated, lay and join pipe in trenches and on foundations complying with methods proposed by the pipe manufacturer. Methods will not be approved which are likely to result in lower quality of installation than that afforded by requirements contained in the following articles. 
4.  Inspection by City. 
a.  The City shall be notified when specific inspections are required so that the inspection time can be scheduled. 
b.  If directed by the representative of the City, all pipe work shall be left open until the City Inspector views the work. The trench may be backfilled with the approval of the inspector if the work is not inspected by the close of the working day. No valves, fire hydrants, tees, reaction blocking or lot services shall be backfilled without the approval of the inspector. 
5.  Pipe Foundation and Laying. 
a.  Clean interior of pipe and all joints before laying. When pipe laying activity is not in actual progress, tightly cover open ends of pipe. Avoid permitting dirt, mud, or other material from entering pipe at any time. 
b.  Avoid damage or shock in handling pipe and accessories. Inspect each length of pipe and reject any defective piece. Carefully protect pipe in place form damage or displacement until backfilling operations are complete. 
c.  Cut pipe in a manner to avoid damage to pipe or lining, leaving a smooth end at right angles to pipe axis. Smooth and bevel edges of cut pipe for push-on, gasket type joints. 
d.  Lay pipe at depth dictated by field conditions, but with distance from top of pipe to finished grade not less than forty-two (42) inches unless otherwise shown or specified. 
e.  Found pipe on firm soil or course granular material in flat bottom trench with entire pipe barrel bearing uniformly on trench bottom, except for an approximately eighteen-inch gap at pipe balance point for sling removal. Hand excavate and backfill as required to provide uniform and continuous bearing and support for the pipe. Do not support pipe on hubs or end bells: Consolidate soil under and around pipe up to pipe centerline by tamping. 
f.  Join pipe with bells facing direction in which laying operation is progressing. Lay pipe upgrade wherever line grade exceeds ten (10) percent. 
g.  Control geometric position of pipe to ensure than pipe and fittings accurately conform with grade and alignment requirements. Lay pipe in a straight line or with uniform sweeping horizontal and vertical curves for proper alignment. Do not exceed manufacturer's recommended maximum joint deflection. 
h.  Prevent water from accumulating or running in trench during pipe. Laying operations or before the trench has been backfilled. 
i.  Adjust pipe depth or alignment to accommodate valve, hydrant or fitting setting, and as necessary to meet tie-in requirements or to avoid obstructions. 
6.  Service Tubing Installation. 
a.  At roads, paved drives, retaining walls, and other paved areas, install service tubing by pushing, pulling, or auguring techniques. Do not cut any paved surface without written authorization of City Engineer. 
b.  At all other locations, install service tubing by trenching and backfilling, unless otherwise noted. 
1.  Lay tubing at depth dictated by field conditions, but with not less than eighteen (18) inches cover. 
2.  Bed tubing on firm soil. Remove any rocks, masonry, or any other objectionable material which could damage tubing. 
3.  Lay tubing in compliance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
4.  Restore ground surface to original condition. Replace or repair any damaged improvements. 
7.  Pipe Connections. Make all pipe connections with standard factory fabricated fittings except where special connection details (if any) are shown on Drawings. 
8.  Installing Water Pipe in Tunnel Liner. 
a.  Tunnel Liner: Four (4) inches or smaller - Insert water tubing into tunnel liner using methods which prevent damage to tubing. 
b.  Tunnel Liner: Six (6) inches to forty-two (42) inches - Insert water pipe concentrically into tunnel liner by securing hardwood blocks radially around water pipe at no more than ten-foot longitudinal intervals. Use steel banding for securing wood blocks in place. 
Blow sand into annular space between water pipe and tunnel liner. Starting at the longitudinal center and proceeding outward to each end. Use techniques which assure complete filling of all voids. 
9.  Valves, Fittings and Hydrants. 
a.  Provide valves, fire hydrants, fittings and other appurtenances as indicated on the Drawings, specified herein, and as required by the City Engineer. 
b.  Set fire hydrants plumb and with ground line index within .1 foot of actual final ground level. After installation if complete, fully open fire hydrant and flush to check for proper operation. 
c.  Set valves and valve boxes plumb, with valve box cover level with surface. Set lower section of valve box concentric with valve operating stem. Avoid contact at lower end of valve box with valve body or pipe. Fully open and close completed valve to verify proper operation. 
10.  Anchorage. 
a.  Anchorage detailed on Drawings, if any, represents minimum anchorage to be installed. When field conditions require additional anchorage, such additional requirements and to provide appropriate additional anchorage shall be provided. 
b.  Anchor all bends, valves, tees, fire hydrants, reducers and other pointes of unbalanced pressure as necessary to resist thrust at test and working pressures, with suitable allowance for water-hammer. Also anchor piping system installed on steep slopes where gravitational force might otherwise cause piping displacement. Accomplish anchorage by use of concrete reaction bracing, metal tie roads and bands, pour concrete having a twenty-eight-day compressive strength of at least two thousand (2,000) pounds against firm earth and allow it to cure for at least five (5) days before placing main under pressure. Position concrete blocks of sufficient size to counteract the magnitude and direction of the resultant thrust force. Keep joints and hydrant drain opening s clear and accessible. Provide special support blocks at plastic pipes according to manufacturer's recommendation. When using bands and tie rods in conjunction with reaction bracing, provide a separate band for each tie rod. Use corrosion resistant materials throughout. When using restrained joint systems, utilize methods and place these special joints at appropriate fittings and pipe joints in accordance with manufacturer's recommendation. 
11.  Special Construction. Where constructing on piers, supporting pipe on bridges, or for other special work, use safe and generally accepted construction methods to accomplish the required work. 
12.  Service Saddles. 
a.  Cast Iron and Ductile Iron Mains. Install three-quarter and one-inch size corporation stops directly into tapped holes in water main. Use service saddles for all taps larger than one-inch size. 
b.  PVC Mains. Use service saddles for all service taps. 
13.  Pipe Detection Wire. Install pipe detection wire around pipe. Provide pipe detection wire for all non-ferrous water mains unless otherwise noted. 
14.  Line Cleaning. 
a.  Avoid permitting dirt, rubbish, construction materials, etc. to enter lines and appurtenances during construction. Use whatever means are necessary to obtain a clean and internally smooth system prior to final acceptance. 
b.  Limit use of flushing water to rates and quantities which will not interfere with service to water customers. 
15.  Water Leakage. 
a.  General Leakage Requirements. Make entire water line system as near watertight as practicable. Eliminate all detectable leakage regardless of test results hereinafter required. 
b.  Testing. Furnish and use appropriate test equipment and methods. Include gage, meter, pump and connections. Bleed all air from system prior to testing, providing any necessary corporation stops and pipe installations. 
1.  Pressure test all elements of the piping system. Where piping is buried or otherwise concealed, maintain the pressure test for not less than six (6) hours. Visible piping may be tested for a lesser time period, if approved by the City. Conduct pressure testing at two hundred (200) PSIG unless a lower pressure is recommended by a manufacturer of an element of the system. When a manufacturer does recommend a lower test pressure, furnish the Engineer with a detailed written explanation before commencing test work. In no even may the lower test pressure be less than one hundred ten (110) percent of the nominal working pressure of the pipe comprising the system. Measure pressure for testing referred to the elevational datum of the lowest pipe of the line section being tested. 
2.  Where possible, use methods and perform construction work in such sequence as necessary to accomplish pressure testing as work progresses. Do not pressure test more than one (1) mile length of pipe at one time. Provide temporary piping and accessories if required to isolate test sections. 
3.  Makeup water requirements to maintain test pressure in gallons per hour per one thousand (1,000) feet of pipe under test, over the test period may not exceed the quantities shown in the following table: 
Pipe Size 
Inches Quantity 
Gal./Hr. Pipe Size 
Inches Quantity 
Gal./Hr. 2 0.16 16 1.26 3 0.24 18 1.42 4 0.32 20 1.58 6 0.47 24 1.89 8 0.63 30 2.37 10 0.79 36 2.84 12 0.95 42 3.31 14 1.10 48 3.79  
Repair all breaks, detectable leaks or other defects and retest as many times as necessary to obtain passing test. 
16.  Disinfecting . 
a.  Chlorinate all potable water lines on completion of construction, after flushing and prior to placing in service. Use precaution to prevent backflow to supply system. 
b.  Fill lines with potable water containing sufficient chlorine to show a twenty-five (25) ppm minimum residual at the end of twenty-four (24) hours' retention period. (50 ppm minimum applied). 
c.  Locate application point at beginning of pipeline extension and apply chlorine by means of a solution feed device. Operate all valves and hydrants while filling the pipeline with chlorinating agent. Draw off at taps and hydrants along the line until an orthotolidine test shows a strong indication of residual chlorine. 
d.  Retain chlorinated water in the system for a period of twenty-four (24) hours. Test for twenty-five (25) ppm residual. If residual is twenty-five (25) ppm or greater flush the system with potable water, otherwise repeat entire procedure until satisfactory results are obtained. 
e.  Demonstrate lines to be free of contamination by drawing samples therefrom on two (2) successive days in the presence of the Engineer. Deliver samples to the Engineer for forwarding to a qualified laboratory for examination. On receipt of satisfactory test report from the foregoing laboratory, and with the approval of the Engineer, the lines so tested are to be considered from of contamination and placed in service. In the event contamination persists, re-sterilize as necessary until receipt of satisfactory test report. 
17.  Final Acceptance by the City. 
a.  The Owner/Developer shall before final acceptance present to the City the following: 
1.  Length of water line installed by line size. 
2.  Cost of water line installed by line size. 
3.  Construction Record Drawings. 
4.  Certification of disinfection and leak testing. 
ARTICLE IX. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM 

8.900. - Description of Work. 
1.  Sanitary sewer system work includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  Foundation preparation. 
b.  Furnishing and laying gravity sewer pipe. 
c.  Furnishing and laying force-main pipe. 
d.  Furnishing and installing lift stations and appurtenances. 
e.  Furnishing and/or constructing drainage structures and appurtenances. 
f.  Cleaning constructed work. 
g.  Testing constructed work. 
2.  Related Work Specified Elsewhere: 
Trenching and Backfilling, Article V 
Tunneling, Article VI 
Pavement Patching, Article VII 
Drainage Structures and Accessories, Article X 
8.901. - Job Conditions. 
1.  Traffic Control. Schedule and conduct work in a manner which will minimize inconvenience to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Provide flagmen, barricades, warning signs, warning lights, and other warning means as appropriate. Maintain traffic on all roads and streets which must be crossed by sewer lines. 
2.  Weather Limitations . Conduct all operations during weather conditions appropriate to the work being performed. 
8.910. - Inspection by City. 
1.  Authorized representatives of City shall have access to the site for inspection at any time. 
2.  The City shall be notified when specific inspections are required so that the inspection time can be scheduled. 
3.  If directed by the representatives of the City all pipe work shall be left open until the City Inspector views the work. The trench may be backfilled with the approval of the inspector if the work not inspected by the close of the working day. 
8.911. - Quality Assurance. 
1.  Manufacturer Experience. Furnish manufactured products produced by firms generally recognized as engaged in the manufacture of products which have proven satisfactory in actual service over at least a two-year period, as determined by the City. 
2.  Imperfections. Regardless of tolerances permitted by industry standards specified herein, the City may reject pipe or pre-cast structures at the manufacturing plant or project site, which have cracks, chips, blisters, lack of smooth interior or exterior surface, evidence of structural weakness, porosity, joint defect, significant variation from theoretical shape, or other imperfection which might, in the opinion of the City, contribute to a reduced functional capability, accelerated deterioration, or reduced structural strength. 
3.  Repairs. Do not use patched or repaired pipe or pre-cast structures unless each individual length or element has been approved and marked for repair by the City at the manufacturing plant. Repairs, other than at the manufacturing plant, are not permitted. 
8.920. - Materials. 
1.  Clay Pipe (CLPS). 
a.  Basic Specification. Nominal six-inch to thirty-six-inch diameter size only: ASTM C700 extra strength vitrified clay sewer pipe. 
b.  Joints. ASTM C425; At Contractor option, use factory fabricated gasket, with bell and spigot pipe and fittings, or use factory fabricated resilient compression sleeve. 
2.  Concrete Pipe. 
a.  Basic Specification. Nominal eighteen-inch size and over only: ASTM C76, reinforced sewer pipe furnished in not less than eight-foot lengths, without lift holes, Class 4 or 5 depending on depth and method of bury. 
b.  Additional specification requirement for all concrete pipe. Maximum absorption by standard ASTM test may not exceed six (6.0) percent, and pipe must be aged at manufacturing plant for not less than five (5) days. 
c.  Identification. Stamp each length or joint of concrete pipe at the plant of manufacture, showing strength or reinforcement class, wall thickness designation, date of manufacture, and manufacturer symbol. 
d.  Joints. AWWA C302 O-ring rubber gasket style in which the completed joint confines the O-ring on four (4) sides with nominal clearance not to exceed one-sixteenth-inch, between smooth, accurately formed, bell and spigot surfaces. 
e.  Interior Wall Lining. Apply factory coating of heavy duty, chemically resistant epoxy resin, suitable for sewer service over barrel and joints of pipe. Apply lining in at least coats, and to a total minimum thickness of twenty (20) mils. Over concrete surfaces which have been thoroughly prepared by either sand blasting or etching with acid. 
3.  Plastic Solid Wall Pipe (PVCS). 
a.  Basic Specification. ASTM D3034 bell and spigot sewer pipe with ratio of barrel outside diameter to wall thickness (SDR) no greater than 35.0, and pipe stiffness at five (5) percent deflection per ASTM D2412, no less than 45.0 psi. 
b.  Couplings and adapters. Provide standard couplings and adapters specifically designed to connect the PVC pipe to manholes or to other pipe materials. Manhole adapters shall provide a positive bond between the piping system and the mortar or concrete of the manhole structure. Protect all couplings and adapters by fully encasing in concrete. 
c.  Joints. Elastomeric gasket system having satisfactory performance record as determined by the Engineer. 
4.  Ductile Cast Iron Pipe (DIPS). 
a.  Basic Specification. ANSI 21.51 ductile iron pipe having thickness class as determined from Table 51.1 for Type 2 laying condition and cover for actual installation. 
b.  Coatings. Cement mortar lining per ANSI A21.4 with standard coal tar coating over lining and pipe exterior. 
c.  Joints. Rubber push-on type (ANSI A21.11) except where mechanical joint (ANSI A21.10 and A21.11) with corrosion resistant alloy bolts, or flanged (ANSI B16.1, Class 125) with corrosion resistant alloy bolts and red rubber gasket joints are indicated. 
d.  Fittings. Same design strength, lining, coating and joint as connecting ductile iron pipe. 
5.  Ductile Cast Iron Pipe - Non-Floating (DIPS/NF). 
a.  Basic Specification. Same material, strength joints, coatings and hydraulic characteristics as ductile cast iron pipe. 
b.  Special characteristic. Installed pipe must weigh more than its volume, computed by exterior pipe dimensions, multiplied by sixty-two and one-half (62.5) pounds per cubic foot. This may be accomplished by manufacturing pipe with greater wall thickness, not necessarily concentrically with interior pipe dimensions, or by concrete anchors. If separate concrete anchors are used, they must be secured to underside of each pipe length using a connecting system which will not deteriorate under long term, adverse conditions. Whether integral or separate anchor methods are used, the method must not result in significant reduction in earth cover above pipe or increase in exposure of pipework above finished grade. 
6.  Pipe Fittings. Use standard, factory fabricated adapters, wyes, tees, and other necessary fittings comparable to pipe with which connected. 
7.  Coarse Granular Material for Pipe Bedding. Crushed stone, crushed gravel, natural gravel, or crushed shell meeting ASTM C33, and having no. 67 granulation (three-quarter-inch to No. 4 sieve). 
8.  Fine granular material for Pipe Bedding. Uniformly graded natural or manufactured sand composed of hard, durable particles with one hundred (100) percent passing a No. 4 sieve, not more than twenty-five (25) percent passing a No. 100 sieve, and containing no more than twenty-five (25) percent total of silt and clay. 
9.  Grade Board Construction. Pine of fir, finished or rough sawn, free of warps, splits, or knots which would interfere with stable and accurate support of pipe. Furnish common steel nails of suitable size for securing wood members. 
10.  Sewer System Structures. Conform with applicable provisions of the following sections: 
Drainage Structures and Accessories, Article X 
Concrete Work, Article XI 
8.930. - Sewage Lift Stations. 
1.  Application. 
a.  Gravity sewers will be used wherever practical. Authorization to install sewage lift station/force main systems may be granted at the sole discretion of the City Engineer. 
b.  Requests for authorization to install lift station/force main systems shall be accompanied by technical justification and cost-analysis demonstrating to City Engineer's satisfaction that gravity sewers are not practical for the specific conditions. 
2.  General Design and Construction Criteria. 
a.  All lift stations shall be submersible type, except as otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
b.  All lift stations shall conform to the Recommended Standards for Sewage Works, latest edition, Great Lake- Upper Mississippi River Board of State Sanitary Engineers, except as otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
c.  All lift stations shall be designed by a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia. 
d.  Construction plans shall be prepared and submitted for review by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. No construction shall begin prior to approval by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
e.  No sewage overflows shall be permitted. 
f.  Temporary by-pass pumping shall be provided during upgrading of existing lift stations. 
3.  [ Pump specifications. ] Pumps shall be submersible, non-clog, centrifugal type, as manufactured by Davis-EMU Division of Davis Water and Waste Industries, Flight Corporation, or approved equal. 
4.  Design Conditions. 
a.  Pumps. 
1.  Number of pumps: The number of pumping units provided shall be adequate to pump the peak design flow with one (1) pumping unit out of service. 
2.  Minimum discharge size: Three-inch. 
3.  Maximum Speed: One thousand eight hundred (1,800) RPM. 
4.  Configuration: Pumps shall be single stage in parallel. 
5.  Efficiency: Pumps shall be designed to operate at the best efficiency point at the design condition. 
6.  Horsepower requirement: Motors shall be non-overloading along the entire pump curve. 
b.  Wetwells. 
1.  Wetwells and valve pits may be pre-cast concrete sanitary sewer manholes, pre-cast monolithic or sectional pre-cast concrete or poured-in-place concrete. 
2.  A separate check valve and plug valve for each pump shall be provided. Valves shall be enclosed separately from the wetwell. 
3.  No steps shall be provided in pump sump chambers. 
5.  Site Work. 
a.  Adequate land shall be provided to allow sufficient room for maintenance of station and turnaround for vehicles. A minimum area of fifty (50) feet by fifty (50) feet (excluding side slopes) shall be provided. 
b.  A twelve-foot-wide, aspalt paved access road shall be provided. 
c.  Lift station shall be fenced and shall be provided with a ten-foot minimum double access gate. Fence shall be eight-foot high, chain link, security type. 
d.  Surfaces inside fenced area shall be gravel, except where landscaping is desired. 
e.  Cut and fill slopes shall not exceed 3H:1V unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
6.  Equipment and Materials. 
a.  The pump design shall be such that the pump unit will be automatically and firmly connected to its discharge piping when lowered into place on the mating discharge connection, permanently installed in the wetwell. The pump shall be easily removable for inspection or service, requiring no bolts, nuts or other fastenings to be disconnected. For this purpose, there shall be no need for personnel to enter the wetwell. Each pump shall be fitted with stainless steel cable of adequate strength and length to permit raising and lowering the pump for inspection or removal. A safety cable hook shall be provided for attachment of the cable to a hook at the access level. The pump, with its appurtenances and cable, shall be capable of continuous submergence underwater without loss of watertight integrity to a depth of sixty-five (65) feet. All major parts, such as the stator casing, oil casing, sliding bracket, volute and impeller shall be of gray iron. All surfaces coming into contact with sludge shall be protected by a coat of rubber-asphalt paint. All exposed bolts and nuts shall be of stainless steel. 
b.  The impeller shall be gray cast iron of non-clog design, capable of handling three-inch diameter spherical solids, fibrous material and other matter found in normal sewage applications. The impeller shall be constructed with a long throughlet without acute turns. A minimum of two (2) vanes shall be provided. The impeller shall be dynamically balanced. Static and dynamic balancing operations shall not deform or weaken it. The impeller shall be slip fit to the shaft. Non-corroding fasteners shall be used. A wear ring system shall be installed to provide efficient sealing between the volute and impeller. 
c.  Each pump shall be provided with a mechanical rotating shaft seal system running in an oil reservoir having separate, constantly hydro-dynamically lubricated lapped seal faces. The seal unit between the pump and oil chamber shall contain one (1) stationary and one (1) positively driven rotating tugsten-carbide ring. The seal unit between the oil sump and motor housing shall contain one (1) positively driven rotating carbon ring. Each interface shall be held in contact by its own spring system. The seals shall require neither maintenance not adjustment, but shall be easily inspected and replaceable. No seal damage shall result from operating the pumping unit out of its liquid environment. The seal system shall not rely upon the pumped media for lubrication. 
d.  The pump shafts shall be of stainless steel and shall rotate on two (2) permanently lubricated bearings. 
e.  A sliding guide bracket shall be an integral part of the pump unit. The volute casing shall have a machined discharge flange to automatically and firmly connect with the cast iron discharge connection, which when bolted to the floor of the sump and discharge line, will receive the pump discharge connection flange without need of adjustment, fasteners, clamps or similar devices. Installation of the pump unit to the discharge connection shall be the result of a simple linear downward motion of the pump unit guided by no less than two (2) guide bars. No other motion of the pump unit, such as tilting or rotating shall be required. 
f.  Lower guide bar holders shall be integral with the discharge connection. A guide bar system shall be installed for each pump, to permit raising and lowering the pump. Guide bars shall be two-inch stainless steel bar of sufficient length to extend from the lower guide holders on the pump discharge connection to the upper guide holders, a detail shall be shown in the drawings. 
g.  The pump motor shall be housed in an air filled or oil filled watertight casing and shall have moisture resistant insulation. The motor shall be NEMA Design B and designed for continuous duty. Motor shall be designed for sustaining a minimum of six (6) starts per hour and shall be adequate to operate the pump at every point on the performance curve without exceeding the motor nameplate. Motors shall be explosion proof. 
h.  The pump motor cable shall be suitable for submersible pump applications. Cable sizing shall conform to NEC specifications for pump motors and shall be of adequate size to allow motor conversion without replacing the cable. The cable entry water seal design shall be such that it precludes specific torque requirements to insure a watertight and submersible seal. The cable entry junction box and motor shall be separated by a stator lead sealing gland or terminal board which shall isolate the motor interior from foreign materials gaining access through the pump top. 
i.  Each unit shall be provided with an adequately designed cooling system. Thermal radiators integral with the stator housing, case in one (1) unit, are acceptable. Where water jackets alone or in conjunction with radiators are used, separate circulation shall be provided. Cooling media channels and ports shall be non- log by virtue of their dimension. Provisions for external cooling and flushing shall be provided. 
j.  All motors shall be three-phase. 
7.  Controls. 
a.  Pump station installation shall be provided with an automatic control center, equipped with main circuit breaker, combination across-the-line magnetic starters, or reduced voltage starters (where required), electrical alternator, H-O-A pump operation selector switches, run indication lights, extra normally open contracts for remote indication of pump operation, terminal board for connection of level sensors and high water alarm, twenty-four-volt control circuit transformer, NEMA 4 high water alarm light and horn with alarm silencer and all other equipment necessary for a fully operational control system. All components shall be housed in a corrosion resistant NEMA 4 stainless enclosure. Provide a space heater, drain and breather fitting. Programmable logic controllers (PLC's) may be submitted for approval in place of relay logic. 
b.  Liquid level devices, each provided with an adequate length of electrical cable, shall be furnished and installed; a detail must be shown on the drawings. A float cable holder shall be installed at the access level. The starting level and stopping level for each pump shall be independently adjustable. Provide a common separate low water cutoff. The lead-lag sequence and on-off-alarm elevations for the installation shall be shown on the drawings. 
c.  Each pump shall be equipped with anon-resettable elapsed time meter mounted on the front of the control panel enclosure. Meters shall record operating time to tenths of an hour. 
d.  Provide automatic alteration of pumps and use control logic to operate in a lead-lag mode with adjustable levels. Pumps shall alternate in sequence with the use of a timer. Over temperature shut down and phase failure protection shall be provided with manual reset. A motor moisture sensor with indicator light for each motor shall be provided. Provide time delays to prevent simultaneous starting of pumps. Retain low water cutoff and other protective devices in hand mode. 
e.  Neatly arrange wiring and components, and label or code. Provide control diagram and legend on inside of enclosure cover. 
f.  Controls shall be supplied by pump manufacturer. 
8.  Accessories. 
a.  Furnish and install aluminum access frames rated for three-hundred (300) lb./sq. ft., complete with hinged and flush locked mechanism, upper guide holder and level sensors cable holder. Frames shall be securely placed, mounted above the pumps. Frame shall be provided with sliding nut rails to attach the accessories required. Lower guide bar holders shall be integral with the discharge connection. Guide bars shall be of at least standard weight galvanized steel pipe, the size shall be indicated on drawings. The guide bars shall not support any portion of the weight of the pump. Doors shall be of skid proof design. 
b.  Furnish stainless steel lifting chain, eye, and wall mounted hook for each pump. Provide two (2) chain grabs for hoist attachment, designed to slip down over the chain and grab the chain at the bottom of the chain for lifting, and to release and be removed from the chain without entering the wetwell. 
c.  Furnish one-quarter-inch stainless steel lifting chain of adequate length, wall hook, and chain grab, as specified above, for use with the debris basket. Chain grab shall utilize same hoist hook and shall be compatible. 
d.  Provide stainless steel debris basket to screen influent flow to pump station wetwell. Basket shall be provided with two-inch maximum openings and shall be mounted on rails to allow ready removal and cleaning of the basket. 
e.  Automatic Phone Dialer. 
1.  The Automatic Phone Dialer shall monitor up to sixteen (16) status/alarm inputs and be capable of transmitting alarm messages via normal dial-up phone lines. Each of the monitoring contacts shall be individually user programmable to alarm on open or closed states. 
2.  The Dialer shall be capable of dialing from one (1) to eight (8) user entered phone numbers, each up to sixteen (160) digits in length utilizing Touch-tone or pulse dialing. 
3.  The Automatic Phone Dialer shall utilize a solid state voice synthesizer. Individual alarm and normal messages shall he user programmable from a standard 230 word vocabulary. 
4.  The Automatic Phone Dialer shall initiate dial-out when alarm condition occurs. Acknowledgement of the alarm shall be by a touch tone code at the receiving phone or by returning a phone call to the Dialer. 
5.  The user shall be capable of obtaining the current status of the alarm and status contacts by calling the dialer and giving it a Touch Tone Code. 
6.  The Automatic Phone Dialer shall operate on one hundred twenty (120) VAC. A Gel-Cell Battery and charger shall be provided to provide operational back-up for a minimum of six (6) hours. 
7.  The Dialer shall be provided with internal gas tube and solid state surge protection on all inputs including power, phone and signal lines. 
8.  Automatic Phone Dialer shall be compatible with existing equipment currently in service and shall be as required for a complete operating system. 
9.  Emergency Power. 
a.  Power must be provided to lift stations from at least two (2) sources. Acceptable sources are: 
1.  2 Independent power lines from the utility. 
2.  Utility power with a back-up, permanently installed generator; or 
3.  Utility power with a connection for a portable generator and a manual transfer switch. 
b.  Where the secondary sources of power are a portable generator connection, the wetwell must be sized to provide a minimum of six-hour storage. 
10.  Spare Parts. 
a.  One (1) complete set of spare parts shall be furnished for each group of four (4) or less key items of identical equipment. 
b.  Spare parts are defined as all parts and appurtenances identified in the equipment manufacturer's current published parts list and operation and maintenance literature as spare parts recommended for that item of equipment. Parts and appurtenances identified as "optional" or otherwise identified by words or symbols of similar meaning shall be considered spare parts and shall be furnished. 
11.  Painting. 
a.  Pumps shall be primed and finished at the factory. No field painting shall be required except for touch ups. 
12.  Factory Tests. 
a.  The submersible pumps shall be tested at the place of manufacture in accordance with the standards of the Hydraulic Institute for testing of pumps. Each pump shall be tested with the actual drive unit to be furnished on the job. The test reports shall cover the complete range of the pumps and shall contain the information necessary to demonstrate that the units are in conformance with the approved Specifications. The following shall be recorded for each pump tested: 
1.  TDH vs. Capacity 
2.  Pump Efficiency vs. Capacity 
3.  Horsepower vs. Capacity 
4.  Speed of Rotation 
b.  Six (6) copies of all certified test reports shall be submitted. 
13.  Installation. The pumps, drives and accessories shall be installed, tested and adjusted and the installation certified by the pump manufacturer's representative. 
14.  Field Testing. 
a.  Following installation and checkout, the ability of the pumps to operate under actual field conditions without overheating, leakage or excessive wear, vibration, or noise shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Engineer. 
b.  Before placing installation into service the pumps shall be run continuously with the motor not submerged for thirty (30) minutes under full load current with no damage resulting to the pump motor. The pumps shall, during the test, product the designed GPM and TDH condition and experience a heat rise of no more than forty-five (45) degrees C above ambient temperature. 
c.  In the event any of the pumping equipment fails to meet the above test requirements, it shall be modified and retested in accordance with these requirements. 
d.  Each pump's performance shall be documented by obtaining concurrent readings showing motor voltage and amperage, pump suction head and pump discharge head. Such reading shall be documented for at least three (3) pumping conditions. One (1) test shall be at shut-off head. Each power lead to the motor shall be checked for proper current balance. 
e.  The Contractor shall submit six (6) certified copies of all test results prior to acceptance of the installation. 
15.  Pump Warranty. 
a.  The pump manufacturer shall warrant the units against defects in workmanship and materials for a period of five (5) years or ten thousand (10,000) hours. Warranty shall apply to parts and labor prorated over sixty (60) months. For the first eighteen (18) months, one hundred (100) percent parts and labor apply. The warranty shall be in printed form. 
b.  The warranty shall be transferable to the sewage collection system Owner. 
16.  Wash Station. 
a.  At each pump station, provide a freeze-proof yard hydrant with hose bib, concrete splash block, and hose rack capable of storing fifty (50) feet of one-inch hose. 
b.  Main supply shall be protected by a dual check type backflow preventer. Backflow preventer shall be contained in a separate close not subject to flooding by sewage. Backflow preventers equipped with drips shall not be installed in areas subject to flooding by any non-potable source. Such devices shall contain an air-gap type funnel between the drip discharge and the drain line provided. 
8.940. - Pipe Foundation. 
1.  Clay Pipe Foundation. Unless otherwise indicated, lay pipe in trenches and on foundations prepared as selected by the Contractor in conformance with the bedding class, trench width and depth, and pipe size tabulated below: 
Pipe Size 
Inches Maximum Trench Width (Ft.-Inches.) Maximum Trench Depth in Feet Class B Bedding Class C Bedding 8 2-3 30 30 10 2-6 22 30 12 2-9 18 30 15 3-0 17 30 18 3-3 18 30 21 3-6 20 30 24 4-0 17 28 27 4-0 18 23 30 4-6 18 25 36 5-6 17 23  
2.  Concrete Pipe Foundation. Unless otherwise indicated, lay pipe in trenches and on foundations prepared as selected by the Contractor in conformance with the bedding class, trench width and depth, and pipe size tabulated below: 
Maximum Trench Depth in Feet Pipe Size Maximum Trench Class C Bedding Class B Bedding CONC. C1.4 CONC. C1.5 CONC. C1.4 CONC. C1.5 8 2-3 - - - - 10 2-6 - - - - 12 2-9 - - - - 15 3-0 13 30 21 30 18 3-3 15 30 24 30 21 3-6 16 30 26 30 24 4-0 16 30 23 30 27 4-0 19 30 29 30 30 4-6 18 30 25 30 36 5-6 17 29 23 30 42 6-0 16 26 21 30 48 7-0 18 28 23 30 54 7-6 18 29 24 30 60 8-6 19 28 23 30 66 9-6 18 27 25 30 72 10-0 19 28 24 30  
3.  Plastic Pipe Foundation. Lay pipe in trenches and on foundations prepared in accordance with methods proposed by the pipe manufacturer in writing and approved by the Engineer. Such methods must result in long term deflections not greater than five (5) percent. Irrespective of manufacturer recommendations, use a bedding system giving not less than the support afforded by Class C Bedding. Limit maximum trench width to the following values: 
Pipe Size 
Inches Maximum Trench Width (Ft.-In.) Pipe Size Inches Maximum Trench Width (Ft.-In.) 8 2-3 30 4-6 10 2-6 36 5-6 12 2-9 42 6-0 15 3-0 48 7-0 18 3-3 54 7-6 21 3-6 60 8-6 24 4-0 66 9-6 27 4-0 72 10-9  
4.  Cast and Ductile Iron Pipe Foundation. Unless otherwise indicated, place underground pipe in trenches having a width no greater than nominal pipe diameter plus two (2) feet, using Class C foundation bedding. 
5.  Definition of Pipe Foundation Terms. 
a.  Trench depth is the vertical distance from pipe invert or flow line to finished ground surface. 
b.  Trench width is the horizontal distance between trench walls at any point from one (1) foot above top of pipe to trench bottom. 
c.  Class B Bedding may be achieved by either of the following two (2) construction methods: 
1.  Shaped Bottom with Tamped Backfill. Shape bottom of trench excavation to conform to a cylindrical surface with a radius at least two (2) inches greater than the radius to the outside of the pipe and with a width sufficient to allow 6/10 of the width of the pipe barrel to be bedded in fine granular material fill placed in the shaped excavation. Carefully place and compact backfill at sides of pipe to a thickness of at least twelve (12) inches above tope of pipe. Limit use of this bedding method to trenches with firm bottom and sides. 
2.  Compact Coarse Granular Bedding with Tampered Backfill. Bed pipe in compacted coarse granular materials placed on a flat trench bottom. Thickness of granular bedding must be at least one-quarter the outside pipe diameter, but not less than four (4) inches thick under pipe barrel, and extend at least halfway up the pipe barrel at the sides. Carefully place compacted backfill above the granular material up a minimum depth of twelve (12) inches over the top of pipe. 
d.  Class C Bedding may be achieved by either of the following two (2) construction methods: 
1.  Shaped Bottom. Bed pipe with ordinary care in an earth foundation formed in the trench bottom by a shaped excavation which fits the pipe barrel with reasonable closeness for a width of at least fifty (50) percent of the outside pipe diameter. Place compacted fill to a minimum depth of six (6) inches above tope of pipe. 
2.  Compacted Coarse Granular Bedding with a Tampered Backfill. Bed pipe in compacted coarse granular material placed on a flat trench bottom. Thickness of granular bedding must be at least four (4) inches under the barrel and must extend one-tenth to one-sixth of the outside diameter up the pipe barrel at the sides. Carefully place compacted backfill above the granular material up a minimum depth of six (6) inches over the top of pipe. 
8.950. - Miscellaneous. 
8.951. - Pipe Laying. 
1.  Clean interior of pipe and all joints before laying. When pipe laying is not in actual progress, tightly cover open ends of sewer. Avoid permitting mud or other material from entering sewer at all times. 
2.  Avoid damage or shock in handling pipe and accessories. Inspect each length of pipe, and reject any defective piece. Carefully protect pipe in place from damage or displacement until backfilling operations are complete. 
3.  Lay and joint pipe in strict conformance with manufacturer's written recommendations as submitted to and approved by the Engineer. Lay all pipe upgrade with spigots pointing downgrade. 
4.  Control geometric position of pipe as necessary to ensure that pipe and fittings accurately conform with required grade and alignment after sewer is completed. 
5.  Prevent water from accumulating or running in trench during pipe laying operations, and until the trench or excavation has been backfilled. 
6.  Remove and re-lay any length of pipe which does not accurately conform with required line or grade, is crushed, or is excessively deflected. 
8.952. - Pipe Connections. 
1.  Make all pipe connections with standard fittings, manholes, structures, or special construction detailed on Drawings. Locate building services and connect thereto with standard fittings as authorized. 
2.  At manholes and structures, neatly cut all connecting pipe flush with inside surface, and provide flexible pipe joint within eighteen (18) inches of outer surface. Make pipe connections to manholes and structures by laying pipe in mortar bed or concrete. Use supplemental materials and techniques as required to obtain watertightness. 
3.  Do not connect any sewage flow to new work until authorized by the City. 
8.953. - Installing Sanitary Sewer in Tunnel Liner. 
    Tunnel Liner, six (6) inches to forty-two (42) inches. 
1.  Insert sewer pipe concentrically into tunnel liner by securing hardwood blocks radially around sewer pipe at no more than ten-foot longitudinal intervals. Use steel banding for securing wood blocks in place. 
2.  Blow sand into annular space between sewer pipe and tunnel liner starting at the longitudinal center and proceeding outward to each end. Use techniques which assure complete filling of all voids. 
8.954. - Wyes, Tees and Services. 
1.  Provide wyes and/or service tees at points indicated on Drawings, specified herein, an as required by the City Engineer. If wyes or service extensions are not to be connected to a building sewer under this Work, close end of pipe with removable factory fabricated plug or stopper. 
2.  Service lines, unless requested by the City Engineer, are to be run to suit field conditions at a minimum grade of two (2) percent and with a minimum pipe cover of thirty (30) inches. 
8.955. - Line Cleaning. 
    Avoid permitting dirt, rubbish, surplus construction material, and other foreign matter to enter structures or pipe during construction. Use whatever means may be necessary to obtain a clean and internally smooth sewer system prior to final acceptance. 
8.960. - Sewer Leakage. 
1.  General Leakage Requirements. 
a.  Make entire sewer line system as near watertight as practicable. Eliminate all visible points of ground water infiltration, and any other significant points of leakage which can be located, regardless of test results obtained as hereinafter required. 
b.  Perform system infiltration test, manhole exfiltration test, and piping or joint air test for all work constructed. 
2.  System Infiltration Testing. 
a.  Measure infiltration into each major section of sewer during wet weather as requested by the Engineer. Use suitable temporary weirs and depth measuring devices, acceptable to the City as giving reasonably accurate flow measurement, furnished, installed and removed by the Contractor. 
b.  Take whatever action may be necessary to permanently reduce infiltration from all water sources into all constructed work, to rates, as determined by tests witnessed by the Engineer, which do not exceed 0.0375 gallons per inch of nominal pipe diameter per foot of pipe per twenty-four (24) hours. 
3.  Manhole Exfiltraton Testing. Test each manhole constructed by temporarily plugging all connecting pipes, filling manhole completely with water, allowing water to stand in manhole for one (1) hour, refilling manhole, and checking for water level drop after a one-hour period. If measurable water level drop occurs, permanently correct leakage source, and test again. Repeat procedure until no measurable water level drop occurs, Permit City to witness successful tests. 
4.  Air Testing. 
a.  Nominal four-inch to forty-two-inch pipe. After completing backfill of a sewer line section, conduct a low pressure air test using methods and devices acceptable to the City Engineer. Perform such tests using the following general procedures: 
1.  Temporarily plug line segment between two (2) manholes using plugs having air tight fittings through which low pressure air can be introduced into the pipe segment being tested. 
2.  Introduce low pressure air into the test pipe segment until the internal air pressure reaches four (4.0) PSIG above ground water pressure, if any. 
3.  Wait at least two (2) minutes for air temperature in the test segment to stabilize while internal air pressure remains no less than three and one-half (3.5) PSIG above ground water pressure. 
4.  Accurately determine the elapsed time for internal pressure to drop one (1.0) PSIG. 
5.  The air test is acceptable if elapsed time is no less than shown by the following table: 
Pipe 
Diameter 
Inches Seconds 
per 100 
feet of Pipe 4 18 6 42 8 72 10 90 12 108 15 126 18 144 21 180 24 216 27 252 30 324 36 360 42 436  
b.  Air leakage time is based on pipe being damp. If pipe and joints are dry, dampen line if helpful in-meeting air test time requirement. 
c.  At each manhole constructed where ground water is known to exist, install a small diameter pipe nipple through the manhole wall at the time that the sewer pipe is installed. Locate the nipple immediately above the lowest connecting sewer pipe, and grout the nipple in place concurrently with grouting the sewer pipe. Prior to placing the nipple, wrap it with a continuous length of heavy nylon chord which can be pulled out, thus permitting removal of the nipple after test work is complete. Just before commencing the air test, attach a clear plastic tube to the nipple, and hold the tube end vertically upward. After ground water has stopped rising in the plastic tube, measure the vertical distance from water level to pipe invert in feet. Average this distance observed at manholes on each end of the test segment, and divide the average distance in feet by two and three-tenths (2.3) to obtain the ground water pressure to be used in computing required test air pressure. 
d.  Permanently correct excessive leakage determined by air testing, and repeat operations until Engineer witnesses a successful test on each line segment of joint; then remove nipple through manhole wall without disturbing adjacent grout. Permanently caulk resulting hole watertight. 
8.970. - Final Acceptance by the City. 
1.  The Owner/Developer shall before final acceptance present to the City the following: 
a.  Length of sewer line installed by line size. 
b.  Cost of sewer line installed by line size. 
c.  Construction Record Drawings. 
ARTICLE X. - DRAINAGE STRUCTURES AND ACCESSORIES 

8.1010. - Description of Work. 
1.  The extent of drainage structure is shown on the Drawings. 
2.  Related Work Specified Elsewhere: 
Trenching and Backfilling, Article V 
Sanitary Sewer System, Article VI 
Concrete Work, Article XI 
8.1020. - Materials. 
1.  Clay Brick. ASTM C32 sewer and manhole brick or ASTM C216 facing brick, Grade MW or SW of nominal size eight (8) by two and one-quarter (21/4) by three and three-quarter (33/4) inches. Color and texture as selected by Contractor. 
2.  Concrete Brick. ASTM C55, Grade P-II, of nominal size eight (8) by two and one-quarter (21/4) inches; gray-white concrete color with smooth formed natural texture. 
3.  Rubble Stone. Provide stone not less than six (6) inches thick nor twelve (12) inches wide, and of proper shape to bring masonry structures to true line, shapes, and elevations; smaller stones may be used to fill interior of walls. Provide stone, free of rounded, worn, weathered and scarred surfaces, and also free of segregation, seams, cracks, pyrite intrusions and other defects tending to reduce weather resistance. Select stone having not less than sixty-five (65) percent wear in accordance with AASHTO 96, and having a loss not exceeding fifteen (15) percent after five (5) cycles of the magnesium sulfate soundness test in accordance with AASHTO T 104. 
4.  Pre-cast Concrete Drainage Structures. Use pre-cast concrete drainage structures, including pre-cast concrete pipe sections, adjustment rings, tapered sections, drop inlets, manholes, and other related products which conform to the requirements of ASTM C478. Furnish structure having a minimum wall thickness of four (4) inches or one-twelth the interior diameter, whichever is greater. Accurately cast openings to meet specified project requirements. 
5.  Drainage Structure Steps. Use steps conforming with applicable government safety regulations and the requirements stated below: 
a.  Provide individual steps, mortared or cast into walls and conical tops of all manholes and similar structures. Alien steps so as to form a continuous ladder with steps equally spaced vertically, no more than sixteen (16) inches apart, using steps having a minimum length of ten (10) inches and which project a minimum clear distance of four (4) inches from the wall. Use steps designed to prevent the foot from sliding off the end, and whose exposed parts are free of any hazardous sharp edges, burrs or projections. 
b.  Steps, fastenings and installation must be capable of supporting a single concentrated load of three hundred (300) pounds. Use designs based on imposed loads being concentrated at such points as will cause maximum stresses in the structural element being considered. 
c.  Construct individual steps as one (1) piece, ferrous casting, unless otherwise approved by the City or its designated representative. 
6.  Metal Castings. Provide castings of uniform quality, free from blowholes, porosity, hard spots, shrinkage, distortion or other significant defects and having smooth surfaces free of casting sand, fins and burrs. Use component parts which fit together uniformly, in a secure fashion. Where casting have lids or covers, make provisions for non-rocking fit. 
a.  Use the following casting material: 
1.  Gray Iron Castings - ASTM A48, Class 30. 
2.  Shop paint all casting surfaces with a single coat of asphaltic paint. 
7.  Mortar Materials. 
a.  Cement - Portland Cement ASTM C150, Type I or II 
b.  Sand - ASTM C114, well screened, clean, hard sharp, siliceous, tree from loam, silt and other impurities. Provide the following grain size distribution: 
1.  #10 sieve, passing ninety-five (95) to one hundred (100) percent. 
2.  #50 sieve, passing fifteen (15) to forty (40) percent. 
3.  #100 sieve, passing zero to five (5) percent. 
4.  Removal by decantation zero to five (5) percent. 
8.  Mortar Mix Proportions. Provide mortar mixed in the proportion of one (1) part cement to three (3) parts sand which only enough water to allow good workability of the mix. Hydrated lime may be added in amounts not exceeding ten (10) percent of the cement weight. 
9.  Cast-In-Place Concrete. Conform with applicable provisions of the following: 
Concrete Work, Article XI 
10.  Reinforcement. Conform with applicable provisions of the following: 
Concrete Work, Article XI 
8.1030. - Inspection. 
    Conform to provisions for inspections listed in Article IX, Sanitary Sewer System and Article VIII, Water System. 
8.1040. - Execution. 
1.  Excavation and Backfill. Conform with applicable provisions of Article V, Trenching and Backfilling. 
2.  Cast-In-Place Concrete. Conform with applicable provisions of Article XI, Concrete Work. 
3.  Pre-Cast Concrete Units. Set pre-cast units plumb and to exact grade on approximately three-inch thickness of compacted sand bedding. 
a.  In the event field conditions necessitate additional pipe connections for which no holes have been cast, neatly chip necessary holes, being careful not to crack portions of unit to remain. Replace any units excessively damaged as a result of field modification. 
b.  For sanitary sewer manholes, fill joints between sections with bituminous mastic especially formulated for sewer service. Use mortar or concrete to seal joints between units and connecting pipe. Supplement connecting joints with manufactured waterstops or seals when recommended by pipe manufacturer or necessary to minimize leakage. 
4.  Masonry Structures. 
a.  Store cement and lime in a dry place. Store masonry units above ground on level platforms which allow air circulation around and under stacked masonry units. 
b.  Handle and store masonry units so as to avoid damage. 
c.  Masonry units before installation and reject all units which are cracked, damaged, or in any way fail to meet this Specification. 
d.  Use only clean masonry units, free of dirt and debris which would adversely affect mortar bond. Do not use frozen materials, or materials mixed or coated with ice or frost. 
e.  Set masonry units, free of dirt and debris which would adversely affect mortar bond. Do not use frozen materials, or materials mixed or coated with ice or frost. 
f.  When using multi-wythe construction, make every fifth coarse a header coarse. 
g.  Do not install masonry when air temperature is below forty (40) degrees F and falling. 
h.  Do not backfill against masonry structures until they are at least seven (7) days old. In cold weather delay backfilling for a longer time to allow additional curing time for mortar. 
5.  Metal Castings. 
a.  Inspect each casting before installation, and reject all castings which are cracked, damaged or in any other way fail to meet the Specifications. 
b.  Clean castings of dirt, mud and grease before installation. 
c.  Set castings according to location and arrangement shown on the Drawings; rigidly support castings to maintain true alignment and elevation. Where castings are located in concrete or mortar construction, thoroughly work concrete or mortar around the casting so as to eliminate voids and provide solid bearing surfaces and rigid construction. 
d.  Make frames, subject to traffic, firm and stable tinder actual traffic conditions. When constructed in paved areas, set frames to conform with exact pavement surface including tilting frame where necessary to match pavement surface. 
6.  Sanitary Sewer Manholes. 
a.  Shape inverts and channels neatly so as to permit smooth hydraulic flow. 
b.  For masonry manholes, saturate outside wall of each manhole with water, and plaster with a smooth, 1/2 inch thick minimum coat of mortar as specified under PART 2, except that the mortar shall be mixed with one (1) part cement to two (2) parts sand. Do not add hydrated lime to plaster mortar. 
c.  Use whatever care, materials and construction technique may be required to achieve permanent watertight joints and connections. For testing and inspection requirements, refer to section 02720, Sanitary Sewer System. 
ARTICLE XI. - CONCRETE WORK 

8.1100. - Quality Assurance. 
1.  Codes and Standards. Comply with the provisions of the following codes, specifications and standards, except as otherwise shown or specified. 
a.  ACI 301 "Specifications for Structural Concrete for Buildings" 
b.  ACI 311 "Recommended Practice for Concrete Inspection" 
c.  ACI 318 "Building Code Requirements for Reinforced Concrete" 
d.  ACI 347 "Recommended Practice for Concrete Formwork" 
e.  ACI 304 "Recommended Practice for Measuring, Mixing, Transporting and Placing Concrete" 
f.  Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute, "Manual of Standard Practice" 
g.  Where local building code requirements exist, comply with provisions of such codes which are more stringent than the preceding codes and standards. 
2.  Workmanship. The Contractor is responsible for correction of concrete work which does not conform to the specified requirements, including strength, tolerances and finishes. Correct deficient concrete as directed by the City Engineer. 
3.  Construction Tolerances. 
a.  Variation from Plumb. For lines and surfaces of piers, and walls do not exceed inch in ten (10) feet nor more than one-inch total; except for exposed corners, control joints and other conspicuous lines, do not exceed one-quarter-inch in any story or twenty-foot maximum, nor one-half-inch in forty (40) feet or more. 
b.  Variation from Grade. For grades shown for slab soffits do not exceed inch ten (10) feet, three-eighths-inch in any bay or twenty-foot maximum, nor three-quarter-inch in forty (40) feet or more. 
c.  Variation in Cross-sectional Dimensions. For thickness of slabs and walls, do not exceed minus inch nor plus inch. 
8.1110. - Mix Design. 
1.  Compressive Strength. Design mixes for a specified strength for three thousand (3,000) psi at twenty-eight (28) days using a minimum of five and one-quarter (51/4) bags of cement (ninety-four (94) pounds), and a maximum of six (6) gallons of water per bag or cement, unless otherwise indicated. 
2.  Admixtures. Use air-entraining admixture in all concrete, unless otherwise shown or specified. Add air-entraining admixture at the manufacturer's prescribed rate to result in concrete at the joint of placement having air content by volume within the following limits: 
a.  Six (6) percent to nine (9) percent for maximum aggregate one-half-inch and under. 
b.  Four (4) percent to six (6) percent for maximum aggregate over one-half-inch through one and one-half-inch. 
c.  Two and one-half (2.5) percent to four and one-half (4.5) percent for maximum aggregate over one and one-half-inch. 
3.  Slump Limits. Proportion and design mixes to result in concrete slump at the point of placement as follows: 
4.  Ramps and Sloping Surfaces. Not more than three (3) inches. 
5.  Reinforced Foundation Systems. Not less than one (1) inch and not more than 3 inches. 
6.  All Other Concrete. Not less than one (1) inch and not more than four (4) inches. 
8.1120. - Materials. 
8.1121. - Form Materials. 
1.  Forms for Exposed Finish Concrete. Unless otherwise shown or specified, construct all formwork for exposed concrete surfaces with plywood, metals metal-framed plywood-faced or other acceptable panel-type materials, to provide continuous, straight, smooth, exposed surfaces. Furnish in largest practicable sizes to minimize number of joints and to conform to joint system shown on Drawings. Provide form material with sufficient thickness to withstand pressure or newly-placed concrete without bow or deflection. 
2.  [ Plywood used in formwork. ] Where plywood is used in formwork provide material complying with U.S. Product Standard PS-1 "B-B High Density Overlaid Concrete Form", Class I, unless otherwise acceptable to Engineer. 
3.  Forms for Unexposed Finish Concrete. Form concrete surfaces which will be unexposed in finished structure with plywood, lumber, metal or other acceptable material. Provide lumber dressed on at least two (2) edges and one (1) side for tight fit. 
8.1122. - Reinforcing Materials. 
1.  Reinforcing Bars. ASTM A 615, Grade 60 unless otherwise shown. 
2.  Steel Wire. ASTM A 82, plain, cold-drawn, steel. 
3.  Welded Wire Fabric. ASTM A 185, welded steel wire fabric. 
4.  Supports for Reinforcement. Provide supports for reinforcement including bolsters, chairs spacers and other devices for spacing, supporting and fastening reinforcing bars and welded wire fabric in place. Use wire bar type supports complying with CRSI recommendations, unless otherwise specified. Wood, brick and other devices will not be acceptable. 
a.  Slabs-on-grade. Use supports with sand plates or horizontal runners where wetted base materials will not support chair legs. 
b.  Exposed-to-view concrete surfaces. where legs of supports are in contact with forms, provide supports with legs which are hot-dip galvanized, or plastic protected or stainless steel protected. 
8.1123. - Concrete Materials. 
1.  Portland Cement. ASTM C 150, Type 1, unless otherwise acceptable to Engineer. 
Use only one (1) brand of cement throughout the project, unless otherwise acceptable to City Engineer. 
2.  Aggregates. ASTM C 33, and as herein specified. Provide aggregates from a single source for all exposed concrete. 
a.  Fine Aggregate. Clean, sharp, natural sand free from loam, clay, lumps or other deleterious substances. 
b.  Coarse Aggregate. Clean, uncoated, crushed granite or similar hard stone processed from natural rock or stone, and containing no clay, mud, loam or foreign matter. 
c.  Maximum Aggregate Size. Not larger than one-fifth of the narrowest dimension between sides of forms, one-third of the depth of slabs, nor three-quarter of the minimum clear spacing between individual reinforcing bars or bundles of bars. Size limitations may be waived if, in the judgment of the Engineer, workability and methods of consolidation are such that concrete can be placed without honeycomb or voids. 
d.  Water. Clean, fresh, and safely drinkable by humans. 
e.  Air-Entraining Admixture. ASTM C 260. 
8.1124. - Related Materials. 
1.  Grout. Ready mixed Portland cement, sand and water mixture conforming with materials and mix design of highest strength project-required concrete except for deletion of coarse aggregate. 
2.  Non-shrink Grout. Factory premixed cementitious material containing no corrosive material is non-shrink from time of placement and shows no expansion after final set when tested under ASTM C 827, has an initial setting time of not less than forty-five (45) minutes, has a twenty-four-hour compressive strength of not less than three thousand (3,000) psi under ASTM C 109 for a trowelable mix, and is selected and applied in conformance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
3.  Absorptive Cover. Burlap cloth made from jute or kenaf, weighting approximately nine (9) ounces per square yard, complying with AASHTO M182, Class 2. 
4.  Moisture-Retaining Cover. One (1) of the following, complying with ASTM C171: 
a.  Waterproof Paper; 
b.  Polyethylene Film; 
c.  Polyethylene-coated burlap. 
5.  Membrane-Forming Curing Compound. ASTM C309, Type 1 unless other type acceptable to City Engineer. 
8.1130. - Concrete Mixing. 
1.  Job-Site Mixing. Mix materials for concrete in an acceptable drum type batch machine mixer. Fro mixers of one (1) cubic yard, or smaller capacity, continue mixing at least one (1) minute, but not more than five (5) minutes after all ingredients are in the mixer, before any part of the batch is released. For mixers of capacity larger than one (1) cubic yard, increase the minimum one (1) minute of mixing time by fifteen (15) seconds for each additional cubic yard, or fraction thereof. 
2.  [ Batch ticket. ] Provide a batch ticket for each batch discharged and used in the work, indicating the project identification name and number, date, mix time, quantity, and amount of water introduced. 
3.  Ready-Mix Concrete. Comply with the requirements of ASTM C94 and as herein spec fled. 
a.  Delete the references for allowing additional water to be added to the batch for material with insufficient slump. Addition of water to the batch will not be permitted. 
b.  During hot weather, or under conditions contributing to rapid setting of concrete, a shorter mixing time than specified in ASTM C94 may be required. 
c.  When the air temperature is between eighty-five (85) degrees F and ninety (90) degrees f, reduce the mixing an delivery time from one (1) hour to seventy-five (75) minutes, and when the air temperature is above ninety (90) degrees F, reduce the mixing and delivery time to sixty (60) minutes. 
8.1140. - Forms. 
1.  Design, erect, support, brace and maintain formwork to support vertical and lateral loads that might be applied until such loads can be supported by the concrete structure. Construct formwork so concrete members and structures are of correct size, shape, alignment, elevation and position. 
2.  Design formwork to be readily removable without impact, shock or damage to cast-in-place concrete surfaces and adjacent materials. 
3.  Construct forms complying with ACI 347, to sizes, shapes, lines and dimensions shown, and to obtain accurate alignment, location, grades, level and plumb work in finished structures. Provide for openings, offsets, sinkages, keyways, recesses, moldings, rustications, reglets, chamfers, blocking, screeds, bulkheads, anchorages and inserts, and other features required in work. Use selected materials to obtain required finishes. Solidly butt joints and provide back-up at joints to prevent leakage of cement paste. 
4.  Fabricate forms for easy removal without hammering or prying against the concrete surfaces. Provide crush plates or wrecking plates where stripping may damage cast concrete surfaces. Provide top forms for inclined surfaces where slope is too steep to place concrete with bottom forms only. Kerf wood inserts for forming keyways, reglets, recesses, and the like, to prevent swelling and for easy removal. 
5.  Provide temporary openings where interior area of formwork is inaccessible for cleanout for inspection before concrete placement, and for placement of concrete. Securely brace temporary openings and set tightly to forms to prevent loss of concrete mortar. Locate temporary openings on forms at inconspicuous locations. 
6.  Chamfer exposed corners and edges are shown, using wood, metal, PVC or rubber chamfer strips fabricated to produce uniform smooth lines and tight edge joints. 
7.  Form Ties. Factory-fabricated, adjustable-length, metal form ties, designed to prevent form deflection, to prevent spilling concrete surfaces upon removal, and to prevent passage of water along tie surface through concrete. 
Provide ties so portion remaining within concrete is at least one-inch inside concrete, and do not leave holes larger than one-inch diameter in concrete surface. 
8.  Cleaning and Tightening. Thoroughly clean forms and adjacent surfaces to receive concrete. Remove chips, wood, sawdust, dirt or other debris just before concrete is placed. Retighten forms after concrete placement if required to eliminate mortar leaks. 
9.  Edge Forms and Screed Strips for Slabs. Set edge forms or bulkheads and inter-mediate screed strips for slabs to obtain the required elevations and contours in the finished slab surface. Provide and secure units sufficiently strong to support the types of screeds required. Align the concrete surface to the elevation of the screed strips by the use of strike-off templates or accepted compacting type screeds. 
8.1141. - Preparation of Form Surfaces. 
1.  Coat the contact surfaces of forms with a form-coating compound before reinforcement is placed. 
2.  Thin form-coating compounds only with thinning agent of type, and in amount, and under conditions of the form-coating compound manufacturer's directions. Do not allow excess for-coating material to accumulate in the forms or to come into contact with concrete surfaces against which fresh concrete will be placed. Apply in compliance with manufacturer's instructions. 
3.  Coat steel forms with a non-staining, rust-preventative form oil or otherwise protect against rusting. Rust-stained steel formwork is not acceptable. 
8.1150. - Placing Reinforcement. 
1.  Comply with the specified codes and standards, and Concrete Reinforcing Steel Institute's recommended practice for "Placing Reinforcing Bars", for details and methods of reinforcement placement and supports, and as herein specified. 
2.  Clean reinforcement of loose rust and mill scale, earth, ice, and other materials which reduce or destroy bond with concrete. 
3.  Accurately position, support and secure reinforcement against displacement by formwork, construction, or concrete placement operations. Locate and support reinforcing by metal chairs, runners, bolsters, spacers and hangers, as required. 
4.  Place reinforcement to obtain at least the minimum coverage for concrete protection. Arrange, space an securely tie bars and bar supports to hold reinforcement in position during concrete placement operations. Set wire ties so ends are directed into concrete, not toward exposed concrete surfaces. 
5.  Install welded wire fabric in as long lengths as practicable. Lap adjoining pieces at least one (1) full mesh and lace splices with wire. Offset end laps in adjacent widths to prevent continuous laps in either direction. 
8.1151. - Joints. 
1.  Construction Joints. Locate and install necessary construction joints, which are not shown on the Drawings, so as not to impair the strength and appearance of the structure, as acceptable to the Engineer. 
2.  Provide keyways in all construction joints in walls, slabs and between walls and footings; accepted bulkheads designed for this purpose may be used for slabs. Construct keyways one (1) inch deep unless otherwise detailed. 
3.  Place construction joints perpendicular to the main reinforcement. Continue all reinforcement across construction joints. 
4.  Isolation Joints in Slabs-on-Ground. Construct isolation joints in slabs on ground at all points of contact between slabs on ground and vertical surfaces, such as column pedestals, foundation walls, grade beams and elsewhere as indicated. 
5.  Form control joints by inserting a pre-molded hardboard or fiberboard strip into the fresh concrete until the top surface of the strip is flush with the slab surface. After the concrete has cured, remove inserts and clean groove of loose debris. 
8.1152. - Installation of Embedded Items. 
    Set and build into the work anchorage devices and other embedded items required for other work that is attached to, or supported by, cast-in place concrete, Use setting drawings, diagrams, instructions and directions provided by suppliers of the items to be attached thereto. 
8.1160. - Concrete Placement. 
1.  Pre-Placement Inspection. Before placing concrete, inspect and complete the formwork installation, reinforcing steel, and items to be embedded or cast-in. Notify other crafts to permit the installation of their work; cooperate with other trades in setting such work, as required. Thoroughly wet wood forms immediately before placing concrete, as required where form coatings are not used. 
2.  Coordinate the installation of joint materials and moisture barriers with placement of forms and reinforcing steel. 
3.  General. Comply with ACI 304, and as herein specified. 
4.  Construction Sequence. Before placing any concrete, complete blasting, heavy earthwork and other construction operations which might cause damage to concrete structures. 
5.  Deposit concrete continuously or in layers of such thickness that no concrete will be placed on concrete which has hardened sufficiently to cause the formation of seams or planes of weakness within the section. If a section cannot be placed continuously, provide construction joints as herein specified. Deposit concrete as nearly as practicable to its final location to avoid segregation due to rehandling or flowing. 
6.  Placing Concrete in Forms. Deposit concrete in forms in horizontal layers not deeper than twenty-four (24) inches and in a manner to avoid inclined construction joints. Where placement consists of several layers, place each layer while preceding layer is still plastic to avoid cold joints. 
7.  Do not use vibrators to transport concrete inside of forms. Insert and withdraw vibrators vertically at uniformly spaced locations not farther than the visible effectiveness of the machine. Place vibrators to rapidly penetrate the placed layer of concrete and at least six (6) inches into the preceding layer. Do not insert vibrators into lower layers of concrete that have begun to set. At each insertion limit the duration of vibration to the time necessary to consolidate the concrete and complete embedment of reinforcement and other embedded items without causing segregation of the mix. 
8.  Placing Concrete Slabs. Deposit and consolidate concrete in a continuous operation, within the limits of construction joints, until the placing of a panel or section is completed. 
9.  Consolidate concrete during placing operations so that concrete is thoroughly worked around reinforcement and other embedded items and into corners. 
10.  Bring slab surfaces to the correct level with a straightedge and strike-off. Use bull floats or derbies to smooth the surface, leaving it free of humps or hollows. Do not sprinkle water on the plastic surface. Do not disturb the slab surfaces prior to beginning finishing operations. 
11.  Maintain reinforcing in the proper position during concrete placement operations. 
12.  Cold Weather Placing. 
a.  Protect concrete work from physical damage or reduced strength which could be caused by frost, freezing actions, or low temperatures, in compliance with ACI 306 and as herein specified. 
b.  When air temperature has fallen to or is expected to fall below forty (40) degrees F, uniformly heat all water and aggregates before mixing as required to obtain a concrete mixture temperature of not less than fifty (50) degrees F and not more than eighty (80) degrees F at point of placement. 
c.  Do not use frozen materials or materials containing ice or snow. Do not place concrete on frozen subgrade or on subgrade containing frozen materials. 
d.  Do not use calcium chloride, salt and other materials containing antifreeze agents or chemical accelerators, unless otherwise accepted in writing by the City Engineer. 
13.  Hot Weather Placing. 
a.  When hot weather conditions exist that would seriously impair the quality and strength of concrete, place concrete in compliance with ACI 305 and as herein specified. 
b.  Cool ingredients before mixing to maintain concrete temperature at time of placement below ninety (90) degrees F. Mixing water may be chilled, or chopped ice may be used to control the concrete temperature provided the water equivalent of the ice is calculated to the total amount of mixing water. 
c.  Cover reinforcing steel with water-soaked burlap if it becomes to hot, so that the steel temperature will not exceed the ambient air temperature immediately before embedment in concrete. 
d.  Wet forms thoroughly before placing concrete. 
e.  Do not use retarding admixtures without the written acceptance of the Engineer. 
8.1170. - Finish of Formed Surfaces. 
1.  Concealed Surfaces. For formed concrete surfaces not exposed-to-view in the finished work, leave surface finish imparted by the form facing material used, with defective areas and form tie voids repaired and patched as specified, and fins and other projections exceeding inch in height rubbed flush. 
2.  Visible Surfaces. For formed concrete surfaces exposed-to-view, including those surfaces of water or other material holding structures visible when the structure is empty, or surfaces that are to be covered with a thin or flexible finish material bonded to the concrete, perform finish operations as specified above under "Concrete Surfaces", and in addition wet and rub entire surfaces with a carbo-rundum stone of medium fineness until all form marks and other surface irregularities have been removed and a uniform surface appearance, achieved. Do not create a plaster coating on concrete. 
3.  Unformed Visible Surfaces. At tops of walls, horizontal offsets and similar unformed surfaces occurring adjacent to formed surfaces, strike-off smooth and finish with a texture matching adjacent formed surfaces. Continue final surface treatment of formed surfaces uniformly across adjacent unformed surfaces. 
8.1171. - Monolithic Slab Finishes. 
1.  Float Finish. Apply float finish to monolithic slab surfaces that are to receive trowel finish and other finishes are hereinafter specified, and slab surfaces which are to be covered with membrane or elastic waterproofing, membrane or elastic roofing, or sand-bed terrazzo, and as shown on Drawings or in schedules. 
a.  After screening and consolidating concrete slabs, do not work surface until ready for floating. Begin floating when surface water has disappeared or when concrete has stiffened sufficiently to permit operation of floats. Consolidate surface with power-driven floats, or by hand-floating if area is small or inaccessible to power units. Check and level surface plane to a tolerance not exceeding inch in ten (10) feet when tested with a ten-foot straightedge. Cut down high spots and fill low spots. Uniformly slope surfaces to drains. Immediately after leveling, re-float surface to a uniform, smooth, granular texture. 
2.  Trowel Finish. Apply trowel finish to monolithic slab surfaces that are to be exposed-to-view, unless otherwise shown, and slab surfaces that are to be covered with resilient flooring, paint or other thin film finish coating system. 
a.  After floating, begin first trowel finish operation using a power-driven trowel. Begin final troweling when surface produces a ringing sound as trowel is moved over surface. Consolidate concrete surface by final hand-troweling operation, free of trowel marks, uniform in texture and appearance, and with a surface plane tolerance not exceeding one-eighth-inch in ten (10) feet when tested with a ten-foot straightedge. Grind smooth surface defects which would telegraph through applied floor covering system. 
3.  Non-Slip Broom Finish. Apply non-slip broom finish to exterior concrete platforms, steps and ramps, and elsewhere as shown on Drawings or in schedules. 
a.  Immediately after trowel finishing, slightly roughen concrete surface by brooming with fiber bristle broom perpendicular to main traffic route. Coordinate required final finish with the City Engineer before application. 
8.1172. - Concrete Curing and Protection. 
1.  General. Protect freshly placed concrete from pre-mature drying, and excessive cold or hot temperature, and maintain without drying at a relatively constant temperature for a period of time necessary for hydration of cement and proper hardening. 
a.  Start initial curing as soon as free water ahs disappeared from concrete surface after placing and finishing. Weather permitting; keep continuously moist for not less than seventy-two (72) hours. 
b.  Begin final curing procedures immediately following initial curing and before concrete has dried. Continue final curing for at least seven (7) days and in accordance with ACI 301 procedures. Avoid rapid drying at end of final curing period. 
2.  Curing-Methods. Perform curing of concrete by one (1) or more of the following methods as selected by the Contractor: 
a.  Provide moist curing by covering concrete surfaces with specified absorptive cover, thoroughly saturating cover with water and keeping continuously wet. Lap absorptive covers at least four (4) inches. 
b.  Provide moisture cover curing by covering concrete surfaces with moisture-retaining cover, placed in widest practicable width with sides and ends lapped at least three (3) inches and sealed by waterproof tape or adhesive. Immediately repair any holes or tears during curing period using cover material and waterproof tape. 
c.  Provide membrane curing by applying compound to damp concrete surfaces as soon as film has disappeared. Apply uniformly in two-coat continuous operation by power-spray equipment in accordance with manufacturer's directions. Recoat areas which are subject to heavy rainfall within three (3) hours after initial application. Maintain continuity of coating and repair damage during curing period. 
d.  Do not use membrane curing compounds on surfaces which are to be covered with a coating material applied directly to concrete or with a covering material applied directly to concrete or with a covering material bonded to concrete, such as other concrete, liquid floor hardener, waterproofing, damp-proofing, membrane roofing , flooring, paining, and other coatings and finish materials, unless otherwise acceptable to the City Engineer. 
3.  Curing Formed Surfaces. Cure formed concrete surfaces, including undersides of beams, supported slabs and other similar surfaces by moist curing with forms in place for full curing period or until forms are removed. If forms are removed, continue curing by methods specified above, as applicable. 
4.  Curing Unformed Surfaces. Initially cure unformed surfaces, such as slabs, floor topping, and other flat surfaces by moist curing. 
5.  [ Final. ] Final cure unformed surfaces, unless otherwise specified, by methods specified above, as applicable. 
8.1180. - Form Removal. 
    In all cases, time and sequence of concrete form removal is at Contractor discretion. Formwork supporting weight of concrete such as beams and slabs must remain in place at least fourteen (14) days and until concrete has attained minimum design twenty-eight-day compressive strength. Formwork not supporting weight of concrete such as sides of beams, walls and columns, may be removed no sooner than forty-eight (48) hours after placement of concrete or when concrete is sufficiently hard as not to be damaged by form removal operations. 
8.1181. - Re-use of Forms. 
1.  Clean and repair surfaces of forms to be re-used in the work. Split, frayed, delaminated or otherwise damaged form facing material will not be acceptable. Apply new form coating compound material to concrete contact form surfaces as specified for new formwork. 
2.  When forms are extended for successive concrete placement, thoroughly clean surfaces, remove fins and laitance, and tighten forms to close joints. Align and secure joints to avoid offsets. Do not use "patched" forms for exposed concrete surfaces, except as acceptable to City Engineer. 
8.1190. - Concrete Surface Repairs. 
1.  Patching Defective Areas. Repair and patch defective areas with cement mortar immediately after removal of forms, but only when acceptable to Engineer. 
a.  Cut out honeycomb, rock pockets, voids over one-half-inch diameter, and holes left by tie rods and bolts, down to solid concrete but, in no case to a depth of less than one (1) inch. Make edges of cuts perpendicular to the concrete surface. Before placing cement mortar, thoroughly clean, dampen with water and brush-coat the area to be patched with neat cement grout. Proprietary patching compounds may be used when acceptable to Engineer. 
2.  Exposed-to-view Surfaces. blend white Portland cement and standard Portland cement so that, when dry, patching mortar will match color of surrounding surface. Provide test areas at inconspicuous location to verify mixture and color match before proceeding with patching. Compact mortar in place and strike-off slightly higher than surrounding surface. 
3.  Repair of Formed Surfaces. Remove and replace concrete having detective surfaces if detects cannot be repaired to satisfaction of Engineer. Surface defects, as such, include color and texture irregularities, cracks, spills, air bubbles, honeycomb, nine (9) ties rods and bolts; fins and rock pockets and holes left by other projections on surface; and stains and other discolorations that cannot be removed by cleaning. 
4.  Repair concealed formed surfaces, where possible, that contain defects that adversely affect the durability of the concrete. If defects cannot be repaired, remove and replace the concrete. 
5.  Repair of Unformed Surfaces. Test unformed surfaces, such as monolithic slabs, for smoothness and to verify surface plane to tolerances specified for each surface and finish. Correct low and high areas as herein specified. Test unformed surfaces sloped to drain for trueness of slope, in addition to smoothness, using a template having required slope. 
6.  Repair finished unformed surfaces that contain defects which adversely affect durability of concrete. Surface defects, as such, include crazing, cracks in excess of 0.01 inch wide or which penetrate to reinforcement or completely through non-reinforced sections regardless of width, spilling, pop-outs, honeycomb, rock pockets, and other objectionable conditions. 
7.  Correct high areas in unformed surfaces by grinding, after concrete has cured at least fourteen (14) days. 
8.  Correct low areas in unformed surfaces during, or immediately after completion of surface finishing operation by cutting out low areas and replacing with fresh concrete. Finish repaired areas to blend into adjacent concrete. Proprietary patching compounds may be used when acceptable to the Engineer. 
9.  Repair defective areas, except random cracks and single holes not exceeding one-inch diameter, by cutting out and replacing with fresh concrete. Remove defective areas to sounds concrete with clean, square cuts and expose reinforcing steel with at least three-quarter-inch clearance all around. Dampen concrete surfaces in contact with patching concrete, and brush with a neat cement grout coating or concrete bonding agent. Place patching concrete before grout takes its initial set. Mix patching concrete of same materials to provide concrete of the same type or class as original concrete. Place, compact and finish to blend with adjacent finished concrete. Cure in the same manner as adjacent concrete. 
10.  Repair isolated random cracks and single holes not over one (1) inch in diameter by dry-pack method. Groove top of cracks and cut-out holes to sounds concrete and clean of dust, dirt and loose particles. Dampen cleaned concrete surfaces and brush with neat cement grout coating. Place dry-pack before cement grout takes its initial set. Mix dry-pack, consisting of one (1) part Portland cement to two and one-half (21/2) parts fine aggregate passing a No. 16 mesh sieve, using only enough water as required for handling and placing. Compact dry pack mixture in place and finish to mat adjacent concrete. Keep patched areas continuously moist for not less than seventy-two (72) hours. 
11.  Repair methods not specified above may be used, subject to acceptance of Engineer. Agreement by the City Engineer to permit repair or patching of concrete does not waive the City Engineer's authority to require complete removal and replacement of defective concrete pours should the patch not prove satisfactory to the City Engineer, due either to deficiency in strength, function or appearance. 
Chapter IX - TREE PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Dec. 12, 2016(1), §§ 1, 2(Exh. A), repealed the former Ch. IX., §§ 9.100-9.103, 9.200, 9.300-9.307, 9.400-9.408, App. A-F, and enacted a new Ch. IX as set out herein. The former Ch. IX pertained to tree preservation standards and derived from the publication of this Land Development Code and an ordinance adopted Nov. 14, 2016(4), §§ 1, 2. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL INFORMATION 

9.100. - Findings. 
    The Mayor and City Council of the City hereby finds that the protection and preservation of trees, the planting of new trees and other landscape material as part of the land development process is a public purpose and provides for the public health and general welfare. This Ordinance is intended to further the City's policy that all development sites where trees are most commonly removed will achieve upon project completion, a uniform standard related to preserved tree coverage, planted tree coverage and buffers. 
    A healthy urban forest will increase the fiscal and psychological value of property, reduce the urban heat island effect and contribute to the community's aesthetic quality. These benefits are crucial to the long-term health and welfare of Woodstock's citizens, workers, and visitors. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.101. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Ordinance is to firmly establish the value of trees to the community and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public by recognizing the standards within this article. Tree canopy preservation and tree replacement will be promoted as an integral part of the land development and construction process in the City. Specific benefits to our citizens attributed to trees include: 
1.  Trees facilitate a harmonious community and help to conserve natural resources as well as provide wildlife habitats. 
2.  Trees provide a more attractive place to live and enhance the aesthetic character of the community. 
3.  Trees mitigate harmful vehicle emissions by reducing carbon dioxide levels. 
4.  Trees are recognized for their importance in the production of oxygen, shading and cooling, noise and wind reduction, prevention of soil erosion, dust filtration and fostering improved air quality. 
5.  Trees contribute to the economic value of real property. 
6.  Trees help reduce the glare of motor vehicle lights, and enhance the appearance of open automobile parking areas and lands used for commercial, public/institutional, office, industrial, and residential purposes. 
7.  Trees can enhance the natural functions of streams and related buffers. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.102. - Applicability. 
    The regulations included in this Ordinance shall apply to all properties located within the City unless otherwise noted in this chapter. Please note: Based on proposed development patterns submitted by applicants within Form Based Code (FBC) designated areas of the City, staff shall have sole discretion over whether Section 18.410 or this chapter will apply. 
1.  Single-Family Residential Outside of LOP. 
a.  The removal of five (5) or fewer trees, other than specimen trees, is allowed with a permit (no fee associated with this permit) on any Residential Lot within a single calendar year. 
b.  Trees under three (3) inch caliper that were not planted to meet the minimum one hundred (100) inches per acre can be removed without a permit. 
c.  Exemptions will be allowed to the five (5) tree per year limit by City staff if the property owner must remove trees in order to build a newly permitted structure, or to build an addition to or to make improvements to an existing structure, or to improve the health of other trees in the landscape. 
d.  With regard to private property owners and/or residential lots not incidental to development, a tree removal permit is required for specimen tree removal. A permit will be granted if the specimen tree is clearly dead, dying, diseased with no chance for recovery or presenting imminent danger to life, limb or property. If City staff cannot adequately assess the condition of the tree, then the property owner shall be required to provide a letter stating such from a certified arborist. (See Section 9.302 [1. and 2.].) 
e.  Dead standing trees that are a danger to human life or property must be removed by the property owner after receiving notice from the City code enforcement division. Dead tree determinations to be made by a certified arborist or designated City staff who have been successfully trained in basic tree evaluation. 
2.  Non Single-Family Residential Outside of LOP: 
a.  Any new construction, renovation, or alteration of a building that results in an expansion or alteration of the total square footage of the building footprint shall invoke the requirements contained in Section 9.200. The Tree Ordinance shall be enforced by the City, designated agent, and/or the municipal court of the City. 
b.  If specimen tree removal is requested, refer to the standards set forth in Section 9.302. 
c.  Trees under three (3) inch caliper that were not required by ordinance or conditions of zoning can be removed without a permit. 
d.  Trees three (3) inch caliper and greater that do not meet the specimen tree criteria require a tree removal permit. City staff shall determine whether portions of the Tree Ordinance apply on a case by case basis. 
e.  Dead standing trees that are a danger to human life or property must be removed by the property owner after receiving notice from the City Code enforcement division. Dead tree determinations to be made by a certified arborist or designated City staff who have been successfully trained in basic tree evaluation. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A); Ord. No. 5202-B-2018, § 1, 7-9-2018) 
9.103. - Definitions. 
    All words in these standards have their customary dictionary definition except as specifically defined herein. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. 
    Arborist: The City's designee responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter. 
    Basal Area: A forestry industry standard used to describe the cross-sectional area of a tree expressed in square inches, of a tree measured at four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground or diameter at breast height (DBH). 
    Berm: A mound of soil, either natural or man-made, used to screen one (1) site or property from the view of another. 
    Boundary Tree: Boundary tree means a tree fifteen (15) inches DBH or larger located on any part of a property adjacent to a permitting property with any portion of the root plate extending into the permitting property. (See root plate.) Boundary trees must be in good health as determined from the vantage point of the property to be developed (pre-construction digital photographs required). This provision shall not authorize the trespass on private property abutting the site. 
    The applicant shall notify the adjoining property owner of a boundary tree in writing that the root plate of a boundary tree is to be disturbed and if the tree should thereafter be damaged or die due to construction impacts, it will be handled as a civil matter between the applicant and the boundary tree owner. The applicant must provide a copy of any letter and the certificates of mailing prior to permit issuance. 
    Buffer: A naturally existing area, a landscaped area or a combination of both designated for screening or around the perimeter of a parcel provided to soften the view of two (2) adjacent lots or parcels from one another. (See Chapter XI for more detailed definitions related to specific uses and See Appendix B for typical buffer details.) 
    Buildable Area: Portion of a parcel excluding the required yards, easements, planting areas, environmental (streams, wetlands) and areas within the future right-of-way. 
    Caliper (or Cal.): American Association of Nurseryman standard for trunk measurement of nursery stock. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken six (6) inches above the ground for up to and including four (4) inch caliper size, and twelve (12) inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
    Critical Root Zone (CRZ): The minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance for survival. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the CRZ of any given tree on the applicant's property shall be represented by a concentric circle with a radius equal to twelve (12) times the diameter of the tree trunk. No inches will be given if these minimum criteria are not met. (See Section 9.300.) 
    Deciduous Tree: A tree which sheds leaves annually. 
    Density Factor: A unit of measure used to prescribe the calculated tree coverage on a site. The site density factor for areas within the corporate limits of the City is one hundred (100) inches per acre. Please note: one hundred (100) year floodplain, wetlands and fifty (50) foot and twenty-five (25) foot stream buffers shall be excluded from the acreage calculation but will remain protected and undisturbed on site during construction. (See Section 9.300.) 
    Diameter at Breast Height (DBH): Means the standard measure of a tree size for those trees existing on a site that have a caliper of at least two (2) inches at a height of four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground. If a tree has two (2) or more trunks below four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground, refer to Section 9.300. 
    Genus Cap: A term used to describe a limit determined by this Ordinance in which the quantity of a particular genus cannot exceed thirty (30) percent of the total number of replacement trees on a site. This limit is put in place to prevent the creation of a monoculture. 
    House Location Plan (HLP): Site plan required by builder's representative for records/documentation at the time an individual home permit is applied for/purchased. 
    Land Disturbance Permit (LDP): A permit necessary to begin land-disturbing activity. 
    Landscape Plan: A scaled plan that clearly delineates buildings, vehicular use areas, and displays and describes all proposed planting as required per zoning conditions and/or the Tree Ordinance. 
    Lot: A measured parcel of land having fixed boundaries and designated on a plot or survey. 
    Monoculture: A plant culture (i.e. vegetation) that results from growing only one (1) type of plant which creates the opposite condition of biodiversity and can sometimes be responsible for the spread of plant diseases. 
    Opaque Buffer: A landscaped area planted in such a manner as to be impenetrable to view, or so obscuring to view that features, buildings, structures and uses become visually indistinguishable. 
    Open Space: Unoccupied portion of a lot or building site that is open to the sky and may contain, outdoor structures, or recreational facilities as it relates to Chapter IX. 
    Overstory Tree: Means those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than forty (40) feet. 
    Parking Lot Trees: Trees required pursuant to Section 9.200 herein. 
    Pervious Area: Area of a parcel or lot left over after impervious areas (see Chapter II definitions) are subtracted. 
    Replacement Planting: The planting of trees on a site that before development had more trees, and after development shall have fewer trees per acre. (Please note: All properties applying for an LDP must meet the minimum one hundred (100) inches per acre whether or not a site had trees prior to development). 
    Replacement Tree: A new tree planted on a site outside of a tree protection area that is used to meet the required one hundred (100) inches per acre. 
    Residential Lot: A lot shown on a subdivision plat as recorded in the records of Cherokee County. 
    Root Barrier: For the purpose of this Ordinance, a mechanical guide (typically hard plastic) that redirects root down and away from sidewalk driveway or other built structures. 
    Root Plate: The area of the root zone comprised of pedestal roots, the zone of rapid taper and roots under compression, the directional radius of which based upon the tree trunk diameter at four and one-half (4.5) feet above the ground. The root plate will typically be represented by a concentric circle centering on the trees trunk with a radius equal in feet to one-half (0.5) times the number of inches of the trunk diameter. (Failure of the tree could result if roots in this area are damaged or destroyed. Example: The root plate radius of a twenty (20) inch diameter tree is ten (10) feet.) 
    Screening: Solid fencing, walls, berms, or dense vegetation used to conceal a lot or part thereof from view. 
    Sidewalk Landscape Zone: The portion of a sidewalk area, adjacent to the street curb and reserved for the placement of trees, groundcover, and street furniture including utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, traffic control boxes, tree grates, newspaper boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. Note: The following may cross in a perpendicular manner but shall not be located within the Sidewalk Landscape Zone: storm drain lines, sanitary sewer lines, water lines, electrical lines and any other utilities not specifically mentioned (see Appendix B). 
1.  If existing underground utilities are present, the director may allow alternative proposals on a case by case basis. 
2.  In the event that existing overhead power lines prohibit the planting of required overstory trees, an appropriate understory tree species may be selected and approved for required inches according to accepted horticultural standards and as approved by the impacted utility (see Appendix A). 
    Specimen Tree: Any tree as defined by Section 9.302. 
    Tree: Any living, self-supporting woody or fibrous plant which normally obtains a diameter breast height (DBH) of at least three (3) inches and typically has one (1) main stem or trunk and many branches and shall be on the approved City street tree list (see Appendix A). 
    Tree Preservation Trust Fund: Fund established to purchase, install, and maintain trees throughout the City's public areas, including parks, green spaces, right-of-way, and government building sites (see Section 9.401). 
    Tree Save Area: Means a protected area designated for the purpose of meeting the one hundred (100) inches per acre requirements, saving natural trees and/or preserving natural s. 
    Tree Protection Fencing: A barrier installed at and around the perimeter of a tree protection area to prevent intrusion of construction-related activities in which fencing is a minimum of four (4) feet in height and is at the CRZ. 
    Understory Tree: A tree that, under normal forest conditions, may grow to maturity beneath overstory trees and will generally reach a mature height of at least ten (10) feet but less than forty (40) feet (see Appendix A). 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE II. - REQUIREMENTS 

9.200. - General Plan Requirements. 
    An appropriately-scaled tree protection plan and/or tree replacement plan shall be submitted and approved as part of the pre-development site plans as required by the provisions of this Ordinance. No plans shall be accepted by City staff unless tree protection and/or tree replacement plans are included in the initial submittal. All commercial parcels and residential lots under development shall comply with street tree and parking lot tree requirements. Street tree requirements are subject to the zoning categories identified within the City of Woodstock Zoning Ordinance (see Chapter VII). 
1.  The Sidewalk Landscape Zone in the Downtown District and any areas with trees between the sidewalk and back of curb shall be designed so that required street trees are planted in a suitable soil volume. Planting environment shall provide an average soil depth greater than or equal to three (3) feet. Each street tree shall have a minimum area suitable for root growth of two hundred (200) square feet provided. 
a.  In addition to or in conjunction with the tree protection areas, each single-family residential lot seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet or greater shall contain a minimum of two (2) two (2) inch caliper overstory trees, at least one (1) of which must be located in the front yard (for the purpose of this Ordinance, the seven (7) foot landscape zone may be considered part of the front yard where applicable). Root barrier, along with lateral pipe locations, shall be shown on HLP (see Section 9.103). 
2.  In addition to or in conjunction with the tree protection areas, each single-family residential lot less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet shall contain a minimum of two (2) two-inch caliper trees (one (1) overstory and one (1) understory), at least one (1) of which must be located in the front yard. (For the purpose of this Ordinance, the seven (7) foot landscape zone may be considered part of the front yard where applicable and in the Downtown District). Root barrier, along with lateral pipe locations, shall be shown on HLP (see Section 9.103). 
3.  Requests for a reduction of landscape zone from seven (7) feet shall only be considered under the following circumstance: 
Developer shall submit a design and implementation protocol incorporating a series of subsurface structural cells for approval by City staff (see Appendix D). 
b.  Parking lot trees shall be provided in landscape islands in parking areas proposing ten (10) or more spaces parking areas with fewer than ten (10) spaces and multi-level parking decks are exempt. 
c.  A sufficient number of three (3) inch caliper (minimum) trees must be planted in interior portions of parking lots so that no parking space is more than fifty (50) feet from a parking lot tree. Show a fifty (50) foot radius dashed circle for each parking lot tree on tree replacement plan to verify graphically. Up to twenty (20) percent of parking lot trees may be planted along the perimeter of the parking lot. Landscaped islands shall terminate each row of parking and all landscaped islands planted with trees shall provide a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet per tree. Light poles are not permitted in parking lot islands, peninsulas and medians unless they are a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any planted tree (see Appendix C). 
d.  The tree replacement plan shall be designed so that all parking lot trees are planted in a suitable soil volume. Planting environment shall provide an average soil depth greater than or equal to three (3) feet. Each parking lot tree shall have a minimum area suitable for root growth of two hundred (200) square feet, provided, however if this minimum square footage is not provided, subsurface soil cells shall be incorporated into the tree replacement plan. All applicable details to show an industry standard subsurface soil cell design shall be attached as part of the tree replacement plan (see Appendix D). 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE III. - TREE REPLACEMENT AND PROTECTION 

9.300. - Tree Density Requirements. 
    The applicant shall provide a development plan demonstrating both responsible canopy preservation (excluding any 50-foot and 25-foot stream buffers) and tree replacement inches on sites submitted for development. Any trees saved (with undisturbed CRZs) or replaced in the 75-foot impervious zone will receive appropriate inches. Please note: All properties applying for an LDP must meet the minimum one hundred (100) inches per acre whether or not a site had trees prior to development. 
    All trees designated for replacement shall be on an inch-for-inch basis. The density of one hundred (100) inches per acre may be achieved as follows: 
1.  Counting existing trees (inches measured at DBH) to be preserved with no impact to CRZ. 
2.  Planting new trees (minimum two (2) inch caliper) for lots that do not have the required one hundred (100) inches per acre. 
Formula: 
Acreage x 100 inches = required inches per acre 
Example: 3.2 acres x 100 inches = 320 inches required 
The minimum required inches per acre shall be calculated and established pursuant to the formula as shown above and calculations shall be in a prominent location on the tree preservation and replacement plan. All applicable sites brought in for land development must maintain a minimum of one hundred (100) inches per acre. Street trees and/or parking lot trees planted after the minimum required inches per acre for the site has been satisfied can be counted toward specimen tree recompense. 
3.  For planted evergreen trees, the following conversions shall apply: 
Evergreen Tree Inches: Evergreen Tree Sold by Height: 2 inches 6 feet minimum 3 inches 8 feet minimum 4 inches 12 feet minimum 5 inches 16 feet minimum 6 inches 18 feet minimum  
4.  For multi-trunk trees (see formula in Appendix B): 
5.  Tree form shrubs shall not be given credit. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.301. - Preservation of Existing Trees. 
    An emphasis of this Ordinance is the preservation of as many existing trees as possible. Thus, inch for inch credit will be given for preserving existing trees. No credit will be allowed for shrubs or for trees with impact to their CRZ. Please note: Administrative variances for encroachment into CRZ shall not be considered. 
1.  All trees to be counted toward meeting the required one hundred (100) inches per acre must be inventoried. Existing tree inventory information (caliper at DBH and genus) must be shown on the tree protection plan and must be provided by an ISA certified arborist, forester, surveyor or landscape architect along with a statement that the provider conducted the inventory in the field. If the plan is unclear or does not match current GIS information, a tree survey shall be required. Please note: Specimen trees must have a surveyed location. 
2.  Tree protection fencing is required to be placed at the CRZ for all trees to be saved and locations shall be clearly delineated on the tree protection plan. All tree protection fencing shall be installed prior to and maintained throughout the land disturbing and construction process, and should not be removed until final landscaping is installed, inspected and final approval granted by the City. 
3.  Plot-sample surveys may be used to determine tree densities for large forested areas with a minimum size of five (5) acres or greater that is to be preserved. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a plot sample is defined as an area measuring fifty (50) feet by fifty (50) feet, for a minimum size of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. Sampling areas must be located within the limits of a tree protection area. The sample must be taken in a portion of the site that is representative of its cover-type. The tree protection plan must delineate all ground cover-types and provide a general description of the types of trees present within the tree protection area (i.e., hardwoods, pine/hardwood mix, etc.). Other sampling and/or inventory methods must be approved by the City's designated representative. 
4.  No credit inches will be given for trees preserved in mandatory stream buffers as required by Chapter XVII, Stream Buffer Protection. The area (measured in acres) of the undisturbed stream buffers shall be excluded from the total site acreage when calculating required inches per acre. Any trees saved (with undisturbed CRZs) or replaced in the seventy-five (75) foot impervious setback zone will receive appropriate inches. 
5.  To aid preservation efforts, land owners shall have the option of moving existing trees to prevent their damage or destruction by development activities. To receive credit for transplanted trees, the following standards must be adhered to: 
a.  Trees must be less than ten (10) inches caliper measured six (6) inches above grade; 
b.  Trees must remain within the planting areas of the parcel; 
c.  Trees shall not be moved to or from stream buffers or wetlands. 
6.  Tree protection areas for subdivisions should be located in common areas, or in buffers required to be undisturbed by zoning or other regulations, or within building setbacks. If tree protection areas must be located on individual lots, the lots must be of sufficient size to reasonably expect the trees to be preserved at the completion of the building process. Please note: Staff shall have sole discretion over whether the lot is of sufficient size. 
7.  With regard to subdivision developments, the City shall require that improvements be located so as to result in minimal disturbance to the natural topography of the lots and the protection of a maximum number of mature trees on the lot. Damage to mature trees located within setback and required yard areas be minimized as much as possible under the particular circumstances, as determined by City staff. 
8.  Every lot in a subdivision shall have trees, either preserved or planted for which an LDP is obtained after the adoption of this Ordinance. These trees can be counted as part of the required one hundred (100) inches per acre for the development. All planted trees must be a minimum of two (2) inch caliper and must be shown on the required house location plan (HLP). This requirement shall apply to the developer or homebuilder, whoever is the responsible party at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the individual lot. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.302. - Preservation, Replacement and Removal of Specimen Trees. 
    A specimen tree is any tree which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to its size, type and condition. The following criteria are used by the City to identify specimen trees. Both the size and condition criteria must be met for a tree to qualify. 
1.  Minimum Size Criteria: 
a.  Twenty-four (24) inch caliper at DBH-Oak, Beech, Ash, Blackgum, Sycamore, Hickory, Maple (does not include Silver Maple), Pecan, Walnut, Magnolia (does not include Bigleaf Magnolia), Persimmon, Sourwood, Cedar, Cypress or Redwood. 
b.  Thirty (30) inch caliper at DBH-Tulip Poplar, Sweet Gum, River Birch, Silver Maple or Pine. 
c.  Ten (10) inch caliper at DBH-American Holly, Dogwood, Redbud or other genus as determined by the City arborist such as Bigleaf Magnolia. 
2.  Condition Criteria: 
a.  Life expectancy greater than fifteen (15) years. 
b.  Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or significant structural deficiencies. 
c.  No more than two (2) major and several minor dead limbs (excluding pine for minor limbs). 
d.  A radial trunk dieback of no more than twenty (20) percent or a canopy dieback of no more than thirty (30) percent. 
3.  Small trees can be classified as specimen if of a rare or unusual species, of exceptional quality, or socio-historical significance. Small trees may also qualify as specimen if used in a landscape as a focal point of the design. In order to claim this credit, the applicant must submit a letter from a certified arborist stating that the tree(s) meet these qualifications. 
4.  An arborist report for each specimen tree that is shown to be impacted by a proposed development requiring an LDP must be submitted to the City to determine whether that tree meets the condition criteria for specimen status. The report must be prepared and signed by a certified arborist or a registered forester. The report must contain the following information. 
a.  Site plan showing an accurate surveyed location of the tree. 
b.  Identification/verification of the tree's size, genus and species. 
c.  Description of the surrounding site conditions. 
d.  Detailed description of the tree's condition. 
e.  Digital photographs to illustrate any defects which would disqualify the tree from specimen status. 
5.  The final determination of specimen tree status will be made by City staff after reviewing the report. 
a.  If a specimen tree is to be removed, a plan or written documentation indicating the reason for removal must be submitted to the City. 
b.  The removal of any specimen tree impacted by a proposed development must be mitigated by replacing the removed specimen tree with minimum four (4) inch caliper trees of comparable species on an inch-for-inch replacement basis. 
Example: Twenty-four (24) inch Oak would require replanting six (6) four (4) inch caliper trees [24 / 4 = 6]. These recompense trees are in addition to the minimum one hundred (100) inches per acre for a particular site. 
c.  Any person who removes a specimen tree in violation of this Ordinance shall be assessed a fine in accordance with Section 9.401. In regard to specimen trees removed after being designated for preservation on an approved plan, the removed tree must also be replaced on an inch-for-inch basis with tree species with potential for comparable size and quality, regardless of the one hundred (100) inches per acre requirement. If a tree is removed without approval and there is no evidence of its condition, size alone will be the determining factor for replacement. In regard to specimen trees removed on a residential lot that is not currently being developed, the fine shall be paid as referenced, however there shall be no requirement for replacement of the specimen tree. 
6.  In order to encourage the preservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of new development projects, the following incentive is offered: 
Preserved specimen trees will receive one and one-half (1.5) x inches DBH (thirty (30) inch Oak x one and one-half (1.5) = forty-five (45) inches). 
Under no circumstance will this incentive allow the requirements of the Tree Preservation Ordinance to be reduced administratively. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.303. - Tree Protection Standards. 
    Allowing enough space for a tree's root system is a critical factor in tree protection throughout the development process. Disturbance within this critical root zone (CRZ) can directly affect a tree's chances for survival. In order to protect trees, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  The CRZ for each tree or group of trees shall be represented on the plan by a circle the size of the CRZ (see definition Critical Root Zone). 
2.  Site layout should be designed to accommodate tree protection areas. 
3.  Construction activities shall be arranged to prevent encroachment into tree protection areas. 
4.  No disturbance whatsoever shall occur within tree protection areas without prior written approval by the City. Disturbance permitted with approval from the City shall be limited to general maintenance (i.e., removal of dead trees and/or cleaning of underbrush by hand). Use of machinery shall not be allowed within the tree protection area. 
5.  Active protective tree fencing shall be installed along the outer edge of and completely surrounding the CRZs of all specimen trees or stands of trees designated for preservation prior to land disturbance. 
6.  Tree protection fencing shall be minimum four (4) feet high and made of orange laminated plastic netting with wooden posts and rail fencing or other equivalent material as approved by the City. 
7.  All protection zones should include signage in English and Spanish that identifies the areas as tree protection and preservation zones and include the name and phone number of the developer or designated agent. 
8.  All tree save fencing must be installed prior to any clearing, grubbing, or grading and must be maintained in functioning condition throughout all phases of development and construction. 
9.  Once tree protection areas are established and approved, any changes are subject to review and approval by the City. 
10.  Developer shall notify any adjacent property owner a minimum of fourteen (14) days prior to construction dates (copy of notification to be provided to City for permit file) if visual assessment identifies boundary tree root plates are potentially within the proposed limits of disturbance (see Section 9.103 definitions). Any and all subsequent tree matters shall be a civil matter between the property owner and the developer. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.304. - Tree Replacement Standards. 
1.  The replacement of trees shall occur within the required yards, buffers, open space, parking lots, and landscape areas, as specified in the Zoning Ordinance and Tree Preservation and Replacement Ordinance. The following standards for replacement will be used to evaluate proposed tree planting plans: 
a.  Existing tree coverage, size, and type. 
b.  Number of trees to be removed from the lot or parcel. 
c.  Area to be covered with structures, parking, and driveways. 
d.  Grading plan and drainage requirements. 
e.  Character of the site and its environs. 
2.  Replacement trees shall be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site, contribute to the diversity of the urban forest, and add to the overall aesthetic quality of the City. 
3.  The spacing of replacement trees must be compatible with spatial site limitations with responsible consideration towards species sizes when mature. Typical spacing for overstory/street trees is thirty (30) feet on center, with no overstory tree being planted less than twenty-five (25) feet on center from any other tree. Spacing of understory trees and/or trees in parking lots shall be subject to approval of the City and within accepted horticultural standards. 
4.  In the event that existing overhead power lines prohibit the planting of required overstory trees, an appropriate understory tree species may be selected and approved for required inches according to accepted horticultural standards and as approved by the impacted utility (see Appendix A). 
5.  Trees selected for planting may be a species from the recommended tree species lists shown in the appendices. Use of a species not shown on these lists is subject to approval of the City, according to accepted horticultural standards (see Appendix A). 
6.  Replacement trees shall be a minimum two (2) inch caliper measured six (6) inches above grade, and be protected by a twelve (12) month guaranteed maintenance surety (one hundred ten (110) percent of installed amount) beginning at the date of planting. 
7.  Planting of replacement trees within utility, storm drainage, or sanitary sewer easements is not acceptable and no credit will be allowed toward the required inches per acre. City staff shall determine whether or not the applicant will be required to install root barriers to prevent future conflicts for trees planted directly adjacent to proposed easements or utility locations. 
8.  Trees and plants selected for planting must meet the minimum requirements as provided in the "American Standard for Nursery Stock" (ANSI Standards latest edition). 
9.  Tree planting may be delayed up to six (6) months in the case of unfavorable climate conditions (drought, flood, extreme heat or cold). Property owners must provide the City with a performance bond or cash escrow that identifies a target date for when the required numbers, sizes, and species of trees will be planted to meet the requirements of this Ordinance. 
10.  Each development site (parcel) should contain trees of sufficient number, size, and type to achieve the minimum required one hundred (100) inches per acre, which is determined according to the size of the parcel and is intended to be consistent across uses and underlying zoning categories. Total replacement units should be gathered by using as diverse a palette of species of trees as possible. However, a minimum of sixty (60) percent of the total replacement units required for any parcel must be achieved in the form of overstory trees. When fewer than ten (10) trees are shown to be planted on a project, one (1) species may be specified. When ten (10) to fifty (50) trees are shown, a minimum of three (3) species of trees are required. When more than fifty (50) trees are shown, a minimum of five (5) species of trees are required. 
11.  When ten (10) or more trees are to be planted, no single genus shall represent more than thirty (30) percent of the required inches per acre. 
12.  Buffer planting standards are as follows: 
    An opaque buffer is a designated area along a property line that is required to be planted for the purpose of screening. Buffers may be required as a condition of zoning or in areas where incompatible land uses exist (i.e., commercial adjacent to residential). 
    The opaque buffer shall consist of evergreen plant materials that must form an eighty (80) percent visual barrier within two (2) years and a one hundred (100) percent visual barrier within five (5) years. Trees must be minimum six (6) feet height at installation, and shrubs must be minimum twenty-four (24) inch height at installation. 
a.  Existing buffer to remain undisturbed: Sparsely vegetated or previously disturbed portions of this undisturbed, existing buffer must be replanted to comply with the definition above. 
b.  Buffer width twenty (20) feet or less: This buffer shall consist of a minimum of one (1) row of evergreen trees and one (1) row of evergreen shrubs (see Appendix B). 
c.  Buffer width twenty-one (21) to thirty-five (35) feet: This buffer shall consist of a minimum of two (2) rows of evergreen trees and one (1) row of evergreen shrubs (see Appendix B). 
d.  Buffer width greater than thirty-five (35) feet: This buffer design shall be subject to approval by the City. 
    Evergreen trees planted within buffer areas may be counted for inch credit toward the minimum. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.305. - Acts of Nature. 
    In the case of an act of nature, be it drought, flood, tornado, lightening, hurricane, wind, insects, snow, ice, rain, or hail, that destroys a tree after the twelve (12) month performance bond or cash escrow has expired, the owner(s) of an affected parcel are excused from replacing those trees as required by the procedure established by this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.306. - Tree Removal. 
    Tree removal should be considered a secondary option for meeting the requirements of this Ordinance, and should be pursued only if all avenues to preservation have been exhausted. 
1.  The tree is located in the buildable area or street right-of-way of a parcel or lot on which improvement is to be made and the tree unreasonably restricts the permitted use of the property. 
2.  The tree is diseased, injured beyond restoration, in danger of falling, or interferes with utility services. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.307. - Tree Species. 
    A diversity of tree species facilitates the long-term health of the urban forest. Lists of tree species deemed acceptable by the City for use in meeting the requirements of this Ordinance are found in Appendix A. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPLEMENTATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

9.400. - Public Trees. 
    No person shall remove, destroy, break, cut, or deface any tree or shrub growing in any public right-of-way, easement or city park under any circumstances. No person shall directly or indirectly place stone or cement or similar substances about any tree growing in the public right-of-way which impedes the entrance of water and air to the roots of the tree. No person shall attach or place any rope, wire, sign poster, handbill or any other thing on any tree or shrub growing in any public right-of-way or city park. In the case of erection, demolition, or repair of any structure, the developer/owner shall implement best management practices per accepted industry standards around all nearby trees in a public right-of-way to prevent harm or injury. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.401. - Tree Preservation Trust Fund. 
    This Ordinance hereby establishes the Woodstock Tree Preservation Trust Fund. The fund will be used exclusively to purchase, install, and maintain trees throughout the City's public areas, including parks, green spaces, right-of-way, and government building sites and, upon resolution of the City Council, to improve the City's parks and/or green spaces as specified by the council in such resolution. 
1.  Occasionally a project site does not have the capacity or will not bear the required one hundred (100) inch per acre of trees. If a property owner or developer cannot meet the minimum site density requirement for tree replacement and/or specimen tree recompense, a mitigation fee for each tree required by this Ordinance but not planted will be paid to the tree preservation fund or, upon resolution of the Council, the owner or developer may be allowed to make improvements to the City's parks and/or green spaces as specified by the council in such resolution. A schedule of mitigation fees is presented below: 
Replacement Mitigation Fee Non-recompense $150.00 per inch Recompense $175.00 per inch  
2.  A fine for each protected tree or specimen tree removed without a permit issued by the City will be paid to the tree preservation fund. Fine amounts will be based on the fee schedule shown above. 
Article III.-Section 10.200: 
Any person or entity violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished for each offense by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. At the discretion of the appropriate court, a violator of this code may be given a reasonable length of time to rectify or correct the violation. 
• DBH measurement shall be rounded to the nearest whole number 
• Money collected from mitigation fees and fines under this Ordinance shall be deposited into the tree preservation trust fund. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.402. - Easements. 
    The City is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the owners of private property located within the City for the purpose of acquiring easements to plant trees. Private property owners shall acquire ownership of trees after planting provided agreement to maintain the trees is reached and the City is absolved of any liability attributable to the planting or presence of the trees. No agreement may be longer than two (2) years and all shall limit the City's interest to an area sufficient to allow planting of trees. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.403. - Inspection. 
1.  Every development within the City shall be required to undergo landscape inspection by the City's designated agent prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The inspection will determine whether the tree preservation or replacement plan has been implemented as required by this Ordinance. At the time of inspection, the City shall collect an inspection fee. This fee will be determined by the Mayor and City Council and used to cover the cost of labor and materials for performing tree and/or landscape inspections. 
2.  Once completed, a written report will be prepared outlining the findings of the inspection and transmitted to the property owner or developer. If the inspection shows that tree planting has been implemented according to plan, and all other departments have signed off on final inspections, a certificate of occupancy will be issued. If the inspection reveals deficiencies between the approved tree protection and replacement plan and the condition of the development site, the property owner or developer will be notified of the nature and extent of the problems uncovered during inspection. Upon issuance of the report, all deficiencies must be corrected before a certificate of occupancy can be issued. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.404. - Violation and Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, or society to violate the provisions of this Ordinance. The removal or destruction of each tree shall constitute a separate offense. Violation of this Ordinance shall constitute grounds for revoking or suspending any permit granted for the construction, demolition, or renovation of a structure on the lot or parcel. Upon revocation or suspension of permit, no new permit for construction, demolition, or renovation of any structure on the site shall be issued for not less than one (1) month, and a civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be levied for violating the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.405. - Appeals. 
    In the event an applicant disputes the decision of the City regarding tree removal and/or replanting, applicant may file a written appeal with the Mayor and City Council. The written appeal should detail the reasons why the decision of the City staff should be vacated. Upon receiving the written appeal, the Mayor and City Council shall hear arguments and decide whether to uphold the administrative decision, modify the administrative decision, or negate the administrative decision. The decision of the Mayor and City Council shall be final. A written copy of the findings and decision of the Mayor and City Council shall be transmitted to the applicant and City. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.406. - Validity. 
    Should any section of this provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance in whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared invalid. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.407. - Repeal of Conflicting Provision. 
    The provisions of any part of resolutions in conflict herewith are repealed. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
9.408. - Effective Date. 
    This Ordinance shall become effective upon approval by the Mayor and Council on date of adoption of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
APPENDIX A. - THE CITY OF WOODSTOCK COUNTY TREE SPECIES LIST 
The City of Woodstock tree species list is intended to support site planning and design activities for tree preservation and replacement, tree maintenance planning and decision making in general. The list is arranged alphabetically by the tree's common name with the "genus" listed first. The Latin name is also listed for more definitive species identification. 
    This list can also be found on the city's website at http://www.woodstockga.gov/DocumentCenter/View/6479 . 
Key to Symbols and Tree Species Characteristic Descriptions 
(As adapted from the Athens-Clarke County Tree Species List) 
TREE CHARACTERISTIC DESCRIPTION and ENTRY CHOICES Species Common Name Entered with genus common name first, then species, then cultivar if applicable. For some species an alternate common name is included in parentheses. Latin Name Genus, species, and variety or cultivar; always italicized or underlined. Parking Lot Canopy Tree Trees approved for planting in parking lots. 1 = trees that will project significant shade, intercept enough water, substantially filter out pollutants, and survive the conditions within a parking area to the extent they could be considered a "canopy" tree 2 = the same as 1, except these trees are ONLY appropriate for large, expanded tree islands or landscape strips, swales, or moist soil conditions with plenty of rooting space Canopy Size Category Very Small-150 square feet with a 15 foot crown diameter 
The minimum open soil surface area is 25 square feet Small-400 square feet with a 25 foot crown diameter 
The minimum open soil surface area is 100 square feet Medium-900 square feet with a 35 foot crown diameter 
The minimum open soil surface area is 225 square feet Large-1,600 square feet with a 45 foot crown diameter 
The minimum open soil surface area is 400 square feet RECOMMENDED USES Level of Use The level of use that the tree should receive. P = Plant new trees and conserve existing trees C = Conserve existing trees L = For limited planting or conservation only N = Do not plant Large Landscape Areas 
Road Frontages-Street 
Road Frontages-Yard 
Parking Lots 
Plazas and Downtown 
Settings 
Riparian Zones and 
Drainage Areas 
Utility Corridors Recommendations on the site situation where the tree may be planted and/or conserved; locations where the tree would adapt well. 

O = tree to avoid, not suitable 
Blank = may or may not be suitable 
x = good choice 
XX = excellent choice PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS Height Class in Urban Conditions Height class (ground to tip of leader or tallest branch) of a mature tree commonly achieved in urban situations with less than optimal growing conditions. S = Small 15-25 feet M = Medium 25-40 feet L = Large 40 feet and taller Crown Class in Urban Conditions The width of the crown (at its widest point) commonly achieved in urban situations with less than optimal growing conditions. VS = Very Small (150 square feet with a 15 foot crown diameter) S = Small (400 square feet with a 25 foot crown diameter) M = Medium (900 square feet with a 35 foot crown diameter) L = Large (1,600 square feet with a 45 foot crown diameter) Mature Crown Form General shape of the tree crown (leaves and branches) when fully leafed out. Irregular Multi-Stemmed Oval (Columnar) Pyramidal Rounded Spreading Upright (Vase) Typical Range of Mature Tree Height Typical range of height of tree in feet from ground to bud at tip of leader or tallest branch under various conditions. Typical Range of Mature Crown Width Typical range of spread of branches in feet at the widest diameter across the crown under various conditions. Leaf Type Persistence and type of leaf on the tree. Deciduous trees lose their leaves in the fall. DB = Deciduous Broadleaf DC = Deciduous Conifer EB = Evergreen Broadleaf EC = Evergreen Conifer Leaf Texture Relative size and appearance of leaves. F = Fine M = Medium C = Coarse Fall Leaf Color The typical color of the tree's fall foliage. EV = Evergreen BR = Bronze or brown MA = Maroon MU = Multi-colored maroon, red, orange, yellow OR = Orange RE = Red YE = Yellow  I = Insignificant color change Flower Color For trees with showy flowers, indicates the typical flower color. B = Blue L = Purple M = Multiple colors white, pink, purple, red, or others P = Pink R = Red W = White Y = Yellow I = Insignificant flowers small with an unremarkable color Flowering Time For trees with showy flowers, the general season of blooming for the species. Wildlife Value Indicates with an "X" if the tree produces flowers (nectar) or fruits that are consumed by insects, birds, or mammals. Excessive Litter Indicates with an "X" if the tree produces large or hazardous leaves, fruit, or other litter. ENVIRONMENTAL CHARACTERISTICS AND TOLERANCES Native Tree to Metro Atlanta Area Indicates whether or not the tree is found naturally growing in the metro Atlanta area. Y = Yes N = No Growth Rate Typical rate of growth under urban conditions. S = Slow (1/2 to 1-1/2 feet/year) M = Moderate (1-1/2 to 2-1/2 feet/year) F = Fast (2-1/2 to 3+ feet/year) Average Life Span The average life span (useful service life) of the species when growing under average urban conditions. A tree is at the end of its useful service life when its risk of failure becomes unacceptable and cannot be improved or when the tree is no longer an asset due to its appearance or condition. S = Short (less than 25 years useful service life) M = Moderate (25 to 40 years useful service life) L = Large (50 years or greater useful service life) Net Effect on Air Quality The net monetary effects in cents attributable to the species on air quality; listed as a benefit (positive) or cost (negative). Includes the species net effect on ozone, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, particulate matter (PM10), and carbon monoxide. Soil Moisture The typical soil moisture conditions for the species in its native habitat. H = Hydric (wet and may be occasionally flooded for short periods) M = Mesic (moist but moderately well- to well-drained) X = Xeric (dry and very well-drained) Drought Tolerance Tolerance of the species to infrequent rain, low soil moisture, full sun, and high temperatures. Low (not tolerant to drought conditions) Moderate (tolerant to mild drought conditions, moderately tolerant to severe drought conditions) High (very tolerant to mild to severe and prolonged drought conditions) Preferred Soil pH Relative soil acidity or alkalinity preferred by the species. In many cases, a range of pH preference is given if it was available. In other cases, a general level is given. A pH of 7.0 is neutral, a pH of less than 7.0 is acidic, and a pH of greater than 7.0 is alkaline. ac = acidic (5.0 to 6.0) sl ac = slightly acidic (6.0 to 7.0) nu = neutral (7.0) sl al = sl alkaline (7.0 to 8.0) al = alkaline (8.0 to 8.5) n/a = no information available Light Requirement The amount of sunlight the species prefers or will tolerate. Trees that are typically found in the understory or are characteristic of late forest successional stages prefer shade or at least partial shade, while trees that typically form the overstory or are characteristic of early successional stages prefer full sun. FS = Full Sun PS = Partial Shade SH = Shade Construction Tolerance/Limitations The broad tolerance of the species in its home range to construction damage, and the limitations that constrain a species tolerance to damage.       Tolerance P = Poor M = Moderate G = Good       Limitations I = physical injury, wood compartmentalization and decay P = Pest complications, including chronic and acute attacks S = Soil conditions, including aeration and water availability C = Limited climatic tolerances, including native range, hardiness, and micro-climate change A = All of the limitations described above Urban Tolerant Tree Based upon other characteristics and tolerances to urban conditions; an "X" indicates the species is suitable for planting under "tough" urban conditions.  
  


  


(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
APPENDIX B. - TYPICAL PLANTING DETAILS 
Multi-trunk tree formula for inches 
Example-Triple-trunk Maple: 
Add each trunk at DBH (5" + 6.5" + 10") = 21.5" 
Convert ____ to ____ 
5 x 5 x .785 = 19.63 6.5 x 6.5 x .785 = 33.17       =_;10 x 10 x .785       =_= 78.5 = 131.3 square inches  
Convert square inches back to diameter 
131.3 / 3.14 = 41.82 
Find the square root of the diameter 
41.82 square root = 6.46 radius 
6.46 x 2 = 12.9" diameter 
12.9" = resulting inches to be used in calculation for credit for the triple trunk maple 
(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
APPENDIX C. - LIGHT POLE/PARKING LOT DETAILS 
APPENDIX D. - SUBSURFACE STRUCTURAL CELLS-SILVA CELL OR OTHER 

(Ord. of 12-12-2016(1), § 2(Exh. A)) 
Chapter X - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION 

10.100. - Definitions. 
1.  Administrative Official shall mean the person, including but not limited to, the City Manager, from whom an appeal is requested pursuant to Section 10.162 below, concerning any error in any order, requirements, development permit, decision, determination or refusal made by that person in the administration or enforcement of any provision of the Land Development Ordinance. 
2.  Commission shall mean the Planning Commission of the City. 
3.  Council shall mean the Mayor and Council of the City. 
4.  Development Process Committee (DPC) shall mean a staff group appointed at the discretion of the City Manager, composed of those staff members deemed by the City Manager as responsible for development within the City as specified in this chapter. Staff members shall also be deemed to include consultants or vendors, as well, engaged by the City of Woodstock to provide professional services. 
(Ord. of 9-25-2017(1)) 
10.101. - City Council. 
1.  Duties and Responsibilities. The Council shall have the following responsibilities: 
a.  To adopt this code and amendments thereto, including amendments to the Official Zoning Map. 
b.  To adopt the Comprehensive Plan and amendments thereto. 
c.  To enter into agreements with landowners and developers concerning the improvement and development of land. 
d.  To review and consider application for Annexations, Rezoning, Variances and Appeals for final action. 
e.  The Council may at its discretion determine additional activities for their final action. 
10.102-10.109 - Reserved. 
10.110. - Planning Commission. 
1.  Composition; term of office; compensation. 
a.  The Planning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members; one (1) appointed by the Mayor and one (1) appointed by each Councilmember from within their ward or residing within five hundred (500) linear feet of a ward boundary or residing in a platted subdivision within five hundred (500) linear feet of a ward boundary. Members shall be nominated by the respective Council member or mayor at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting and shall be approved by a majority vote of those present. A member's term shall run concurrently with the term of the individual who appointed the member. 
b.  Appointees shall be residents of the City and shall hold no other public office and shall not be employees of the City. A member's term shall run concurrently with the term of the individual who appointed the member. Members may be appointed to successive terms without limitation. 
c.  Each member shall be compensated at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting for attendance and participation in Planning Commission meetings. No member shall receive compensation if no meeting is held in a given month or if such member fails to attend a scheduled meeting. 
2.  Removal from office; vacancies. 
a.  Planning Commission members serve at the will of the City Council and can be removed at any time at the sole discretion of the City Council by majority vote or by the Councilmember that made the appointment. Any member who is removed may request a hearing before the Council and present their position to the Council should they desire. 
b.  Any vacancy, whether due to resignation or removal, shall be filled if possible within thirty (30) days for the unexpired term only, in the same manner as the original appointment. 
c.  If a member moves, no longer complying with the residency provisions of Section 10.110(1)(a), that shall constitute a resignation from the Commission, which shall be effective on the date of such residency change. 
d.  Any member who fails to attend three (3) consecutive meetings without being excused shall automatically be removed from the Commission, and a replacement member shall be nominated for Council approval by the Councilmember or the Mayor, who appointed the member who was removed. The Council may excuse, for good reason as determined in the sole discretion of the Council, any member and in such event the member shall not be automatically removed. Along with such approval for an excused absence the Council may establish a period of time for a leave of absence at its discretion or provide that the leave is until a time as determined by the Council. Additionally, the Council may appoint a temporary replacement or authorize the Council member in whose ward the excused member resides to appoint a temporary replacement to serve until such time as the excused member returns, at which time the temporary replacement shall no longer serve. 
3.  Officers; quorum and voting; procedural rules. 
a.  At its first meeting of each calendar year, the Planning Commission shall, by majority vote of the membership (excluding vacant seats), elect one (1) of its members to serve as chairperson and preside over the Commission's meetings and one (1) member to serve as vice chairperson. The individuals so designated shall serve in such capacities for a period of one (1) year, with eligibility for re-election. Vacancies in these offices shall be filled for the unexpired terms by majority vote of the Commission membership (excluding vacant seats). 
b.  A quorum for the Commission shall consist of a majority of the Commission membership (excluding vacant seats). A quorum is necessary for the Commission to take official action. All actions of the Planning Commission shall be taken by majority vote of the quorum present to pass any motion. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member. 
c.  The chairperson or acting chairperson may take part in all deliberations and discussions and may vote on official business. 
d.  The Planning Commission shall be provided an employee of the City for clerical support as necessary. 
e.  The Planning Commission shall follow the rules of procedure of the City Council with respect to public hearings and meetings and determine the time and dates of meetings, not inconsistent with the provisions of this code. 
f.  All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and all records of the Commission shall be public records. Minutes shall be kept of all Commission meetings. 
4.  Powers and duties. The Planning Commission shall have the power and duty to: 
a.  Consider requests for annexations of property into the City limits and make recommendations to the City Council regarding approval of such requests; 
b.  Consider requests for rezoning of property within the City limits and make recommendations to the City Council regarding approval of such requests; 
c.  Make recommendations to the City Council regarding proposed zoning map and zoning ordinance changes according to the procedures contained in the Land Development Ordinance; 
d.  Consider request for variances and waivers for new development from the Land Development Ordinance within the City limits in accordance with the variance and waiver provisions of this chapter and Section 10.160 and make recommendations to the City Council. 
5.  The Planning Commission may: 
a.  Make studies and recommend to the City Council plans, goals and objectives relating to the growth, development and re-development of the City, as will best promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens; 
b.  Develop and recommend to the City Council policies, ordinances, administrative procedures and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and efficient manner; and 
c.  Prepare a comprehensive land use plan, or parts thereof, for the future development of the City, for consideration and adoption by the City Council. 
6.  Staff; Finances. The Planning Commission may request from Council such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and/or may request of the Council to contract with the state Planning agency and City planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the Planning Commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the City Council. 
7.  Powers and Duties. 
a.  The Commission shall hear and consider applications for variances from the Land Development Ordinance and make a recommendation to Council. 
b.  The Commission shall consider only those applications where the strict application of the development requirements of this Ordinance would result in practical difficulties to, or undue hardship upon the owner of such property. The Commission shall ensure that the spirit of the ordinance is observed and that public safety and welfare is secured, and substantial justice is done. 
c.  The Commission shall review the variance application in accordance with Section 10.160 of this chapter and make a recommendation to the Council. 
d.  In recommending granting of a variance, the Commission may recommend attaching thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of the Land Development Ordinance will be served. 
e.  No variance shall be considered until the applicant has demonstrated and the Commission finds that the variance conditions have been met as set forth in the Land Disturbance Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 3-13-2017(2), § 1) 
10.111-10.139. - Reserved. 
10.140. - Development Process Committee. 
1.  Organization. The City Manager may organize a Development Process Committee (DPC) to perform duties as specified by the City Manager. The membership and procedures, if any, of the DPC shall be established at the sole discretion of the City Manager. In the absence of the organization of a DPC, responsibilities of the DPC in the Land Development Ordinance shall reside solely with the City Manager, or designee. 
2.  Powers and Duties. If the City Manager establishes a DPC, the DPC may: 
a.  Review all applications for annexations, rezoning and variances including public input meeting comments, then meet with applicant to determine appropriate recommendation. 
b.  Provide the recommendation in writing to the Mayor and Council via the Planning Commission. 
c.  Review applications for administrative variances for reduction of parking spaces or required pervious parking up to twenty (20) percent of the required number of spaces; for reduction of Buffer and Setbacks up to twenty (20) percent from the required buffer and setbacks; Tree and Landscaping up to twenty (20) percent of any tree or landscaping requirements; to relocate fences that are required either by code or as a condition of zoning in order to maximize the effectiveness of said fence in terms of privacy, safety and/or aesthetics. An administrative variance shall not add to an existing variance. The DPC shall make a finding of approved, denied or forward and the finding shall be signed by the City Manager or designee. If the determination is to forward an administrative variance application a written recommendation along with the finding of the DPC shall be attached. The application shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission as provided for by the variance process. 
d.  Hold pre-application meetings for site plans and subdivisions of land, providing assistance to applicant for designing to comply with City codes. 
e.  Review all plats for compliance with the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance and approve preliminary and final subdivision plats when in compliance. Variances or waivers shall be approved through the appropriate process before approval. The City Manager or designee shall sign to approve plats when such plats meet all requirements and have been signed as approved by all departments. 
f.  Perform such other duties as may be specified in the Land Development Ordinance, required by the City Manager or reasonably appropriate to effect the provisions of the City's ordinances. 
g.  Review and determine if crosswalks installed with new development shall include pedestrian activated equipment, signaling that pedestrians are entering the crosswalk for passage across the street. 
3.  Fees. Fees shall be set by the Council by separate schedules adopted as ordinances. 
(Ord. of 11-14-2016(3), § 1; Ord. of 9-25-2017(1); Ord. of 12-11-2017(1)) 
10.141-10.149. - Reserved. 
10.150. - City Staff. 
    City Manager: The City Manager shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this Code. The City Manager may designate other City staff or professional personnel to assist with the administration of this Ordinance. The City Manager may establish such other procedures, either written or verbal, as shall be reasonable to carry out the intent of these ordinances. Any permit, certificate or license issued in conflict with the provision of this Code shall be void. 
10.151-10.159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES 

10.160. - Variances. 
1.  The following conditions must be considered before a variance from the requirements of the City's ordinances can be considered by the Commission and granted by the Council: 
a.  There is exceptional and extraordinary conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question, due to its size, shape or topography; and, 
b.  The application of these regulations to this particular piece of property would create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship; and, 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and, 
d.  A literal interpretation of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of any rights that others in the same district are allowed; and, 
e.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment of the public good, or impair the purposes and intent of the Ordinance. 
In granting a variance, the Council may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this Ordinance will be served. 
However, the Council shall not be authorized to grant a density variance or a use variance to permit a use in a district in which the use is prohibited without a rezoning. 
2.  No variance shall be authorized unless the Council finds that all of the following conditions exist; 
a.  That the special circumstances or conditions applying to the building or land or building and land in question are peculiar to such premises and do not apply generally to other land or buildings in the vicinity; and, 
b.  That the granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a property right and not merely to serve as a convenience to the applicant; and, 
c.  That the condition from which relief or a variance is sought did not result from willful action by the applicant; and, 
d.  That the authorizing of the variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or unreasonably increase the congestion of public streets, increase the danger of fire, imperil the public safety, unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding areas or in any other respect impair the health, safety, comfort, morals or general welfare of the inhabitants of the City. 
Following the review and consideration of a variance application by the Commission a recommendation shall be made by the Commission to the Mayor and Council to approve, approve with conditions or deny. 
10.161. - Time Limitation. 
1.  Any improvements associated with the granting of a variance must be commenced within eighteen (18) months from the date of approval. If work is not started that is associated with the variance project within the eighteen (18) months time the variance shall expire. The Council may grant an extension if before the expiration date the holder of the variance shall make a written request for an extension providing satisfactory justification. 
2.  Any request for variance that has been denied by the Council may not be reinitiated for a twelve-month time period beginning from the date of final decision on the requested variance. This time limit applies to the same or similar request that had been denied by the Council. This section will not restrict multiple appeals or requests for distinctly different requests for variance on the same piece of property within the twelve-month time period. The provision for reapplication for variance is not an appeal of the decision of the Council and will be treated as a new application and request for variance. 
3.  An applicant may petition the Council to waive the twelve-month waiting period after a five-month period from the date of the decision by the Council. The applicant is charged with demonstrating that the facts or conditions present at the time of the approval or denial of the requested variance have materially changed or that the request is materially different. If the waiver is granted by the Council, the application of request of variance shall be treated as a new application. 
10.162. - Appeals. 
    The Mayor and Council shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirements, development permit, decision, determination or refusal made by an Administrative Official of the City in the administration or enforcement of any provision of the Land Development Ordinance. Such appeals shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved or any governmental officer, department, board or agency affected by any decision with respect to this Ordinance may file an appeal to such action as identified above. Such appeal shall be made within ten (10) days following notification of the decision appealed from, by filing with the City Manager a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The City Manager shall forthwith transmit to the Council all documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
2.  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Administrative Official who's action is being appealed certifies to the Council, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and/or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
3.  The Council shall conduct a hearing at which the Administrative Official, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall present the code sections and justification for the action taken. The appellant may then present any evidence, statements or documents pertaining to the matter being appealed. 
4.  The Council may, in conformity with this section, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all powers of the Administrative Official. The Council may direct the issuance of a permit. It shall be the duty of the Administrative Official to carry out the decisions of the Council. 
10.163. - Interpretation of Zoning Map (Ref. 7.303). 
    The Council shall apply the following standards in arriving at a decision: 
1.  Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, or along the center lines of alleys, streets, rights-of-way, or water courses, unless such zoning district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the Zoning Map. 
2.  Where zoning district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
3.  In undivided property, or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the location of any such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown on the Zoning Map, shall be determined by the use of the map scale shown thereon. 
4.  If, after the application of the foregoing rules, uncertainty still exists as to the exact location of a zoning district boundary, the Council shall determine and fix the location of said line in a reasonable manner. 
10.164. - Special Exceptions and Interpretations. 
    The council shall hear and decide the following exceptions to the terms of this Ordinance provided that such exceptions shall impose appropriate conditions and safeguards: 
1.  The extension of a district for a distance of not more than fifty (50) feet where the boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract held in single ownership at the time of the passage of this Ordinance. 
2.  Questions relating to interpretation of use restrictions. 
3.  Questions relating to the existence of a non-conforming use. 
Prior to the council's determination of any of the matters set forth in this Section 10.164, staff shall follow the notice and public hearing procedures set forth in Chapter XI of the City's Land Development Ordinance. 
10.165. - Amendments. 
    The Woodstock Zoning Ordinance and the Official Woodstock Zoning Map may be amended from time to time subject to the procedures and requirements set forth in this section and in Chapter XL. Amendments include, but are not limited to, amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, zoning property from one zoning classification to another and annexation of property into the city limits. 
1.  No amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. The Planning Commission shall have sixty (60) days within which to submit its report. If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report within sixty-day period, it shall be deemed to have recommended the proposed amendment to the Council. 
2.  Amendments may be initiated by any one (1) of the following: 
a.  The City Council 
b.  The Planning Commission 
c.  All of the owners of property affected by a proposed amendment. 
d.  The City Manager 
3.  Before enacting an amendment to this article, the City Council shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon as required by O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4 and in conformance with Chapter XI. 
4.  Amendments initiated by property owners may only be initiated once in a twelve-month period of time with respect to the same parcel of land. The twelve-month time period shall begin on the date the Mayor and Council take official action on the proposed amendment. However, this limitation shall not apply to those properties affected by an amendment initiated by the City Council or Planning Commission. The City Council or Planning Commission may file and propose an amendment with respect to any parcel at any time. 
5.  An applicant may petition the City Council to waive the twelve-month waiting period by demonstrating that the facts or conditions present at the time of the approval or denial of the requested amendment have materially changed or if the request is materially different. If the waiver is granted by the City Council, the application for the zoning change shall be treated as a new application. 
6.  The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may place a conditional use provision on a zoning district designation. The zoning district in this case shall include a suffix "C" and shall be effective until otherwise amended. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2), §§ 1, 2) 
10.166. - Official Woodstock Zoning Map. 
    The Official Woodstock Zoning Map shall be updated on a semi-annual basis, in January and July of each year. These updates shall include all annexations and rezonings adopted by ordinance during the previous six-month period. Such updates shall be subject to the procedures and requirements for amendments contained in this chapter and in Chapter XI. 
    The City Council may at its option, delay adopting updated maps in its sole discretion. Any failure of the Council to adopt an updated map shall not be deemed a violation of the Ordinance and the previously adopted map shall remain in full force and effect. 
10.167. - Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses. 
1.  The City Manger shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, rezoning and variance applications, special home occupations and other matters pertaining to the Ordinance, which fee schedule is subject to review and approval by the City Council. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the City Clerk's Office. 
2.  No action shall be taken on any application or appeal until such time as 
a.  All required documents have been submitted, and 
b.  All applicable fees, charges and expenses have been paid. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Council may waive these requirements either explicitly or implicitly, i.e. by approving an application or appeal which did not meet these requirements. 
10.168. - Public Hearings. 
    The Council shall hold a public hearing before making its decision on all requests for Annexations, Variances, Rezoning, Zoning Map Interpretations, Special Exceptions and Appeals, and shall act within a reasonable time after receiving an application, in accordance with Georgia law and the provisions of Chapter X. 
10.169. - Applications. 
1.  Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements, all applications for public hearing and recommendation by the Commission and decision by City Council shall be filed with the City Manager on forms provided, in accordance with submittal guidelines established by the Development Process Committee. Each application shall contain such information as the City Manager and Development Process Committee determine to be necessary for the Commission and/or Council to make an informed decision. 
2.  Any applicant wishing to defer a proposed public hearing application shall file a written request for deferral with the City Manager or designee, two (2) business days prior to the date of the scheduled public hearing. Each written request for deferral shall be accompanied by a postponement fee established by City Council with resolution from time to time. 
3.  Deferrals may be granted by the City Manager or designee up to two (2) times for any public hearing application. No application shall be granted a request for a third deferral. Applicants seeking to defer an application for a third time, shall withdraw the application and submit a new application when prepared to do so in accordance with the public hearings schedule. The applicant may submit a new application without prejudice with respect to the twelve-month limitation established in this Chapter. No fees shall be refunded and all fees are due upon the submittal of a new application. 
4.  The DPC shall evaluate the completeness of an application to proceed to the Planning Commission. Should an application remain incomplete, lacking sufficient information for the Planning Commission and City Council to make informed decisions, the DPC is authorized to reject the application. Upon rejection of an application, the applicant may submit a new application when prepared to do so in accordance with the public hearings schedule without prejudice with respect to the twelve-month limitation established in this Chapter. No fees shall be refunded and all fees are due upon the submittal of a new application. 
5.  The City Council may allow an application to be withdrawn, postponed or amended, in its sole discretion, at any time prior to its final vote on the application without prejudice with respect to the twelve-month limitation established in this Chapter. 
6.  No public hearing application or written request for deferral will be accepted without the submission of applicable fees. The failure to submit applicable fees constitutes a rejection of the public hearing application or written request for deferral. Upon rejection of an application, the applicant may submit a new application when prepared to do so in accordance with the public hearings schedule without prejudice with respect to the twelve-month limitation established in this Chapter. No fees shall be refunded and all fees are due upon the submittal of a new application. 
(Ord. of 2-13-2017(2), § 3) 
10.170. - Hearing Procedures. 
    The Commission shall utilize the hearing rules established by council for the conduct of hearings. Said rules shall be published and available to the public. 
10.171. - Appeals from Action of Council. 
    Any party aggrieved by any final judgment or decision of the Council may within thirty (30) days thereafter appeal to the Superior Court or court of like jurisdiction. The appellant shall furnish the City a written notice of appeal specifying the judgment or decision from which appeal is taken. In case of such appeal, the Council shall cause a certified copy of the record of proceedings to be provided to the City Attorney for response to the court to which the appeal is taken. 
10.172-10.199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 

10.200. - Violations and Penalties. 
1.  This chapter shall be enforced by the City Manager or his/her designee, Code Enforcement Officer or Law Enforcement Officer. 
2.  Any person or entity violating any provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished for each offense by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate offense. At the discretion of the appropriate court, a violator of this code may be given a reasonable length of time to rectify or correct the violation. 
3.  In addition to any other remedies and after due notice to the owner of the violation, the City may: 
a.  Issue a citation for violation of City Code which shall require the presence of the violator in Municipal Court. 
b.  May institute an action for injunctive relief or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance, land clearing or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land. 
4.  The Building Official or his/her designee may, in addition to other remedies, notify utilities to withhold service there from until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of this Code. 
Chapter XI - ZONING POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 

11.100. - Title. 
    This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Policy and Procedures Ordinance of the City of Woodstock, Georgia". 
11.101. - Purpose. 
    This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the requirements contained in O.C.G.A. Tit. 36, Ch. 66. It is the intention of this Ordinance to establish minimum procedures governing the exercise of the City's zoning powers. The minimum procedures are designed to ensure that due process is afforded the general public when the City regulates the use of property through its zoning power. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS 

11.200. - Annexation and Rezoning of Annexed Areas. 
    The Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission shall review annexation and rezoning applications and shall make a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council of the proposed zoning district of the annexation area. The Planning Commission shall have the option to conduct a public hearing on the zoning of the area proposed for annexation or it may choose not to hold a formal public hearing. 
    The Mayor and City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed annexation. The official zoning action by the Mayor and City Council shall follow the procedures set forth in sections 11.203 through 11.205 of this article. 
11.201. - Zoning Amendments Initiated by the City. 
    The Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission shall review and make a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council on all zoning amendments initiated by the City. The Planning Commission may conduct a public hearing following the procedures set forth in sections 11.203 through 11.205 of this article. 
    The Mayor and City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment. The official zoning action by the Mayor and City Council shall follow the procedures set forth in sections 11.203 through 11.9203 of this article. 
11.202. - Zoning Amendments Initiated by Property Owners. 
    The property owner(s) or a person having the owner(s) written authority to act on their behalf, may apply to the Mayor and City Council for an amendment to the Woodstock Zoning Ordinance. The applicant shall make application at City Hall on forms provided for the requested change. The applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with the requirements of section 10.103. 
1.  Applications to amend the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map shall include the following information: 
a.  A legal description of the tract(s) proposed to be rezoned; 
b.  A plat drawn to scale showing the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract(s) prepared by a Engineer, Architect, Land Planner or Land Surveyor, whose Georgia State registration is current and valid and whose seal shall be affixed to the plat; 
c.  The present and proposed zoning classifications for the tract(s); 
d.  Responses to the criteria stated in section 11.205; and 
e.  Any other requirements as may be required from time to time by the Zoning Administrator. 
2.  This applicant shall be allowed to submit renderings, site plans and other exhibits purporting to depict the proposed development should a map amendment be approved. The applicant may, however, be required to develop according to such plans if approved by the Planning Commission, or the Mayor and Council. Any deviation from approved plans shall require submission of modified plans to the Planning Commission for their approval. 
The Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission shall review the application and make a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council with regard to the proposed zoning amendment. The Planning Commission shall have the option to conduct a public hearing on the proposed amendment following the procedures set forth in sections 11.203 through 11.205 of this article. 
The Mayor and City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed zoning amendment. The official zoning action by the Mayor and City Council shall follow the procedures set forth in sections 11.203 through 11.205 of this article. 
11.203. - Public Notice. 
    A public hearing shall be held on all proposed amendment to this Ordinance. Prior to such public hearing, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4 requires that public notice be provided. Public notice of a proposed amendment to the Zoning Ordinance shall consist of an onsite sign, legal notice in the official organ of the City and notice to the applicant and property owner of the date, time and place of the public hearing. 
1.  The on-site sign shall be displayed on the subject property and shall b e clearly visible from a public street. The sign shall be posted a minimum of fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing on the proposed amendment. The sign shall announce the time, date, place and purpose of the public hearing, and the present and proposed zoning district. Acts of vandalism or natural occurrences which limit the effectiveness of such public notice shall not void the proceedings or actions taken under this section. 
2.  The legal notice shall appear in the official legal organ of the City and shall be published at least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing. The legal notice shall state the name of the applicant, the property owner, location of the subject property, the present and proposed zoning district, the current and proposed use of the subject property, and the time, date and place of the public hearing. 
3.  The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the date, time and place of the public hearing by certified mail to the address indicated on the application. Such notice shall be mailed no later than ten (10) days prior to the date of the public hearing. Receipt of such letter by the applicant or his legal representative shall constitute notice to be present at the public hearing to discuss the application. Failure of the applicant or his representative to be present at the public hearing constitutes grounds by which the City Council may deny the application, unless the applicant shows just cause for the absence. 
4.  If the City has not designated an official legal organ, then the notice must be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the City according to the provisions of section 11.203.2. 
5.  Public Input Plan Required. See Council Policy Manual #700-0008. 
a.  Goals of the Plan: The proposed Public Input Plan is designed to facilitate on-going communication among the applicant, the potentially impacted property owners, elected officials and staff during the application review process. Specifically, the Plan is aimed at ensuring the following: 
i.  That the potentially impacted property owners have adequate opportunity to learn about an application that may affect them and to work with applicants to resolve concerns at an early stage of the process. 
ii.  The applicants pursue early and effective citizen input in conjunction with their applications, giving them the opportunity to understand and try to mitigate any real or perceived impacts that applications may have on the community. The proposed plan is not intended to produce complete consensus on all applications, but to encourage applicants to be good neighbors and to foster an atmosphere for informed decision making. 
b.  Requests Requiring Public Input Plan: The following requests require preparation, submittal and execution of a Public Input Plan, as determined by the Community Development Department: 
i.  Rezoning and Zoning Condition Amendments; 
ii.  Conditional Use Permit; 
iii.  Variances from architectural standards; 
iv.  Variances from lot standards; and 
v.  Other requests, as determined by the Community Development Department. 
c.  Contents of the Plan: A copy of the Public Input Plan shall be submitted as part of the application. At a minimum, the Public Input Plan shall include the following information: 
i.  Property owners, political jurisdictions and public agencies which may be affected by the application; 
ii.  How those potentially impacted by an application will be notified that an application has been made; 
iii.  How those potentially impacted parties will be informed of the substance of the development proposed by the applicant; 
iv.  How those potentially impacted will be afforded an opportunity to discuss the applicant's proposal with the applicant and express any concerns, issues or problems that they may have with the proposal, in advance of the public hearing; 
v.  The applicant's schedule for completion of the Public Input Plan process. 
d.  Public Input Meeting Notification: The applicant is required to notify the potentially impacted parties of the Public Input Meeting. This notice is required to be postmarked at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the date of the scheduled Public Input Meeting and shall include the following: 
i.  All properties that lie within five hundred (500) feet but a minimum of three (3) parcels in depth in each direction of the legal boundary of the subject property. 
ii.  Any homeowner's associations (HOA) which represent subdivisions or properties that fall within the 500 foot boundary including each member of the Board of Directors for the HOA, a list of which is maintained by the Woodstock Police Department. If the HOA is represented by a management company, the agent or community manager for the respective HOA shall also be notified in accordance with this section. The applicant shall verify with the management company that the list of Board of Directors is correct. 
iii.  City of Woodstock Department of Community Development to be kept in the case file. 
At a minimum, the notification shall include: 
i.  The date, time and location of the Public Input Meeting; 
ii.  The date, time and location of the Planning Commission and Mayor and City Council Public Hearings; 
iii.  Summary of applicant's request 
A listing of all property owners and addresses notified of the Public Input Meeting, including HOA Board Members and the community manager through the management company (if managed) shall be submitted to the Community Development Department. 
e.  Public Input Meeting Requirements and Protocol: 
i.  The applicant or authorized representative shall be available to answer questions of the general public for at least thirty (30) minutes; 
ii.  The meeting location shall be held at a publicly accessible facility within the community; 
iii.  The meeting shall not begin prior to 7:00 pm on the evening the meeting is to be held; 
iv.  A copy of the complete application package including supporting documents (i.e.: site plans, zoning maps, etc), as accepted by the Community Development Department, shall be made available at the meeting. 
f.  Public Input Meeting Report: 
i.  In order to formalize the Public Input Plan process, the applicant shall provide a written report on the results of the Public Input Meeting to the Community Development no later than 12:00 p.m. on the Friday prior to the scheduled Development Process Committee Meeting. This report will be attached to the Staff Report, which is prepared for each case and is sent to the Woodstock Municipal Planning Commission the Mayor and City Council. At a minimum, the Public Input Report shall include the following information: 
Details of methods the applicant used to involve the public, including: 
- Dates and locations of all meetings where citizens were invited to discuss the applicant's proposal; 
- Content, dates mailed and numbers of mailings, including letters, meeting notices, newsletters and other publications; 
- List of property owner addresses receiving notices or other written materials; and 
- The number of people that participated in the process. 
A summary of concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process, including: 
- The substance of the concerns, issues and problems; 
- How the applicant has addressed or intends to address concerns, issues and problems expressed during the process; and 
- Concerns, issues and problems the applicant is unable or unwilling to address and why. 
6.  The City Council may waive the requirements of Section 11.203(5) at a regular or called meeting of the Council. Once waived by City Council, all requirements within Section 11.203(5) are deemed waived, including the public input plan, public input meeting, and notification requirements. 
(Ord. of 12-14-2015(1); Ord. No. 5359-2018, § 1-4, 9-10-2018) 
11.204. - Public Hearing. 
    Before taking action on any proposed zoning amendment, the City Council shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the following procedures. Printed copies of these procedures shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
1.  Public hearings shall be held in conjunction with regular meetings of the City Council, at a time and place provided in the published notice of hearing. 
2.  The hearing moderator shall begin the public hearing by stating the subject matter of the hearing and informing those present of the rules which shall be followed during the hearing. Proposed zoning amendments shall be considered in the order indicated on the published notice. 
3.  The hearing shall be conducted by the City Attorney or other hearing officer designated by the City Council. 
4.  A verbal staff report shall be made, stating the recommendation of the Planning Commission and summarizing the written report submitted for the hearing. 
5.  The hearing officer shall allow the applicant or his/her designee to present the case for the rezoning. Failure of the applicant or his representative to be present at the public hearing shall cause an automatic termination of the proceeding on the request, unless the applicant shows just cause for the absence. 
6.  The hearing officer will next give those opposed to the petition an opportunity to be heard. Each speaker shall identify himself or herself and state his/her address. 
7.  The hearing officer may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against the proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for discussion o the proposed zoning amendment. 
8.  If there are a large number of persons present to speak, the hearing officer may request that a spokesperson be designated. The hearing officer will allow as many people to be heard as necessary to present all relevant information. Speakers will not be permitted to continue with redundancy, in the discretion of the hearing officer. 
9.  The hearing officer shall afford the applicant a brief period of time to rebut the issues raised by the opposition. If any new issues are raised by the applicant during this rebuttal period, the opposition shall be given an opportunity to address the new issues. 
10.  Because of time constraints in hearings, interested parties shall be encouraged to submit petitions, studies, letters, and other materials requiring prior study in advance so that such materials can be included in the final packets distributed to the Council Members before the hearing. The City Council shall have the discretion to accept such materials at the hearing. Such materials, if presented orally at the hearing, shall be subject to the time limitation for presentation by each party. 
11.  Upon conclusion of public comments, as determined by the hearing officer, conduct of the meeting shall be returned to the presiding Official of the City Council. The City Council shall have the discretion to call on previous speakers as necessary for clarification of views or materials submitted. 
12.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the hearing officer to maintain decorum in the conduct of a hearing, or to assure that the hearing is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
13.  The City Council shall have the discretion to continue a hearing to a later date if the materials submitted or views expressed require more time for study and consideration than may reasonably be allocated in one (1) meeting. 
14.  The City Council shall discuss the written application, any City staff report, and the presentations of the applicant and opposition during the public hearing and render a decision on the petition. The meeting shall be held in public, without interruption by members of the public audience. 
11.205. - Zoning Standards. 
1.  All applications for rezoning shall be evaluated according to the following criteria: 
a.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
b.  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use of usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
c.  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
d.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
e.  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; and 
f.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
2.  The applicant is responsible for submitting responses to the above criteria for evaluation by the Planning Commission and City Council. 
3.  The following factors shall also be considered by the Planning Commission and City Council in evaluating an application for rezoning: 
a.  Impact on the road system and traffic flow; 
b.  Adequacy of the water service system to the area proposed for development; 
c.  Availability or adequacy of sanitary sewer systems or whether the soils in the area proposed for development are suitable to absorb the projected flows from septic tank systems; 
d.  Impact on economic values in the area; 
e.  Impact on the health, safety, and general welfare of the area; and 
f.  Suitability of the site for the proposed use in overall size, topography and neighborhood compatibility. 
11.206. - Official Action. 
1.  The Planning Commission shall take the information presented in the application, the information presented by City Staff and any other information presented at the Planning Commission meeting with respect to the criteria and factors outlined in section 11.205. If the Planning Commission determines that the rezoning proposal will not adversely impact the criteria and factors, they shall recommend that the Mayor and Council approve the rezoning application. 
2.  If the Planning Commission determines that the rezoning will have a significant adverse impact on some or all of the criteria, and if no mitigation measures are proposed, then the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the Mayor and Council that the rezoning application be denied. 
3.  The Planning Commission may recommend approval of the rezoning application, subject to conditions or mitigation measures regarding the location, character and other features of proposed structure(s) or use(s) as it deems advisable so as to protect or improve the quality of life through prevention of air, water and noise pollution and promotion of aesthetic conditions. 
4.  The Planning Commission's written recommendation to the Mayor and Council shall state the impact of the proposed rezoning application on each of the criteria identified in section 11.205. 
5.  The Planning Commission shall have sixty (60) days from the date of presentation of the application to make its recommendation to the Mayor and City Council. If no recommendation is made to the Mayor and City Council within the sixty (60) days, then the application shall be deemed as approved by the Planning Commission. 
6.  The Mayor and City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the application according to the provisions of sections 11.203 through 11.204. 
7.  The Mayor and Council shall consider the information presented at the public hearing, the recommendation by the Planning Commission, information presented by City Staff and evaluate it in respect to the criteria outlined in section 11.205 and make a decision within sixty (60) days of the public hearing. The "zoning decision" by the Mayor and City Council shall be considered the final administrative action on a rezoning application. If the Mayor and City Council shall deem appropriate they shall have the authority to send back to the Planning Commission any such plans that have deviated from the original recommended plans for further review and recommendation within sixty-day decision period. If the Mayor and City Council send plans back to the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall consider the revised plans under the same procedures as a new application after which the Council shall receive the recommendation of the Planning Commission and reconsider the application under its normal procedures. 
11.207. - Campaign Contribution Disclosure. 
1.  All applicants, or person(s) representing an applicant seeking a zoning change, must complete and sign a disclosure form as part of the application process. Such form will disclose any campaign contribution(s) totaling two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) of greater to any local government official, which contribution was made within the two (2) years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
2.  Any opponent to a request for zoning change shall complete and sign the above described disclosure form prior to speaking at the public hearing in opposition to the zoning change. 
Chapter XII - SPRINKLER STANDARDS 
    This section includes standards for use of sprinkler systems in multi-family and commercial buildings. 
ARTICLE I. - SCOPE AND EXCLUSIONS 
1.  All commercial buildings and multi-family residential structures within the City of Woodstock, Georgia shall be construed with an approved sprinkler system throughout, as defined by NFPA #13. 
2.  This Ordinance shall apply to multi-family residential structures and commercial structures over three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet and structure that are not covered by other codes. 
3.  This Ordinance shall not apply to a duplex or free standing single family residence. 
4.  An NFPA # 13 R system will only be permitted in structures up to three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet. Anything above three (3) stories or three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet in size must have an NFPA 13 System. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS THREE STORIES OR LESS, THAT ARE NOT REQUIRED TO BE SPRINKLED BY OTHER CODES 
1.  A combination fire protection sprinkler system may be allowed in commercial buildings that are three (3) stories in height or less and which are not required to have sprinkler systems by other codes. A combination sprinkler system shall comply with the following: 
a.  No anti-freeze solution or any other additive shall be allowed in any combination sprinkler system. 
b.  When dead end systems are used, the sprinkler system shall be isolated form the domestic water supply by not less than a dual check valve assembly. That conforms to underwriters laboratories standards and is approved by the City of Woodstock. A union and full port shut off, acceptable to the City of Woodstock fire service, shall be installed on both sides of the check valve assembly to facilitate removal for test and repair. 
If the sprinkler system exceeds one hundred seventy-five (175) psi a pressure reducing valve must be used. 
c.  When the dual check valve and shut-off valves are installed outside the structure, they shall not be buried in the earth, but shall be protected form freezing, at a location acceptable to the City of Woodstock fire service. For example, in a pre-cast concrete valve pit with cover. The top of the protective housing shall extend one-half-inch above the finished landscaping and be installed in an area approved by the City of Woodstock Fire Service. 
d.  A water meter shall not be required for the fire protection water line. The City of Woodstock City Council shall establish a monthly sprinkler fee to be added to the water bill. All shut-offs in the sprinkler system shall be secured in an acceptable method to prevent tampering and shall be locked in the open position. A sign shall be placed on the valves which shall read, "Fire Department shall be notified when valves are turned off and turned back on". All shut-offs shall be readily accessible to the fire service at all times. Locking devices will be inspected on a routine basis by the Woodstock Fire Service. If locking devices are broken or not in place, it shall be the responsibility of the owner/tenant to notify the fire service within twenty-four (24) hours. If notification is not made within the twenty-four-hour limit, the business would be fined up to the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence. If a third violation is noted upon inspection, business shall be required to install a water meter at their own expense. 
e.  All sprinkler heads shall be UL-Listed. Spacing of all sprinkler heads shall be in accordance with U.L. Listings and manufacturers recommendations. 
f.  Sprinkler heads are not required in bathrooms, closets and hallways that are not to be used as means of exit or in attics. All other areas require sprinkler heads including drive-in garages and basements (finished or unfinished). Exception: Sprinkler heads must meet hazardous area hourly fire rating for drive in garages. 
g.  All mechanical rooms shall have one hundred thirty-five (135) to one hundred sixty-five (165) degree commercial sprinkler heads with a maximum three-eighths-inch orifice. 
h.  Dropped escutcheons shall be used if a sprinkler head is obstructed by light fixtures, beams, pipes, or other features. Additional sprinkler heads may be used for areas where obstructions block spray pattern. 
i.  When ceiling fans are used, sprinkler heads shall be located so fan housing does not interfere with the pattern. Installation of sprinkler heads shall still conform to spacing requirements. If sprinkler head location exceeds spacing requirements, additional heads shall be used. 
j.  All spacing of sprinkler heads in relation to head products equipment and heaters shall be sprinkled top manufacturers requirements. 
k.  All sprinkler piping in unheated areas shall be protected from freezing. 
l.  An accepted water flow switch with a bell that can be heard from no less than five hundred (500) feet away is required. Both shall be accessible for checking and repair. 
m.  Each system shall have an accessible inspectors test drain valve at the most remote point away from the system water supply. 
n.  If a sprinkler system issued for more than one (1) living unit and separate electric service is used for each unit, the alarm switch with bell shall be on house electric service. 
o.  All condominiums shall have the following wording in the recorded declaration of covenants and a copy of the document shall be provided to the City of Woodstock fire service and the City of Woodstock Building Inspector. 
"Sprinkler system: In the event that any unit be equipped with fire sprinkler system heads, compromising any part of the system nor shall any sprinkler head by painted, covered, or otherwise tampered with, or altered". 
"Prior to any alterations, amendments, modifications, or change, business will submit such alterations, amendments, modifications or change to the City of Woodstock fire service for their approval and agree to comply with all domestic sprinkler requirements of the City of Woodstock, Georgia". 
p.  The installer of any sprinkler system shall be a licensed Georgia Fire Protection Sprinkler Installer. 
q.  The fire service sprinkler connection shall be located on the front (street side) of the building. The sprinkler connection shall be equipped with a one and one-half-inch national standard thread (NST) female swivel. The connection shall be unobstructed and clearly marked to be seen from the road. 
ARTICLE III. - INSPECTION OF SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 
1.  The fire service shall have access to all sprinkler systems for the purpose of inspections. Inspections may be made annually or as often as deemed necessary by the fire service. Inspections shall include but not be limited, to the following: 
a.  Procedures for inspection the sprinkler system shall be set forth by the Fire Chief or Fire Inspector. A copy of which may be obtained from the Woodstock Fire Service. 
b.  A sprinkler inspection form shall be filled out in duplicate one (1) copy shall be given to the owner or occupant and one (1) copy shall be kept for permanent files of the fire service. 
c.  Each riser manifold shall be tagged. The tag shall show date of in inspection and inspector's signature. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCEPTIONS TO THE BUILDING CODE 
1.  In buildings up to five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet per floor, no fire wall is required. 
2.  In single story buildings divided into occupant units, one-hour fire walls extending up thirty-six (36) inches above the roof an out flush with the roof overhang are required when an approved sprinkler system is in place. If no sprinkler system is in place four-hour walls are required between units. 
3.  Standard one-half-inch gypsum wall board may be substituted for five-eighths-inch type "X" gypsum board relating to one-hour tenant separation walls. 
4.  Standard one-half-inch gypsum wallboard may be substituted for five-eighths-inch type "X" gypsum wallboard. One-half-inch plywood may be substituted for three-quarter-inch plywood relating to one-hour floor-ceiling assemblies. 
5.  Fee simple townhouses may have one-hour rated party walls in lieu of two-hour rated party walls. 
6.  Attic smoke stops at three thousand (3,000) square feet will be allowed in lieu of smoke stops between every unit. 
7.  Exit travel may be extended thirty-five (35) feet in lieu of the existing twenty (20) feet. 
8.  Tenants egress may pass by other tenants doors and windows without those doors and windows being rated. 
9.  Interior finishes shall be class "C" or better instead of class "A" finish. 
10.  One-hour rating of walls and door of hazardous areas as noted by the City Fire Service will be required. 
11.  Unless otherwise specified within this code, all other requirements of applicable codes of the City of Woodstock, Georgia shall be complied with. 
12.  Certification of flow must be acceptable to the City of Woodstock Fire Service. 
13.  In the interest of life safety, other exceptions may be allowed when warranted by the City of Woodstock fire service. 
14.  All new construction must submit sprinkler plans to the City of Woodstock fire service for approval before construction of sprinkler systems commences. 
Chapter XIII - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT/FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTION 
    It is hereby determined that: 
    The flood hazard areas of the City of Woodstock, Georgia (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "City"), are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
    Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can (1) Protect human life and health; (2) Minimize damage to private property; (3) Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and (4) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
    Article IX, section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Georgia law have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. Therefore, the City of Woodstock, Georgia, does ordain this Ordinance and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction policies for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 
    All defined terms throughout this chapter are capitalized, and the definitions are contained in Chapter II of this Land Development Ordinance. 

13.210. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, stream bank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
13.220. - Applicability. 
    This Ordinance shall be applicable to all areas within the City. 
(Ord. No. 5697-2019, § 3, 3-25-2019) 
13.230. - Designation of Ordinance Administrator. 
    The City Manager, or his designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Ordinance (the "Administrator"). 
13.240. - Basis for Area of Special Flood Hazard-Flood Area Maps and Studies. 
    For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The Flood Insurance Study (hereinafter sometimes "FIS"), dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. The maps can be viewed on the internet at or by contacting the City's GIS Division. 
(2)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the one-hundred-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
(a)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City; or 
(b)  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the City's Community Development Department (hereinafter "Community Development Department"). 
(3)  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
(a)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City; or 
(b)  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia, which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the Community Development Department. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the Woodstock City Hall. 
13.250. - Compatibility with Other Regulations. 
    This Ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other Ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this Ordinance are in addition to the requirements of any other Ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this Ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other Ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
13.260. - Severability. 
    If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Ordinance. 
13.270. - Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Woodstock or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

13.310. - Permit Application Requirements. 
    No owner or developer shall perform any Land Development Activities on a site where an Area of Special Flood Hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this Ordinance prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
    Unless specifically excluded by this Ordinance, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a Development Activity shall submit to the Community Development Department a permit application on a form provided by the Community Development Department for that purpose. 
    No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this Ordinance. 
13.320. - Floodplain Management Plan Requirements. 
    Any application for a Permit with Areas of Special Flood Hazard located on the site must include a Floodplain Management Plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
(a)  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
(b)  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
(c)  Proposed and existing locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
(d)  Proposed and existing locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
(e)  Proposed grading plan; 
(f)  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
(g)  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
(h)  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
(i)  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the Lowest Floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
(c)  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 13.520(2); 
(d)  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in subsection 13.510(5). 
(e)  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre-and post development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable State and Federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this Ordinance. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all Land Development Activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and Development Activity is not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
13.330. - Construction Stage Submittal Requirements. 
    For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a Floodplain Management Plan, the permit holder shall provide to the Administrator a certified as-built FEMA issued elevation certificate or flood-proofing certificate for non-residential construction including the Lowest Floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the Lowest Floor or flood-proofing is completed. A final Elevation Certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any Lowest Floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
    Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The Administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall result in the issuance of a stop work order for the project. 
13.340. - Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. 
    Duties of the Administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this Ordinance have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including but not limited to section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of Articles IV and V of this chapter.; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the Lowest Floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
(6)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the Administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article VI of this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined by FEMA, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and, 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the Administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
ARTICLE IV. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

13.410. - Definition of Floodplain Boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish Base Flood Elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the Future-Conditions Flood Elevations shall be provided by the City's GIS Division (the "Woodstock GIS Division"). If Future-Conditions Elevation data is not available from the Woodstock GIS Division, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Community Development Department. 
13.420. - Definition of Floodway Boundaries. 
(1)  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the Regulatory Floodway shall be provided by the Community Development Department. If Floodway data is not available from the Community Development Department, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Community Development Department. 
13.430. - General Standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within the Future-Conditions Floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(a)  Raising the Base Flood Elevation or Future-Conditions Flood Elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(b)  Reducing the Base Flood or Future-Conditions Flood storage capacity; 
(c)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the Base Flood or Future-Conditions Flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the Development Area; or, 
(d)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under subsection (1) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
(a)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the Base Flood Elevation for the Base Flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the Future-Condition Flood Elevation for the Future-Conditions Flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(b)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two (2.0) percent; 
(c)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(d)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 13.440; 
(e)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate (in the case of all water lines) infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(f)  Any significant physical changes to the Floodplain shall be submitted as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (hereinafter "CLOMR") or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (hereinafter "CLOMA"), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the Administrator using the FEMA Community Consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six (6) months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
13.440. - Engineering Study Requirements for Floodplain Encroachments. 
    An engineering study is required whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the Future-Conditions Floodplain (except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established Base Flood Elevations and/or Floodways for which the provisions of section 13.540 apply). This study shall be prepared by a currently registered Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the Community Development Department prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the Future-Conditions Floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or Floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the Community Development Department. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information shall be obtained whenever available. Computations shall be shown duplicating FIS results and shall then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one (1) every one hundred (100) feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all encroachments in to the future-conditions floodplain. 
13.450. - Floodway Encroachments. 
    Located within Areas of Special Flood Hazard are areas designated as Floodway. A Floodway as used herein is an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, Floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the Base Flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development, within the Floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project Base Flood Elevations, Floodway elevations, or Floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the Floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the Floodway shall be issued by the Community Development Department until an affirmative CLOMR is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the Community Development Department. 
13.460. - Maintenance Requirements. 
    The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a Floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The Community Development Department may direct the property owner (at owner's sole cost and expense) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the Community Development Department. If said property owner does not perform this restoration, then said property owner shall be subject to the penalties provided for herein. 
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

13.510. - General Standards. 
    In all Areas of Special Flood Hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvement of principal buildings (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the Future-Conditions Floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met; 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated Buildings - All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the Lowest Floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(a)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and, 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(b)  So as not to violate the Lowest Floor criteria of this Ordinance, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
(c)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the Future Conditions Flood Elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State of Georgia requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(9)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(10)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; and, 
(11)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(12)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or Future Condition Elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 5697-2019, § 4, 3-25-2019) 
13.520. - Building Standards for Structures and Buildings Within the Future Conditions Floodplain. 
    For Structures and Buildings within the Future-Conditions Floodplain, the following provisions, in addition to those in section 13.510, shall apply: 
(1)  Residential Buildings. 
(a)  New Construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the Future-Conditions Floodplain unless all requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met, all new construction shall have the Lowest Floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the Future-Conditions Flood Elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). 
(b)  Substantial Improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the Future-Conditions Floodplain unless all requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met, all substantial improvements shall have the Lowest Floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). 
(2)  Non-Residential Buildings. 
(a)  New Construction. New Construction of principal buildings including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the Future-Conditions Floodplain unless all requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met, all new construction shall have the Lowest Floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered Professional Engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above and shall provide such certification to the Administrator. 
(b)  Substantial Improvements. Substantial improvement of principal buildings including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the Future-Conditions Floodplain unless all requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met, all substantial improvements shall have the Lowest Floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). Substantial improvements that have met all of the requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered Professional Engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above and shall provide such certification to the Administrator. 
(3)  Accessory Structures and Facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection 13.510(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for Recreational Vehicles. All Recreational Vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(b)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for Residential Buildings-Substantial Improvements (subsection 13.520(1)(b)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for Manufactured Homes. 
(a)  New and Substantially Improved Manufactured Homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the Future-Conditions Floodplain unless all requirements of sections 13.430, 13.440, and 13.450 have been met; 
(b)  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The Lowest Floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(c)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(7). 
(Ord. No. 5697-2019, §§ 5-7, 3-25-2019) 
13.530. - Building Standards for Structures and Buildings Authorized Adjacent to the Future Conditions Floodplain. 
(1)  Residential Buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home located adjacent to the Future-Conditions Floodplain, the elevation of the Lowest Floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). 
(2)  Non-Residential Buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building located adjacent to the Future-Conditions Floodplain, the elevation of the Lowest Floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). 
(Ord. No. 5697-2019, § 8, 3-25-2019) 
13.540. - Building Standards for Residential Single-Lot Developments on Streams Without Established Base Flood Elevations and/or Floodway (A-Zones). 
    For a residential single-lot development, not part of a subdivision, that has one (1) or more Special Flood Hazard Areas but no base flood data have been provided (i.e. A-Zones), the Administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, Base Flood Elevation and Floodway data, or Future Conditions Flood Elevation data available from a Federal, State, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this Ordinance. 
    If data is not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including Structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the Top Of Stream Bank, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In Special Flood Hazard Areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the Lowest Floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with subsection 13.510(5). 
13.550. - Building Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO-Zones). 
    Areas of Special Flood Hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the Lowest Floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the Lowest Floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 13.510(5). 
(2)  New and substantial improvements of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and, 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
13.560. - Standards for Subdivisions. 
    (1) All Subdivision proposals shall identify the Special Flood Hazard Area and provide Base Flood Elevation data and Future Conditions Flood Elevation data; 
    (2) All residential lots in a Subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the Future Conditions Floodplain such that encroachments into the Future Conditions Floodplain for residential Structures will not be required; 
    (3) All Subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed Structures in accordance with section 13.320. 
    (4) All Subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
    (5) All Subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and, 
    (6) All Subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City of Woodstock to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
ARTICLE VI. - VARIANCE AND APPEALS 
    The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance. A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a Permit by the Woodstock Development Process Committee (hereinafter referred to as "DPC") or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit for the reasons stated herein above. 
(1)  Applications for variances from the requirements of this Ordinance shall be submitted to the DPC. All such requests shall be heard by the DPC within fourteen (14) days of submission. The committee shall make a finding of "approved", "denied" or "forward". The finding shall be signed by the chairperson of the Development Process Committee. All affected parties shall be given notice prior to the DPC meeting and be given the opportunity to be heard at the DPC meeting. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the Woodstock Development Process Committee shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Mayor and Council as per Chapter 10, section 10.162, of this Land Development Ordinance. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor and Council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Cherokee County, Georgia, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the Woodstock Development Process Committee and the Mayor and Council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this Ordinance. 
(8)  Conditions for Variances: 
(a)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(i)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
(b)  The provisions of this Ordinance are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed Lowest Floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced Lowest Floor elevation. 
(d)  The Administrator for the City of Woodstock shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the Woodstock Development Process Committee and the Mayor and Council shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this Ordinance, the Woodstock Development Process Committee and the Mayor and Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance. 
(11)  Variances shall not be retroactive (i.e. issued after the fact). 
ARTICLE VII. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Ordinance or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 

13.710. - Notice of Violation. 
    If the Community Development Department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this Ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person and served on that person by U.S. mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested). Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Ordinance without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site by U.S. Mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested). 
    The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this Ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Community Development Department by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation. 
13.720. - Penalties. 
    In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Community Development Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing sent by U.S. Mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested) of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Community Development Department may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop Work Order. The Community Development Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. The Community Development Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The Community Development Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the Community Development Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the Community Development Department shall deem appropriate or such lesser period (in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the Community Development Department has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the Community Development Department may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this Ordinance, the Community Development Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person served by U.S. Mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested), requiring such person to appear in Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall remain uncured shall constitute a separate offense. 
Chapter XIV - STORMWATER STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connections, Ch. 58, Article II, section 58-44, City Code of Ordinances. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for stormwater and sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, para. III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTION, PURPOSE AND INTENT 

14.110. - Introduction. 
    It is hereby determined that: 
    Land Development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase Stormwater Runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
    Land Development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased Non-Point Source Pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
    The impacts of Post-Development Stormwater Runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
    These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of Stormwater Runoff quantity and quality from New Development and Redevelopment, by the use of both Structural Stormwater Control as well as Nonstructural Stormwater Management Practice, such as the conservation of Open Space and Greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and Greenspace for Stormwater Management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or "credits." The Georgia Greenspace Program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those Greenspace areas which provide Stormwater Management quality and quantity benefits; 
    Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of both State and Federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of Post-Development Stormwater Runoff quality and Non-Point Source Pollution; 
    Therefore, the City of Woodstock, Georgia (sometime hereinafter referred to as "City") has established this set of Stormwater Management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of Post-Development Stormwater Runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate Post-Development Stormwater Runoff Discharge in order to control and minimize increases in Stormwater Runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and Non-Point Source Pollution associated with Post-Development Stormwater Runoff. 
14.120. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter of the Land Development Ordinance is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the City of Woodstock, Georgia by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased Post-Development Stormwater Runoff and Non-Point Source Pollution associated with New Development and Redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of Post-Development Stormwater Runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This Ordinance seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
1.  Establish decision-making processes surrounding Land Development Activity that protects the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
2.  Require that New Development and Redevelopment maintain the Pre-Development hydrologic response in their Post-Development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce Flooding, Stream Bank erosion, Non-Point Source Pollution and increases in Stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of Stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
3.  Establish minimum Post-Development Stormwater Management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of Stormwater Runoff quantity and quality; 
4.  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of Structural Stormwater Control Facilities that can be used to meet the minimum Post-Development Stormwater Management standards; 
5.  Encourage the use of Nonstructural Stormwater Management Practices and Stormwater Better Site Design, such as the preservation of Green Space and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include Green Space, with the City's Green Space protection plan; 
6.  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of Structural Stormwater Control and Nonstructural Stormwater Management Practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and, 
7.  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of Stormwater Management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS AND ADMINISTRATIVE 
    All defined terms throughout this chapter are capitalized, and the definitions are contained in Chapter II of this Land Development Ordinance. 
    This chapter shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, Subdivision applications, and Grading applications, unless specifically exempted. This article describes the applicability of this chapter to Developments in the City of Woodstock, Georgia 

14.210. - Responsibilities. 
1.  The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the City; specific applicability and exemptions are defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (hereinafter "GSMM") and this article. See section 14.260 for information regarding obtaining this document. 
2.  The City Manager or designee shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
3.  The application of this article and the provisions expressed in this article shall be the minimum Stormwater Management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other local requirements authorized by state statute. Other Stormwater project improvements, as defined under state law, may be required. 
14.220. - Applicability. 
    These standards apply to any New Development or Redevelopment site that meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
1.  New Development that involves the creation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of Impervious Cover, or that involves other Land Development Activity of one (1) acre or more; 
2.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of Impervious Cover, or that involves other Land Development Activity of one (1) acre or more; 
3.  Any New Development or Redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the City to be a Hotspot; or, 
4.  Land Development Activity smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items 1 and 2, above, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct Land Development Activity may take place at different times on different schedules. 
14.230. - Exemptions. 
    The following activities are exempt from this Ordinance: 
1.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a Subdivision or a phased development project; 
2.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures exempted above; 
3.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
4.  Repairs to any Stormwater Management Facility or practice deemed necessary by the City. 
14.240. - Compatibility. 
    This Ordinance is not intended to modify or repeal any other Ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this Ordinance are in addition to the requirements of any other Ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this Ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other Ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
14.250. - Severability 
    If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivisions or clause of this Ordinance. 
14.260. - Stormwater Management design manual. 
    The City will utilize the policy, design criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the GSMM. A copy of the GSMM can be viewed in the office of the City's Department of Public Works or can be accessed at www.georgiastormwater.com. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

14.310. - Permit Application Requirements. 
    No Owner or Developer shall perform any Land Development Activity without first meeting the requirements of this Ordinance prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically exempted by this Ordinance, any owner or developer proposing a Land Development Activity shall submit a permit application to the City on a form provided for that purpose that can be obtained from the Department of Community Development. Unless otherwise exempted by this Ordinance, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater Management plan in accordance with section 14.320; 
(2)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with Article V, if applicable; 
(3)  Permit application and plan review fees. 
14.320. - Stormwater Management Plan Requirements. 
    The Stormwater Management plan shall detail how Post-Development Stormwater Runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this chapter, including the performance criteria set forth in Article IV, Stormwater Development Standards. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be prepared under the direct supervisory control of a registered Professional Engineer (PE) licensed in the State of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all Stormwater Management Facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the GSMM. 
    The Stormwater Management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this chapter are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse Post-Development Stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed Stormwater Management System. The plan shall include all of the information required in the Stormwater Management site plan checklist found in the GSMM. This includes: 
1.  Common address and legal description of site. 
2.  Vicinity Map. 
3.  Existing Conditions Hydrologic Analysis: The existing condition hydrologic analysis for Stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing Stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
4.  Post-Development Hydrologic Analysis: The Post-Development hydrologic analysis for Stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the Post-Development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of Post-Development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the Post-Development Stormwater Management performance criteria in Article IV; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than fifty (50) percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in Article IV must be met for the Stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
5.  Stormwater Management System: The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed Post-Development Stormwater Management System, which shall include: 
a.  A map and/or drawing or sketch of the Stormwater Management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural Stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; 
b.  A narrative describing how the selected structural Stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; 
c.  Cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural Stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; 
d.  A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the Stormwater Management System for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); 
e.  Documentation and supporting calculations to show that the Stormwater Management System adequately meets the Post-Development Stormwater Management performance criteria in Article V of this chapter; 
f.  Drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed Stormwater conveyance elements including Stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and, 
g.  Where applicable, a narrative describing how the Stormwater Management System corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local Greenspace protection plan. 
6.  Post-Development Downstream Analysis: A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of Post-Development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten (10) percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
7.  Construction-Phase Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan: An erosion and sedimentation control plan written in accordance with Chapter IV of this Ordinance or a NPDES Permit for Construction Activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent Stormwater controls. 
8.  Landscaping and Open Space Plan: A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to Stormwater Management Facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: 
a.  The arrangement of planted areas, natural and Greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; 
b.  Information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; 
c.  Descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; 
d.  Density of plantings; 
e.  Descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and, 
f.  A description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the Stormwater Management Facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
9.  Operations and Maintenance Plan: Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for Stormwater Management Facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a Stormwater Management Facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
10.  Maintenance Access Easements: The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to Stormwater Management Facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
11.  Inspection and Maintenance Agreements: Unless an on-site Stormwater Management Facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site Stormwater Management Facility or practice (approved template located in Appendix D of the Land Development Ordinance). 
12.  Evidence of Acquisition of Applicable Local and Non-local Permits: The applicant (and their Professional Engineer) shall certify and provide documentation to the City that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the Stormwater Management plan. 
13.  Modifications for Off-Site Facilities (if applicable): The Stormwater Management plan for each land development project shall provide for Stormwater Management Measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage Stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of Stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional Stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A Stormwater Management plan must be submitted to the City which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Community Development Department that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
a.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
b.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
c.  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
d.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
e.  Water quality impairment in violation of State water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
14.330. - Stormwater Management Inspection and Maintenance Agreements. 
    Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a Stormwater Management Facility or practice hereunder and for which the City requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site Stormwater Management Facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement (see Appendix D of the Land Development Ordinance), and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
    The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the Community Development Department prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
    The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the Stormwater Management Facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
    As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the Stormwater Management Facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
    The City, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future Stormwater Management Facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this Ordinance and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORMWATER DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
    The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all Stormwater Management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance: 

14.410. - Water Quality. 
    All Stormwater Runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a Stormwater Management System complies with this requirement if: 
1.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the GSMM; 
2.  Appropriate structural Stormwater controls or Nonstructural Practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the GSMM; and, 
3.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the City are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural Stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
14.420. - Stream Channel Protection. 
    Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three (3) approaches: 
1.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer. 
2.  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event. This requirement may be waived by the Development Process Committee for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, lakes, estuaries, or tidal waters where the reduction in the smaller flows will not have an impact on streambank or channel integrity. 
3.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
14.430. - Overbank Flooding Protection. 
    Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the Post-Development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm under section 14.420 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the twenty-five-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
    This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the Development Process Committee for sites where the Post-Development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled Post-Development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled Post-Development conditions. 
14.440. - Extreme Flooding Protection. 
    Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the one-hundred-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
    This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the Development Process Committee for sites where the Post-Development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled Post-Development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled Post-Development conditions. 
14.450. - Structural Stormwater Controls. 
    All structural Stormwater Management Facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the GSMM, adopted by reference in Article II of this chapter. All structural Stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural Stormwater controls not included in the GSMM, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the City before being included in the design of a Stormwater Management System. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of Stormwater Runoff or increased non-point source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
    Applicants shall consult the GSMM for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural Stormwater control. 
14.460. - Stormwater Credits for Nonstructural Measures. 
    The use of one (1) or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required by this article. The applicant may, if approved by the City, take credit for the use of Stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the GSMM. 
14.470. - Drainage System Guidelines. 
    Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, Stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one (1) parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Methods to calculate Stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Stormwater design manual; 
2.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the Stormwater Management plan using the methods included in the GSMM; and, 
3.  Design and construction of Stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the GSMM. 
14.480. - Dam Safety Standards. 
    Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER INSPECTIONS AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS 

14.510. - Construction Inspections. 
Inspections to Ensure Plan Compliance During Construction 
    Periodic inspections of the Stormwater Management System construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by them. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved Stormwater Management plan for establishing compliance. 
    All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
1.  The date and location of the inspection; 
2.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved Stormwater Management plan; 
3.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and, 
4.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved Stormwater Management plan. 
    If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
Final Inspection and As Built Plans 
    Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved Stormwater Management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any Stormwater Management Facilities, or practices, after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all Stormwater Management Facilities and practices and must be certified by a Professional Engineer. See Chapter III of this Land Development Ordinance for specific submittal requirements. A final inspection by the Community Development Department is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
14.520. - Ongoing Inspection and Maintenance. 
Long-Term Maintenance and Inspection 
    Stormwater Management Facilities, and practices included in a Stormwater Management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement, must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this Ordinance. 
    A Stormwater Management Facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the Stormwater Management Facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. 
    The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City, may correct the violation as described in the "Failure to Maintain" section below. 
    Inspection programs by the City may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to, routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in Stormwater Management Facilities; and evaluating the condition of Stormwater Management Facilities and practices. 
Right-of-Entry for Inspection 
    The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this Ordinance is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this Ordinance. 
Records of Maintenance Activities 
    Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a Stormwater Management Facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the City. 
Failure to Maintain 
    If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City, after thirty (30) days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
ARTICLE VI. - VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND LIABILITY 

14.610. - Violations. 
    Upon determination that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a Permit, an approved Stormwater Management plan or the provisions of this Ordinance, the Community Development Department, shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Ordinance without having first secured a Permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
    The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the Owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the Permit, the Stormwater Management plan or this Ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Community Development Department, by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation. 
14.620. - Penalties. 
    In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the Community Development Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the Community Development Department may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop Work Order. The Community Development Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. The Community Development Department may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has other wise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The Community Development Department may suspend, revoke or modify the Land Disturbance Permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated [upon such conditions as the Community Development Department in its sole discretion may deem necessary] to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures in the time frame set forth in the notice of violation or if no time frame is stated, fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the Community Development Department shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the Community Development Department has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the Community Development Department in its sole discretion may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this Ordinance, the Community Development Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Woodstock Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation remains uncured shall constitute a separate offense. 
14.630. - Property Owner Liability; Supplemental Charges. 
    Any person in violation of any portion of this article shall pay for all costs associated with the violation, including, but not limited to, sampling, testing, containment, cleanup, injury, legal and any other costs. 
Chapter XV - STREET, SIDEWALK, TRAIL, AND ADDITIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4010, § 1, adopted July 11, 2016, renamed Ch. XV from "Street Lighting Standards" to "Street, Sidewalk, Trail, and Additional Infrastructure Standards." An ordinance adopted June 8, 2015(4) repealed the former Ch. XV, §§ 15.100-15.180, and enacted a new Art. XV as set out herein. The former Ch. XV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the publication of this Land Development Ordinance. 

ARTICLE I. - STREET LIGHTING STANDARDS 

15.100. - Conformance by Developer: Acceptance of Public Ways. 
1.  The owner, developer or other person developing a subdivision is required to provide street light services and shall be required to conform to all of the standards herein provided for and, in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain a permit from the Code Enforcement Department prior to commencing any construction of any street light facilities. 
2.  The owner, developer or other person developing a shopping center, industrial park, office park or like development, shall install street lights along public rights-of-way adjoining that property in conformance with the standards herein provided for; and, in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain a permit from the Code Enforcement Department prior to commencing any construction of any street light facilities. 
3.  The Building Inspector shall not accept any facilities proposed to be dedicated until such time as the provisions hereof have been complied with. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.101. - Lighting in Developments Other than Single-Family Residential. 
    Street lighting in developments other than single-family residential shall be permitted only: 
1.  With the approval of the Building Inspector subject to the safety, economic and other factors involved; and 
2.  Upon final approval by the City; and 
3.  Upon compliance with the standards herein provided for. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.102. - Installation and Operation Standards Adopted: Exceptions. 
    In order to insure adequate illumination of public right-of-way and promote safety and security. The American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illumination Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standard Institute (1983), as amended, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the City with the following exceptions: 
1.  Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be: 
ROADWAY 
CLASSIFICATION COMMERCIAL AREA INTERMEDIATE AREA RESIDENTIAL AREA Arterial 1.2 0.9 0.6 Major Collector 1.2 0.9 0.6 Minor Collector 0.8 0.6 0.4 Local/Residential 0.6 0.5 0.3  
The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third (0.33) of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may be not less than one-sixth (0.166) of this average. 
2.  Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the Code Enforcement Department for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards, and no lighting shall be installed or operated without this approval. Should the Building Inspector disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any public right-of-way, he shall communicate the disapproval in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. Any disapproval of a light or lighting system by the Building Inspector may be appealed to the City Manager. 
If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the Building Inspector, a notice of appeal shall be filed with the Building Inspector within thirty (30) days from the date following the written notice of disapproval. It shall be the responsibility of the Building Inspector to transmit forthwith to the City Manager all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken, and to insure that the appeal is promptly handled. The City Manager may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify, the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. 
3.  Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as "security lights" or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public street, shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite for the street, and shall be oriented in such a manner to insure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from the objectionable glare. The approval of the Building Inspector shall be obtained before installation of these lights. 
4.  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.103. - Exceptions to Terms of Article. 
    The City may grant exceptions to the literal terms of this article where special conditions or hardships exist. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.104. - Federal, State Laws to Prevail in Conflicts. 
    If any provision of this article is in conflict with any state or federal law, or with any rule, regulation or order of any state or federal agency having jurisdiction of the subject matter of this article, it is hereby deemed to be the intention of the City that the state or federal law or rule, regulation or order, as the case may be, shall prevail so that the remaining portion of this article shall be deemed to be full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.105. - Right of Appeal. 
    Any person or agency dissatisfied with any decision or action of the City Manager shall have the right to appeal in writing from said decision to the City Council within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision or action. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.106. - Availability of Adopted Standards. 
    The American National Standards Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illumination Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1983), as amended, shall be made available by the Building Inspector for public reference. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.107. - Procedures to be Followed by Subdivision Developers. 
    Street lights shall be required to be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions except, however, subdivisions containing only lots which are five (5) acres or larger are exempted from the requirements of this paragraph. The term "subdivision" shall be as defined in Chapter II of this Code. At the time of and as a requirement of the submission of the final plat, the developer shall: 
1.  Submit a final street light layout prepared by the utility company which will provide the lighting service showing exact location of street lights within the subdivision. This drawing must be approved by the Building Inspector prior to obtaining any building permit within that subdivision. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facility and by the City. The fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet above the ground, and shall have approximate arm length to place the light over the street. No arm shall be less than two and one-half (2.5) feet long. One (1) light shall be located at each street intersection within the subdivision. 
2.  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures, and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation. 
3.  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the Building Inspector. 
4.  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.108. - Subdivisions with Underground Electric. 
    In subdivisions utilizing underground cable for electrical service, the developers shall be required to accomplish the same items listed in the preceding section hereof. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.109-15.199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 
    All streets, whether public or private, which shall hereafter be established in connection with the development of a major subdivision shall comply with the following design and improvement standards. See the end of this chapter for standard street design details. 

15.200. - General Subdivision Standards. 
1.  Access to Arterials and Collectors. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector route, the Development Process Committee may require that access to such street be limited by: 
a.  The subdivision of lots so as to back on the arterial or collector route and front on a parallel minor route; 
b.  A series of cul-de-sac, "U" shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the arterial or collector route; or 
c.  A marginal access or service street, separate from the arterial or collector route by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points. 
d.  The number of residential or local streets entering on arterial or collector routes shall be kept to a minimum. 
2.  Reserve Strips. The creation of reserve strips adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such street shall not be permitted. 
3.  Development Entrances. All proposed developments such as residential, commercial, industrial subdivisions, apartments, commercial lots, mobile home parks, private subdivisions, etc., shall construct acceleration/deceleration to the following requirements: 
a.  Residential Subdivisions. 
1.  Residential subdivisions not exceeding twenty (20) lots whose entrance is on an unclassified or minor collector county or city road or street shall install offset radii and fifty-foot tapers as shown in the applicable herein standard detail and Section 3.901.1. 
2.  All other residential subdivisions shall construct full acceleration/deceleration lanes to conform to the applicable herein standard detail and Section 3.901.1. 
3.  Residential subdivision exceeding two hundred (200) lots shall be required to provide the Public Works Director with a traffic study. 
b.  Commercial/industrial subdivisions exceeding two (2) businesses. 
1.  Full acceleration/deceleration lanes shall be installed per the applicable herein standard detail and Section 3.901.1. 
2.  If the Public Works Director determines that the project's size warrants a center turn lane and longer acceleration/deceleration lanes, then this may be required: 
c.  Small commercial businesses (two (2) or less). 
1.  On unclassified and minor collector roads offset radii and fifty-foot tapers per the applicable herein standard detail and Section 3.901.1. 
2.  Small commercial businesses shall install full acceleration/deceleration lanes per the applicable herein standard detail and Section 3.901.1, if accessing a major collector or an arterial road. 
3.  Commercial businesses on corner lots, which have frontage on interior subdivision streets, shall have access only from the main city or county road or street. 
4.  Commercial businesses on corner lots, which have frontage on an unclassified or minor collector city or county road or street, shall install an additional lane out to the intersection. 
d.  Large Commercial Businesses. The Public Works Director may require a center turn lane or longer acceleration/deceleration lanes if the traffic the project generates and the existing city or county road or street warrants it. 
e.  Access onto a state highway shall meet existing Georgia DOT requirements only, except that the entrance must be paved. A copy of the Georgia DOT permit shall be submitted to the Community Development Department before the plans can be approved. 
f.  The developer shall be required to upgrade the existing city road or street to meet the sight distance and lane requirements of the applicable herein standard detail and Section 15.201.1. In cases involving rock cuts, deep fills or cuts, proximity to flood plain, etc., the requirements of pavement widening for full acceleration/deceleration lanes may be modified or waived by the Public Works Director. 
4.  Intersections. Intersections of new street in a subdivision shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Street shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than sixty (60) degrees shall not be permitted. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least one hundred (100) feet therefrom. Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one (1) point unless specifically approved by the Public Works Director. 
b.  Proposed new intersections along one (1) side of an existing street shall coincide, wherever practicable, with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Jogs within street shaving center line offsets of less than on hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected streets have separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where streets intersect arterial or collector routes, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersection of arterial or collector streets shall be at least eight hundred (800) feet apart. 
c.  Where a street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting sight distance, the subdivider shall cut such ground or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the street right-of-way to the extent necessary to provide adequate sight distance. 
d.  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a two (2) percent grade for a distance of twenty-five (25) feet, measured from the back of curb of the intersecting street. 
5.  Street Names. Street or roads that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with, existing named streets, shall bear that name. The names of new streets and roads shall be subject to the approval of the Development Process Committee and shall not duplicate or be similar in sound to existing names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, circle, way, boulevard, drive, place, or court. 
6.  Railroads and Limited Access Highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways, where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands, shall be treated as follows: 
a.  In residential areas, a buffer strip at least twenty-five (25) feet in depth in addition to the normally required depth of the lot may be required adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening; the placement of structures within said strip is prohibited." 
b.  In commercial or industrial areas, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practical, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth of commercial or industrial sites. 
c.  Streets parallel to a railroad, where intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at grade, shall to the extent practical, be at a distance of at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
7.  Bridges. Bridges of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the Public Works Director, shall be constructed at the full expense of the subdivider without reimbursement from the City. The sharing of the expenses for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the Public Works Director, shall be fixed by special agreement between the City and the subdivider. The cost shall be charged to the subdivider pro-rata as to the percentage of his development so served. 
The engineering design of all bridges shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for review and approval prior to construction. The Public Works Director may consult with consultants or state agencies on the design of proposed bridges. 
8.  Private Streets. Private streets may be permitted by the Public Works Director in developments where controlled access or privacy is desired by the developer, provided such streets meet the standards of a public street and that a legal provision is drawn up that will guarantee the continued maintenance of the streets. 
9.  Half Streets. Half streets are prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
10.  Split Level Streets. Streets which are constructed so as to have two (2) traffic ways, each at different level within the same right-of-way shall provide such additional right-of-way as necessary to meet the requirements of and a paved traffic surface meeting the requirements of a marginal access street on each level. The slope between the two (2) traffic ways should not be less than two (2) to one (1). 
11.  One-Way Streets. If permitted by the Public Works Director, one-way street shall meet the minimum right-of-way and pavement widths of a marginal access street and have a pavement width of eighteen (18) feet. 
12.  Alleys. Alleys are permitted in any zoning category. 
13.  Dams. No city road or street shall be constructed on or across an existing or proposed dam. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.201. - Design Standards. 
    Design of proposed roads, streets and storm drains shall conform to these specifications: 
1.  Geometric Standards. 
a.  Required Speed Design/Maximum Grades. Minimum design speeds and maximum grades in the City by street classification shall be as prescribed in AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highway and Streets, 1990 Edition ("The Green Book") and as follows: 
Street Type Maximum 
Allowable Grade Minimum Required 
Design Speed (mph) Arterial 8% 55 Major Collector 11% 45 Minor Collector 12% 35 Local 15% 25 Alleys Varies Varies  
* Maximum grade of eighteen (18) percent are allowable on vertical tangents of two hundred (200) feet or less in length. Maximum grade on any street without curb and gutter shall be fourteen (14) percent. Minimum grade on cul-de-sac shall be one and one-half (1.5) percent to maintain one (1) percent in curb line. 
b.  Horizontal Curves. Horizontal curves and super elevation shall be as prescribed in AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 1990 ("The Green Book") and as follows: 
Street Type Speed Design (mph) Maximum Horizontal 
Curve (degree) Arterial 55 4 Major Collector 45 8 Minor Collector 35 15 Local 25 32  
Super elevation may be eliminated on streets with speed design thirty (30) mph or less. Minimum tangent between reverse curves on streets without super elevation shall be fifty (50) feet. Tangent between reverse curves on street with super elevation shall be sufficient to accommodate full super elevation run out as prescribed by "The Green Book". 
c.  Vertical Curves. Vertical curves shall be as prescribed in "The Green Book". Length of vertical curves shall be determined by the formula L=KA where: 
L = Length of vertical curve A = Algebraic difference in grades K = Rate of vertical curvature.  
  
Speed Design (mph) K Crests K Sags 25 20 30 30 30 40 35 40 50 45 80 70 55 150 100  
d.  Sight Distance. Horizontal sight distance of intersections shall be measured from the centerline of ingress/egress road extending to either side of abutting street along thoroughfare as shown in standard detail for Subdivision Entrance Sight Distance (horizontal). See the end of this chapter for design standard details. Vertical sight distance shall be measured as shown in standard detail for Subdivision Entrance Sight Distance (vertical). Minimum stopping sight distance shall be: 
Speed Design (mph) Minimum Stopping Sight Distance 25 160 30 200 35 250 40 325 45 400 50 475 55 550  
The design speed for sight distance at subdivision entrance intersections shall be the existing road speed limit plus five (5) mph. 
2.  Storm Drainage Design Standards. 
a.  Storm drainage design shall comply with the requirements of Chapter XIII, flood damage prevention standards, and Chapter XIV, storm water standards. 
b.  Permitting, sizing and location of all existing and proposed drainage structures shall be the responsibility of a registered professional engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor, subject to approval by the Public Works Department. 
c.  Storm drainage pipes, also known as the stormwater conveyance system, shall be designed according to the methods and criteria found in the stormwater management design manual and Article IV of Chapter XIV, stormwater standards, of this chapter. 
d.  Corrugated metal pipes (CMP) are not permitted within City right-of-way. Reinforced concrete pipes (RCP) shall be used within City right-of-way. High density polyethylene pipes (HDPE) may be used within City right-of-way but are not permitted within the roadway. The use of HDPE is expressly limited to the type with a smooth interior. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A); Ord. of 11-14-2016(2), § 1) 
15.202. - Construction. 
    Road, street and storm drainage construction shall comply with the following requirements; and with the latest edition of the Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges of the Georgia Department of Transportation as amended by the latest published supplemental specifications, if any, of the Department of Transportation, unless otherwise specifically set forth herein. 
1.  Clearing and Grubbing. The entire area within construction limits shall be cleared and grubbed. Disposal of all debris shall be done in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. No burial of debris within the right-of-way will be permitted. 
2.  Grading. 
a.  Grading shall be accurately done to the lines and grades shown on the plans. Embankments shall be compacted to a density of ninety-five (95) percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHO Method T-99. If it is necessary in order to obtain this compaction, the contractor shall add moisture to the material as placed. 
b. Depth of Cut or Fill Cut Slopes Fill Slopes 2 feet or less 4 to 1 4 to 1 2-5 feet 3 to 1 3 to 1 Over 5 feet 2 to 1 2 to 1  
The depth of cut referred to above shall be constructed to be the maximum cut or fill occurring in any one (1) section of cut or fill. The slope on cut or fill shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or full. When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, slope may be changed to vertical slope upon written approval of the Public Works Director. 
c.  Typical grading section shall be as shown in the applicable herein standard detail for residential or commercial/industrial street. 
3.  Storm Drainage. Storm drainage shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction plans. Trench construction and back fill shall be in accordance with Georgia DOT Standard No. 1030-D (latest version). Deviation from storm drainage as shown in the approved plans is not permitted unless specifically approved by the Public Works Director prior to installation. 
a.  Cross Drain Pipes: 
1.  Not less than eighteen (18) inches in size when under the street. 
2.  Have headwalls or flared end sections of an approved type on inlet and outlet ends of the pipe. 
3.  Extend twenty (20) feet past the rear of the building if thirty (30) inches or smaller. 
4.  Extend from edge of right-of-way to edge or right-of-way if larger than thirty (30) inches. 
5.  Maximum continuous length of pipe shall be three hundred (300) feet. 
6.  Junction boxes having access to the pipe shall be constructed to meet the requirements of Georgia DOT Standard 1030D (or most current). 
b.  Materials and Installation: 
1.  Concrete Pipes: 
A.  Shall be reinforced within the right-of-way but may be plain pipe outside of the right-of-way, if diameter is eighteen (18) inches or less. 
B.  Flat bottom and circular pipe sections shall be laid in a preparation trench with the socket ends pointing upstream. Sections may be joined by mortar joins, bituminous plastic cement joints, rubber-type gasket joints, O-ring gasket joints, or pre-formed plastic gasket joints. In bituminous plaster cement joints, the annular space shall be filled with joint material and the inside of each joint wiped smooth. Mortar joints shall be thoroughly wetted before filling with joint material. After the initial set, the mortar on the outside shall be protected from the air and sun with thoroughly wet earth or burlap cover. Rubber-type, O-Ring, and pre-formed plastic gasket joints shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
2.  Metal Pipe: 
A.  Metal pipe shall be fully coated inside or outside of the right-of-way. 
B.  Workmanship and Finish. Culvert pipe on which the shelter coating has been bruised or broken either in the shop or in shipping, or which shows defective workmanship, shall be rejected. Among others, the following defects are specified as constituting poor workmanship and the presence of any or all of them in any culvert pipe shall constitute sufficient cause for rejection: 
• Uneven laps; 
• Elliptical shaping; 
• Variation from a straight centerline; 
• Ragged or diagonal sheared edges; 
• Loose, unevenly lined or space rivets; 
• Poorly formed rivet heads; 
• Unfinished ends; 
• Illegible brand; 
• Lack of rigidity; 
• Bruised, scale, or broken shelter coating; 
• Dents or bends in the metal itself. 
C.  Coupling Bands. Field joint shall be made with bands of the same metal as the culverts. The bands shall be not less than seven (7) inches wide for diameters of eight (8) inches to thirty (30) inches, inclusive: not less than twelve (12) inches wide for culverts with diameters thirty-six (36) inches to sixty (60) inches. Such bands shall be so constructed as to lap on an equal portion of each of the culvert sections to be connected at the ends by galvanized angles having minimum dimensions of two (2) inches by three-sixteenths (0.1875) inches. The seven (7) band shall have a least two (2) galvanized bolts not less than one-half (0.5) inch in diameter. The one-half (0.5) band shall have three (3) and twenty-four (24) inch band shall have five (5) one-half (0.5) inch bolts. Other equally effective methods of connecting the coupling bands may be used if approved by the Public Works Director. 
D.  Gauge Determination and Tolerances. The gauge of the culvert metal will be determined from the thickness of the galvanized sheets. The mean thickness and the permissible variations therefrom for each gauge are as shown: 
WEIGHT AND GAUGE TOLERANCES 
Gauge # Weight (oz./sq. ft.) *Mean Thickness (inches) Permissible Variation in Thickness (inches) for coil width (inches) Up to 15 Over 15 to 32, Incl. 8 112.5 0.1681 0.008 0.009 10 92.5 0.1382 0.008 0.009 12 72.5 0.1084 0.008 0.009 14 52.5 0.0785 0.007 0.007 16 42.5 0.0636 0.007 0.007 18 34.5 0.0516 0.006 0.007  
*Thickness measured on tangent of corrugation. 
E.  Corrugated Aluminum or Steel Pipe and Pipe-Arches. Pipe sections shall be laid in a prepared trench with outside laps of circumferential joints pointing upstream and with longitudinal joints at the sides. Coupling bands, fastened by two (2) or more bolts, shall join the section. The space between adjoining sections shall be not more than the width of one (1) corrugation. 
F.  All damaged spots in galvanized coating that expose the base metal shall be required before the structure is back filled. All damage spots in bituminous coating that expose the base metal shall be recoated with asphalt before the structure is back filled. 
3.  Before any traffic over a storm drain is allowed, the developer shall provide an adequate depth and width of compacted back fill to protect the structure from damage or displacement. Any debris or silt that constricts the flow through a pipe shall be removed by the developer as often as necessary to maintain drainage. All pipe structures shall be cleaned before the work is accepted. Any damage or displacement that may occur due to traffic or erosion shall be repaired or corrected at the developer's expense. 
4.  Minimum clearances are: 
A.  One (1) foot between the bottom of the base or sub-base, if used, and the exterior crown of the culvert. 
B.  A minimum of one-half (0.5) foot between underground utilities and exterior crown of culverts. 
5.  Storm drainage pipe shall be bedded in Type 57 gravel, if firm soil is not available. 
6.  A certification by the supplier of the pipe specifications for each pipe shall be required before installation. 
A.  Bridge piling shall be driven to Georgia DOT standards for loading. Certification of pile load shall be by a professional engineer. 
B.  Changes in construction plans caused by field conditions shall be made at the direction of the Public Works Director with the cost of such changes to be paid by the developer. 
C.  Ditches. Where storm water velocity exceeds five (5.0) fps, the ditch shall be rip-rapped. 
4.  Sub-Grade. Sub-grade width shall include at least one (1) foot on each side outside the width of the base course, or one (1) foot on each side outside the location of curb and gutter forms. 
a.  After the earthwork has been completed, all storm drainage and other underground utilities have been installed under the roadbed, and the back fill in all such ditches thoroughly compacted, the sub-grade shall be brought to the lines, grades and cross section shown on the plans. 
b.  If any sections of the sub-grade are composed of unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the authorized representative of the City and replaced with suitable, thoroughly compacted material. 
c.  When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed, a layer of No. 3 stone can be laid as a traffic surface if the developer so desires. This material shall not be used as part of the base material. It may be worked into the sub-grade, if not, shall be removed before the base course is placed. 
d.  The top six (6) inches of sub-grade shall be compacted to a density of one hundred (100) percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99. The contractor shall add moisture if necessary to obtain this compaction. 
e.  Provision shall be made to drain low points in road construction when the final paving surface is delayed. 
1.  Provide break in the berm section when the curbing has not been constructed. 
2.  Use two and one-half (2.5) inches of six-inch pipe sections to provide drainage under curb to side slopes. 
5.  Curb and Gutter. Shall be vertical or roll-back type having the sections and dimensions shown in the applicable detail herein. 
a.  Residential Curb: 
1.  Concrete shall have a minimum strength of two and one-half (2.5) PSI at twenty-eight (28) days. 
2.  Typical minimum section shall be six (6) inches by twenty four (24) inches by nine (9) inches (6" x 24" x 9"). 
b.  Industrial or Commercial Curbing: 
1.  Concrete shall have a minimum strength of three thousand (3,000) PSI at twenty-eight (28) days. 
2.  Typical minimum section shall be six (6) inches by thirty (30) inches by nine (9) inches (6" x 30" x 9"). 
c.  Construction Methods: 
1.  Line and grade shall be set by developer's engineer or surveyor. 
2.  One-half (0.5) inch expansion joints of pre-molded bitumastic expansion joint material shall be provided at all radius points and at intervals not to exceed fifty (50) feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 
6.  Base and Pavement for Residential/Industrial/Commercial Streets. 
a.  Graded aggregate base material is subject to approval by the Public Works Director. Gradation and compaction test reports shall be provided to the Public Works Department. 
b.  After aggregate base has been placed, spread, shaped, and compacted; it shall be inspected by the Public Works Department. After conditional acceptance, paving can begin. 
c.  After the prime has cured for twenty-four (24) hours, it shall be inspected and by the Public Works Department. After conditional acceptance, paving can begin. 
d.  Hot-mix asphaltic concrete is subject to approval by the Public Works Director. Gradation, asphalt cement content and compaction test reports shall be provided to the Public Works Department. 
7.  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of all streets in residential developments and along both sides of the main connector road of commercial/industrial developments, or where deemed necessary by recommendation of the Public Works Director. 
Where a new development or parcel to be developed abuts an existing city or county roadway, curb and sidewalk shall be installed along the entire roadway frontage of the property. 
Sidewalks shall be located and designed as follows: 
a.  Sidewalks shall not be less than one (1) foot from the right-of-way line to prevent interference with fencing, walls, hedges, landscaping, or structures placed on the property line at a later date. 
b.  Sidewalks shall run parallel to the street. 
c.  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide and four (4) inches thick. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete with twenty-five hundred (2,500) PSI strength at twenty-eight (28) days. 
e.  All driveway aprons over sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete. 
f.  Sidewalks shall be properly back filled and landscaped. 
g.  On-site sidewalks or service walks are required for convenience and access to all dwelling units and other principal buildings from streets, driveways, parking areas or garages and for convenient pedestrian circulation and access to all site facilities. 
h.  Sidewalks and walks shall be laterally pitched at a slope of not less than one-quarter (0.25) inch per foot in order to provide adequate surface drainage. 
i.  Sidewalks and walks shall not exceed a seven (7) percent grade. Where sidewalks exceed five (5) percent grade, a non-slip surface texture shall be used. 
j.  Sidewalks and walks adjacent to parking areas shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide in order to prevent car overhang from restricting pedestrian movement along the sidewalk. 
k.  Width, alignment and grade of sidewalks and service walkways shall provide safety, convenience and good appearance for pedestrian traffic. Small jogs or changes in the alignment shall be avoided. 
l.  The alignment and grade of sidewalks and service walkways shall be coordinated with the site grading plan to prevent the passage of concentrated surface water on or across the sidewalk and to prevent the ponding of surface water by the sidewalk. 
m.  All sidewalks shall meet Americans with Disabilities Act requirements for handicapped accessibility. 
8.  Utility Cuts in Existing Streets. All utility construction plans within City right-of-way shall be revised and approved by the Public Works Director. All storm drainage construction shall be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Director. 
a.  No existing city road or street shall be open cut unless warranted by unusual circumstances. Any open cut shall be authorized in advance by the Public Works Director. Storm drains fifty-six (56) inches and smaller shall be bored. 
b.  If open cutting is authorized by the appropriate city department, the trenches shall be: 
1.  Compacted to one hundred (100) percent if under pavement and to ninety-five (95) percent if not under pavement. 
2.  Cut, back filled and compacted in accordance with Georgia DOT Standard Number 1401 with a surface course consisting of two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete Georgia DOT type "E" mix. 
9.  Signs. The developer shall install street name signs, traffic regulatory signs, and any other signs deemed necessary by the Public Works Director. 
a.  Street signs shall be green "Scotchlite" with white legends mounted on ten-foot round posts. 
b.  Traffic regulatory signs shall conform to the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices", and shall be approved by the Public Works Director as to design, material and method of installation. 
10.  Pavement Marking. Pavement marking as prescribed by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be required on: 
a.  All residential streets (whether local, minor collector or major collector) where the speed design is thirty-five (35) mph or greater. 
b.  All industrial/commercial road and streets. 
c.  All roads and street with more than one (1) lane in each direction. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.203-15.299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS 

15.300. - Required Access. 
1.  Facilities, buildings or portions of buildings hereafter constructed shall be accessible to fire department apparatus by way of an approved fire apparatus access road with an asphalt, concrete or other approved driving surface capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least seventy-five thousand (75,000) pounds (34,050 kg). 
2.  Accessibility for fire fighting equipment shall be provided and maintained throughout all stages of construction and occupancy. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.301. - Minimum Specifications. 
1.  Grade. Fire apparatus access roads shall not exceed ten (10) percent in grade. Grades steeper than ten (10) percent may be approved by fire chief. 
2.  Turning Radius. The customary turning radius of a fire apparatus access road is twenty-five (25) feet. 
3.  Dead Ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be provided with width and turnaround provisions in accordance with the following table. 
Length (feet) Width (feet) Turnaround Required 0-150 20 None required 151-500 20 120 ft Hammerhead, 60 ft "Y" or 96 ft diameter cul-de-sac in accordance with Illustration 1 501-750 26 120 ft Hammerhead, 60 ft "Y" or 96 ft diameter cul-de-sac in accordance with Illustration 1 Over 750 Special approval required  
4.  Fire Apparatus Access Road Gates. Gates securing the fire apparatus access roads shall comply with all of the following criteria: 
a.  The minimum gate width shall be twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Gates shall be of the swinging or sliding type. 
c.  Construction of gates shall be of materials that allow manual operation by one (1) person. 
d.  Gate components shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and replaced or repaired when defective. 
e.  Electric gates shall be equipped with a means of opening the gate by fire department personnel or emergency access. Emergency opening devices shall be approved by the fire code official. 
f.  Manual opening gates shall not be locked with a padlock or chain and padlock unless they are capable of being opened by means of forcible entry tools or when a key box containing the key(s) to the lock is installed at the gate location. 
g.  Locking device specifications shall be submitted for approval by the fire code official. 
h.  Electric gate operators where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. 
i.  Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F 2200. 
j.  A Knox key shall be provided where access control gates limit fire department access. 
k.  Where structures protected by automatic alarm systems have access control gates, the gates shall automatically open upon transmission of an alarm. 
5.  Signs. Where required by the fire code official, fire apparatus access roads shall be marked with permanent NO PARKING-FIRE LANE signs complying with Illustration 2. Signs shall have a minimum dimension of twelve (12) inches wide by eighteen (18) inches high and have red letters on a white reflective background. Signs shall be posted on one (1) or both sides of the fire apparatus road as required by this chapter. 
a.  Fire lane signs as specified in this chapter shall be posted on both sides of fire apparatus access roads that are twenty (20) to twenty-six (26) feet wide. 
b.  Fire lane signs as specified in this chapter shall be posted on one (1) side of fire apparatus access roads that are more than twenty-six (26) feet wide and less than thirty-two (32) feet wide. 
6.  Provide reasonable accessibility to and around all buildings for fire fighting equipment, including fire department ground ladders on multiple-story projects. A minimum of ten (10) feet on all sides of the building shall be provided to provide such access. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
Note- The illustrations referenced in this section are not set out at length in this Code, but may be found in the offices of the City. 
15.302. - Commercial and Industrial Developments. 
1.  Buildings or facilities exceeding three (3) stories or thirty (30) feet in height shall have at least two (2) means of fire apparatus access for each structure. 
2.  Buildings or facilities having gross building area of more than sixty-two thousand (62,000) square feet shall be provided with two (2) separate and approved fire apparatus access roads. However, projects having a gross building area of up to one hundred twenty-four thousand (124,000) square feet that have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings are equipped throughout with approved automatic sprinkler systems are exempt from this requirement. 
3.  Where two (2) fire apparatus access roads are required, they shall be placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half (0.5) of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the lot or area to be served, measured in a straight line between accesses, except as approved by the Development Process Committee. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.303. - Aerial Fire Apparatus Access Roads. 
1.  Where the vertical distance between the grade plane and the highest roof surface exceeds thirty (30) feet, approved aerial fire apparatus roads shall be provided. For purposes of this section, the highest roof surface shall be determined by measurement to the eave of a pitched roof, the intersection of the roof to the exterior wall, or the top of parapet walls, whichever is greater. 
2.  Aerial fire apparatus access roads shall have a minimum unobstructed width of twenty-six (26) feet, exclusive of shoulders, in the immediate vicinity of the building or portion thereof. However, where two (2) separate fire apparatus access roads are provided in accordance with all the other provisions contained in this section the width of the aerial fire apparatus access roads may be reduced to twenty (20) feet. 
3.  At least one (1) of the required access routes meeting this condition shall be located within a minimum of fifteen (15) feet and a maximum of thirty (30) feet from the building, and shall be positioned parallel to one entire side of the building. The side of the building on which the aerial fire apparatus access road is positioned shall be approved by the fire code official. 
4.  Overhead utility and power lines shall not be located over the aerial fire apparatus road or between the aerial fire apparatus access road and the building. Other obstructions shall be permitted to be placed with approval of the fire code official. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.304. - Multiple-Family Residential Developments. 
    Multiple-family residential projects having more than one hundred (100) dwelling units shall be equipped throughout with two (2) separate and approved fire apparatus access roads. Projects having up to two hundred (200) dwelling units may have a single approved fire apparatus access road when all buildings, including nonresidential occupancies, are equipped with approved automatic sprinkler systems. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.305. - One- or Two-Family Residential Developments. 
    Development of one- or two-family dwellings where the number of dwelling units exceeds thirty (30) shall be provided with two (2) separate and approved fire apparatus access roads and shall meet the requirements of Section 15.302(3). 
1.  Where there are more than thirty (30) dwelling units on a single public or private fire apparatus access road and all dwelling units are equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system, access from two (2) directions shall not be required. 
2.  The number of dwelling units on a single fire apparatus access road shall not be increased unless fire apparatus access roads will connect with future development, as determined by the fire code official. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(4), § 2(Exh. A)) 
15.306-15.399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ASPHALT TRAIL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

15.400. - Asphalt Trails. 
15.401. - Scope. 
1.  Asphalt trails shall be laid out and constructed so as to be woven through the woods, between the trees and over the root systems. This is a careful, interactive process between the Woodstock Parks and Recreation Department, Woodstock Public Works Department (City), contractor, and surveyor. 
2.  Asphalt trails shall be constructed to the desired width of ten (10) feet. If site conditions prohibit the construction of a ten (10) foot wide trail, a minimum width of eight (8) feet may be constructed with City approval. 
3.  Asphalt trails shall be constructed in a manner that does not disrupt the tree root systems or require unnecessary removal of trees or cutting of roots. All ground disturbances should be outside of the tree's drip line where practical. Where this is impractical, encroachments into the drip line may be approved by the City. Drip line is defined as the area of ground perpendicularly below the outer reaches of the tree's branches. This specification does not prevent any matters allowed under the Tree Preservation Standards. 
4.  Asphalt trails shall be constructed at the locations and to the dimensions, lines, grades and cross section indicated on the drawings or as directed by the City and in conformity with the provisions and requirements set out in these specifications. 
5.  Asphalt trails shall include all the necessary excavation, unless otherwise indicated, sub-grade and sub-base preparation, backfilling, final clearing up and completing all incidentals thereto, as indicated on the drawings or as directed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1(Exh. A), 7-11-2016) 
15.402. - Quality Assurance. 
1.  Use only materials that are furnished by a bulk asphalt concrete producer regularly engaged in production of hot-mix, hot-laid asphalt concrete. 
2.  Comply with applicable requirements of the current approved edition of Georgia Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications-Construction of Transportation Systems. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1(Exh, A), 7-11-2016) 
15.403. - Protection. 
1.  Contractor shall not encroach upon any areas outside the proposed asphalt trail surface and shoulder. Equipment shall not twist, turn or backup into woodland spaces outside of the area of the graded trail unless approved by the City. 
2.  Contractor shall not park vehicles, store or stage any materials or equipment under the overhanging branches or the drip line of trees to be saved. 
3.  Contractor shall review all construction adjustment considerations with the City prior to implementation. 
4.  Contractor shall keep detailed field notes of all adjustments and changes and make them available at any time. 
5.  Contractor shall utilize gravel fill base material when paved surfaces or trails are placed over any tree root system or under any tree canopy. Reference details on construction documents. 
6.  Trees and roots shall be protected from damage both above grade and below ground by using the development process outlined in Part 3-Execution. 
7.  After final rolling, do not permit vehicular traffic on asphalt concrete pavement until it has cooled and hardened, and in no case, no sooner than six (6) hours. 
8.  Do not permit construction traffic on finished asphalt trail surfaces. 
9.  Provide barricades and warning devices as required to protect pavement and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1(Exh. A), 7-11-2016) 
15.404. - Submittals. 
1.  Provide certificates stating that the materials supplied comply with specifications. Certificates shall be signed by the asphalt producer and the contractor. 
2.  Application instructions and a description as well as other data relative to the contractor's application equipment and methods shall be submitted to the City for approval. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.405. - Conditions. 
1.  Weather Limitations: 
a.  Apply bituminous prime and tack coats only when the ambient temperature in the shade has been at least forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit. 
b.  Do not conduct paving operations when surface is wet, frozen, or contains excess moisture that would prevent uniform distribution and required penetration. 
c.  Construct asphaltic courses only when atmospheric temperature in the shade is above thirty-five (35) degrees Fahrenheit, when the underlying base is dry and when the weather is not rainy. 
d.  Place base course when air temperature is above thirty-five (35) degrees Fahrenheit and rising. No base course shall be placed on a frozen, saturated, or otherwise unsuitable sub-grade material. 
2.  Grade control: establish and maintain the required lines and grades for each course during construction operations. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.406. - Inspection and Testing. 
1.  Pavement and base testing will be performed by an independent testing laboratory selected by the owner. 
2.  Trail alignment shall be hand-probed immediately after staking by a geotechnical consultant to determine subsurface structural conditions. 
3.  The testing agency shall test in-place graded aggregate base courses for compliance with specified compaction, thickness and surface smoothness requirements. 
4.  The testing agency shall take one (1) four (4) inch diameter core per fifty (50) linear feet of asphalt paved areas at locations selected by the City for density and thickness tests. Repair holes resulting from coring to match existing paving. 
5.  Compaction: 
a.  Graded Aggregate Base: Minimum acceptable density shall be ninety-eight (98) percent of maximum dry density in accordance with ASTM D 698. Conduct one (1) test for each two thousand five hundred (2,500) square yards of in-place material, but in no case less than one (1) daily for each layer. Test density of graded aggregate base according to ASTM D 2167. 
b.  Asphaltic Concrete: Compare density of in-place material against laboratory specimen of same mixture. Minimum acceptable density of in-place material shall be ninety-four (94) percent of the calculated voidless density based upon the effective specific gravity of the aggregate used. It is intended that acceptance density testing will be accomplished while the bituminous mixture is hot enough to permit further densification if such is shown to be necessary. If the density does not conform to the requirements stated herein above, the contractor shall continue compactive effort until the required density is obtained. 
6.  Pavement Thickness: Inspect the cores of the base and surface courses to determine the average thickness of the course. If the average thickness exceeds the allowable values listed below, additional cores shall be made at the contractor's expense to determine the area of deficient thickness. The deficient area shall be corrected by overlay with the same type of mix to the limits as determined by the City. 
a.  Base Course: Six (6) inch. 
b.  Binder Course: Two (2) inch. 
c.  Surface Course: One (1) inch. 
7.  Surface Smoothness: Test finished surface of each asphalt course for smoothness using a ten (10) foot straightedge. Intervals of tests shall be as directed by the owner. Surfaces will not be acceptable if exceeding the following: 
a.  Base Course: One-quarter (0.25) inch in ten (10) feet. 
b.  Binder Course: One-quarter (0.25) inch in ten (10) feet. 
c.  Surface Course: One-eighth (0.125) inch in ten (10) feet. 
8.  Contractor's Duties Relative to Testing: 
a.  Notifying laboratory of conditions requiring testing. 
b.  Coordinating with laboratory for field testing. 
c.  Paying cost for additional testing performed beyond the scope of that required and for retesting where initial tests reveal non-conformance with specified requirements. 
d.  Paying the cost of overlays or pavement removal and replacement, which does not comply with the specified testing limits. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.407. - Products and Materials. 
1.  Staking Materials. Staking materials shall be placed in field according to the plans and shall consist of the following: 
a.  One (1) inch by two (2) inch by three (3) foot (1" x 2" x 3') tall stakes for center line stakeout. 
b.  One (1) inch by two (2) inch by eighteen (18) inch (1" x 2" x 18") short stakes for corners. 
c.  Plastic flagging tape: 
Red-Indicates trees to remove. 
Yellow-Indicates trees to save. 
White-Indicates centerline. 
Pink-Control points. 
d.  Wire flags (pink). 
e.  Two (2) inch by two (2) inch by twelve (12) inch (2" x 2" x 12") hub stakes. 
f.  Mallet-short handle for driving stakes. 
2.  Graded Aggregate Base Course. Graded aggregate base course shall be of uniform quality throughout and shall meet the requirements of Section 815 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
3.  Binder Course. Binder course shall be a uniform quality throughout and conform to the requirements of Section 828 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
4.  Surface Course. Surface course shall be of uniform quality throughout and shall conform to the requirements of Section 828, Type "F" of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
5.  Prime Coat. Prime coat shall conform to the requirements of Section 412 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
6.  Tack Coat. Tack coat shall conform to the requirements of Section 413 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
7.  Gravel. Number 57 stone for root area fill not under trail: gravel shall be of uniform quality throughout and shall meet the requirements of Section 800 for Number 57 Stone, Group II and shall have the following gradation: 
Sieve Size Percent Passing 2-inch - 1 1/2-inch 100 1-inch 95-100 1/2-inch 25-60 No. 4 0-10 No. 8 0-5  
8.  Plastic Pipe. Four (4) inch perforated Schedule 40 ultra violet light resistant PVC. 
9.  Geosynthetic Materials. 
a.  Filter Fabric. Filter fabric utilized for separation of aggregate base or controlled fill materials from existing subgrades or sediment deposition shall conform to the requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, Section 881.06 for non-woven, needle-punched filter fabrics. The requirements outlined under Item 2.01.I.2 of this specification section will typically be sufficient for most applications. Filter fabric samples, as well as specific manufacturer's property characteristics and installation guidelines, shall be submitted to the City for review and approval with specific identification of each proposed application. 
b.  Geogrid Reinforcement Materials. Geogrid reinforcement materials utilized for subgrade stabilization applications shall be a regular grid structure formed by biaxially drawing a continuous sheet of select polypropylene material and shall have aperture geometry and rib and junction cross-sections sufficient to permit significant mechanical interlock with the material being reinforced. The geogrid shall have high flexural rigidity and high tensile strength at ribs and junctions of the grid structure. The geogrid shall maintain its reinforcement and interlock capabilities under repeated dynamic loads while in service and shall also be resistant to ultraviolet degradation normally encountered in the material being reinforced. Geogrid reinforcing material samples, as well as specific manufacturer's property characteristics and installation guidelines, shall be submitted to the City for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.408. - Execution. 
15.409. - Equipment. 
1.  No track type equipment shall be used in the construction of this work. Rubber tire vehicles shall be used exclusively and shall be limited to small back hoes, bobcats, pickup trucks, dump trucks and narrow paving machines of the type used for golf course cart paths equipment shall be a lightweight, small-scale vehicle capable of negotiating eight (8) foot to ten (10) foot wide pathways. 
2.  Asphalt spreader machines shall have a spreader opening width not to exceed eight (8) feet and a total width not to exceed ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.410. - Layout. 
1.  Contractor shall stake trail coordinate control points as per the plans with hub stakes and tall stakes shall flag stakes with pink tape. 
2.  Contractor shall stake the centerline of the proposed trail layout as per the plans with wire/flag stakes to indicate routes. 
3.  Contractor and a representative from the City shall walk the stakeout to make adjustments to the layout and flag trees to be removed with red tape. 
4.  The owner's surveyor shall make field notes and transfer field adjustments to the construction documents. 
5.  Contractor shall prepare a construction stakeout of the trail based on the revised layout and grading plans. Stakeout shall include horizontal and vertical (i.e., spot elevations) information. 
6.  Contractor and a representative from the City shall walk the stakeout again to make minor horizontal adjustments and to adjust the vertical grading. 
7.  The owner's surveyor shall transfer revised data to the construction documents for contractor's reference. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.411. - Clearing and Grubbing. 
1.  Clearing and grubbing shall be performed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
2.  Contractor shall remove trees and underbrush from the trail corridor. This shall be accomplished with a rubber tire tractor and bush hog. Small trees shall be cut off flush with the ground. Large trees shall be cut down by hand saws or uprooted and removed by knocking the tree down so that it falls within the trail corridor. All stumps shall be ground down eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches below finished subgrade. Trees shall be cut into pieces and removed by small truck. No dragging of cut trees, tree trunks or limbs shall be permitted. No root rakes shall be permitted. 
3.  Limbs, brush and treetops shall be removed or chipped and stock-piled for later use in areas approved by the City. 
4.  Contractor shall hand rake surface leaf mulch and humus away from trail bed. Contractor shall scatter this material in designated areas that will not be disturbed by construction. Soil mixed with ground up stump litter shall be removed from the trail corridor and not be left under the trail surface. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.412. - Removal of Structures and Obstructions. 
    Unless otherwise indicated or stipulated, the removal of structures, obstructions, etc., will be performed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.413. - Trail and Drainage Excavation. 
    Trail and drainage excavation, as indicated on the drawings or as directed by the City, shall be performed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.414. - Embankment Construction. 
    Embankment construction, as indicated on the drawings or as indicated by the City, shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the City LDO, Chapter XV, Section 15.202.2. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.415. - Subgrade Preparation. 
1.  As determined necessary by the City, cut roots on the uphill slope prior to grading. Fine grading shall proceed to remove bumps, dips and holes from the trail bed. Stump holes must be filled and compacted. 
2.  The subgrade shall be shaped so that the finished asphalt surface will slope to direct water into the natural drainage swales and conform to natural drainage patterns to the greatest extent possible, within the limits imposed by the drawings and specifications. Cross slope shall be downhill at two (2) percent. 
3.  The subgrade for the trails shall be formed by excavation to a depth equal to the thickness of the asphalt and base course, except where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees. Contractor shall not excavate where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees unless the soils are determined by the geotechnical engineer to be unstable. 
4.  Rough grade of native soil shall be roller compacted to achieve maximum density stated on the details. 
5.  Yielding or unsuitable material shall be removed and backfilled with satisfactory material except where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees. 
6.  Where yielding or unsuitable materials are found and where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees, the geotechnical consultant shall be utilized to determine the subgrade conditions and to verify subgrade preparation specifications. Geotechnical test results for subgrade preparation shall be submitted to the City for any specification revisions prior to the contractor's commencement of work. 
7.  Final subgrade shall conform to the lay of the trail less the depth of the asphalt and specified base. 
8.  For thin-based, light-duty trail, a geotextile fabric shall be placed along the trail prior to placing base material. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.416. - Base Course. 
1.  Contractor shall work from within the proposed edges of the sub base. Compacted base shall extend twelve (12) to eighteen (18) inches outside of the edges of the asphalt paving. 
2.  Contractor shall place a minimum of four (4) inches of graded aggregate base along trail grading, compacted thoroughly and finished to a smooth, unyielding surface and proper line, grade and cross section of the proposed construction. Compaction density shall be shown on the plans or details. 
3.  Except as indicated elsewhere, placement of graded aggregate sub base shall be in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
4.  Where yielding or unsuitable materials are found and where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees, the contractor shall place a special fill material system consisting of, as determined by the geotechnical consultant, varying depths of graded gavel fill placed over geotextile fabrics or geogrid subgrade reinforcements, which are placed on or above the subgrade. The geotechnical consultant shall be utilized to take the soil borings as necessary to determine the subsurface conditions, and to verify that base material specifications and details are sufficient to support the trails and specified uses. Geotechnical test results for base material shall be submitted to the City for any base specification revisions prior to beginning work. 
5.  Drainage pipes, walls, bridge abutments, etc. may be constructed using the trail as an access route only after base cover is placed and compacted. Light duty pipes may be placed prior to rough grading. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.417. - Surface Preparation. 
    Contractor shall place asphalt paving over the approved base. 
1.  Loose and Foreign Material: 
a.  Remove loose and foreign material from surface immediately before application of paving. 
b.  Use power brooms or blowers, and hand sweeping as required. 
c.  Do not displace surface material. 
2.  Prime Coat: 
a.  Uniformly apply at a rate of two-tenths (0.20) to five-tenths (0.50) gallons per square yard over compacted and cleaned sub base surface. 
b.  Apply enough material to penetrate and seal, but not flood the surface. 
c.  Allow to cure and dry as long as required to attain proper penetration, and in no case less than twenty-four (24) hours unless otherwise acceptable to the City. 
d.  Blot excess asphalt with just enough sand to prevent pick-up under traffic. 
e.  Remove loose sand before paving. 
3.  Tack Coat: 
a.  Dilute material with equal parts of water and apply to contact surfaces of previously constructed asphalt concrete or Portland cement concrete and similar surfaces. 
b.  Apply at a rate of five one-hundredths (0.05) to fifteen one-hundredths (0.15) gallons per square yard of surface. 
c.  Apply tack coat by brush to contact surfaces of curbs, gutters, manholes, and other structures projecting into or abutting asphalt concrete pavement. 
d.  Allow surfaces to dry until material is at condition of tackiness to receive pavement. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.418. - Asphalt Concrete Placement. 
1.  Place asphalt concrete mix on prepared surface, spread and strike-off using paving machine. 
2.  Spread mixture at a minimum temperature of two hundred twenty-five (225) degrees Fahrenheit. 
3.  Inaccessible and small areas may be placed by hand. 
4.  Place each course at a thickness such that when compacted it will conform to the indicated grade, cross-section, finish thickness, and density indicated. 
5.  Pavement Placing: 
a.  Unless otherwise directed, begin placing along centerline of area to be paved on crowned section, and at high side of sections on one-way slope, and in direction of traffic flow. 
b.  After first strip has been placed and rolled, place succeeding strips and extend rolling to overlap previous strips. 
c.  Complete base courses for a section before placing surface courses. 
d.  Place mixture in as continuous an operation as practical. 
6.  Hand Placing: 
a.  Spread, tamp, and finish mixture using hand tools in areas where machine spreading is not possible, as acceptable to the City. 
b.  Place mixture at a rate that will ensure handling and compaction, before mixture becomes cooler than acceptable working temperature. 
7.  Joints: 
a.  Carefully make joints between old and new pavements, or between successive days' work, to ensure a continuous bond between adjoining work. 
b.  Construct joints to have some texture, density and smoothness as adjacent sections of asphalt concrete course. 
c.  Clean contact surfaces free of sand, dirt, or other objectionable material and apply tack coat. 
d.  Offset transverse joints in succeeding courses not less than twenty-four (24) inches. 
e.  Cut back edge of previously placed course to expose an even, vertical surface for full course thickness. 
f.  Offset longitudinal joints in succeeding courses not less than six (6) inches. 
g.  When the edges of longitudinal joints are irregular, honeycombed, or inadequately compacted, cut back unsatisfactory sections to expose an even, vertical surface for full course thickness. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.419. - Asphalt Concrete Compaction. 
1.  Provide sufficient rollers to obtain the required pavement density. 
2.  Begin rolling operations after placing, as soon as the mixture will bear weight of roller without excessive displacement. 
3.  Do not permit heavy equipment, including rollers, to stand on finished surface, before it has thoroughly cooled or set. 
4.  Compact mixture with hot hand tampers or vibrating plate compactors in areas in accessible to rollers. 
5.  Start rolling longitudinally at extreme lower side of sections and proceed toward center of pavement. Roll to slightly different lengths on alternate roller runs. 
6.  Do not roll centers of sections first, under any circumstances. 
7.  Breakdown Rolling: 
a.  Accomplish breakdown or initial rolling immediately following rolling of transverse and longitudinal joints and outside edge. 
b.  Operate rollers as close as possible to edge without causing pavement displacement. 
c.  Check crown, grade, and smoothness after breakdown rolling. 
d.  Repair displaced areas by loosening at once with lutes or rakes and filling, if required, with hot loose material before continuing rolling. 
8.  Second Rolling: 
a.  Follow breakdown rolling as soon as possible, while mixture is hot and in condition for compaction. 
b.  Continue second rolling until mixture has been thoroughly compacted. 
9.  Finish Rolling: 
a.  Perform finish rolling while mixture is still warm enough for removal of roller marks. 
b.  Continue rolling until roller marks are eliminated and course has attained specified density. 
10.  Patching: 
a.  Remove and replace damaged or defective areas. Remove a minimum of ten (10) feet of trail length, five (5) foot minimum length up the trail and five (5) foot minimum length down the trail, from the edges of the damaged area. Small patches within the boundaries of the finished trail are not permitted. 
b.  Cut out and fill with fresh, hot asphalt concrete. 
c.  Compact by rolling to specified density and smoothness. 
d.  Remove deficient areas for full-depth course. 
e.  Cut sides perpendicular and parallel to direction of traffic with edges vertical. 
f.  Apply tack coat to exposed surfaces before placing new asphalt concrete mixture. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.420. - Backfilling. 
    Contractor shall fine grade the outside edges of the trail to transition down to base grade by spreading native soil and covering with leaf and stockpiled wood chip mulch. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.421. - Cleaning and Protection. 
1.  Cleaning. After completion of paving operations, clean surfaces of excess or spilled asphalt materials to the satisfaction of the City. 
2.  Protection. 
a.  After final rolling, do not permit vehicular traffic on asphalt concrete pavement until it has cooled and hardened, and in no case no sooner than six (6) hours. 
b.  Provide barricades and warning devices as required to protect pavement and the general public. 
3.  Maintenance. The contractor shall maintain the surfaces of pavements until the acceptance of the project. Maintenance shall include replacement, overlay, milling and reshaping as necessary to prevent raveling of the road material, the preservation of smooth surfaces and the repair of damaged or unsatisfactory surfaces, to the satisfaction of the City. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.422. - Supervision and Approval. 
    Pavement shall meet the requirements of the regulatory agency responsible for the maintenance of pavement. Obtain agency approval of pavement before requesting final payment. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.423-15.499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONCRETE TRAIL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

15.500. - Concrete Trails. 
15.501. - Scope. 
1.  Concrete trail shall be laid out and constructed so as to be woven through the woods, between the trees and over the root systems. This is a careful, interactive process between the Parks and Recreation Department, Public Works Department, contractor, and surveyor. 
2.  Concrete trail shall be constructed to the desired width of ten (10) feet. If site conditions prohibit the construction of a ten (10) foot wide trail, a minimum width of eight (8) feet may be constructed with City approval. 
3.  Concrete trail shall be constructed in a manner that does not disrupt the tree root systems or require unnecessary removal of trees or cutting of roots. All ground disturbances should be outside of the tree's drip line where practical. Where this is impractical, encroachments into the drip line may be approved by the City. Drip line is defined as the area of ground perpendicularly below the outer reaches of the tree's branches. This specification does not prevent any matters allowed under the tree preservation standards. 
4.  Concrete trail shall be constructed at the locations and to the dimensions, lines, grades and cross section indicated on the drawings or as directed by the City and in conformity with the provisions and requirements set out in these specifications. 
5.  Concrete trail shall include all the necessary excavation, unless otherwise indicated, sub-grade and sub-base preparation, backfilling, final clearing up and completing all incidentals thereto, as indicated on the Drawings or as directed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.502. - Quality Assurance. 
    Comply with applicable requirements of the current approved edition of Georgia Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications-Construction of Transportation Systems. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.503. - Protection. 
1.  Contractor shall not encroach upon any areas outside the proposed concrete trail surface and shoulder. Equipment shall not twist, turn or backup into woodland spaces outside of the area of the graded trail unless approved by the City. 
2.  Contractor shall not park vehicles, store or stage any materials or equipment under the overhanging branches or the drip line of trees to be saved. 
3.  Contractor shall review all construction adjustment considerations with the City prior to implementation. 
4.  Contractor shall keep detailed field notes of all adjustments and changes and make them available at any time. 
5.  Contractor shall utilize gravel fill base material when paved surfaces or trails are placed over any tree root system or under any tree canopy. Reference details on construction documents. 
6.  Trees and roots shall be protected from damage both above grade and below ground by using the development process outlined in Part 3-Execution. The tree preservation standards set forth in the City LDO, Chapter IX shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.504. - Submittals. 
1.  Provide certificates stating that the materials supplied comply with specifications. Certificates shall be signed by the concrete producer and the contractor. 
2.  Application instructions and a description as well as other data relative to the contractor's application equipment and methods shall be submitted to the City for approval. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.505. - Conditions. 
1.  Weather Limitations: 
a.  Do not conduct concrete paving operations when surface is saturated, or contains excess of moisture that would prevent uniform distribution and required penetration. 
b.  Construct concrete trail sections only when atmospheric temperature in the shade is above forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit, when the underlying base is dry and when weather is not rainy. 
c.  Place base course when air temperature is above thirty-five (35) degrees Fahrenheit and rising. No base course shall be placed on a frozen, saturated, or otherwise unsuitable sub-grade material. 
2.  Grade Control: Establish and maintain the required lines and grades for each course during construction operations. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.506. - Inspection and Testing. 
1.  Geotechnical consultant shall hand probe the route of the trail prior to grading to determine structural conditions. 
2.  Pavement and base testing will be performed by an independent testing laboratory selected by the owner. 
3.  The testing agency shall test in-place courses for compliance with specified density, thickness and surface smoothness requirements. 
4.  Earthwork and compaction operations shall conform to the requirements set forth in the currently approved edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
5.  Concrete Strength. One (1) set of acceptance and field cylinders (a total of four (4)) from the same batch of concrete will be made for each fifty (50) cubic yards or fraction thereof, not less than once for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of pavement in each day's placing for each class and mix design. 
a.  Each batch of concrete shall be tested for slump prior to placement. Slump shall be between one-half (0.5) and one and one-half (1.5) inches as determined by AASHTO Test Method T119. 
b.  Acceptance cylinders are compression test cylinders molded in the field, stored and cured in the field for the first twenty-four (24) hours after molding and thereafter in the laboratory of the testing agency until time of testing. Average breaking strength at twenty-eight (28) days of a set of two (2) acceptance cylinders will comprise test. 
c.  Field cylinders are compression test cylinders molded in the field, stored and cured on the work site in the same location and subject to the same exposure as job concrete of which it is a representative. Each set of two acceptance cylinders will have two (2) matching field cylinders. 
d.  One (1) field cylinder will be broken at seven (7) days and the remaining will be held in reserve. 
6.  Pavement Thickness. The surface course of the concrete trail shall be six (6) inches thick. The allowable variation in thickness of each course is as follows: 
a.  Aggregate Base Course: ± one-half (0.5) inch. 
b.  Surface Course: ± one-quarter (0.25) inch. 
7.  Surface Smoothness. Test finished surface of each course for smoothness using a ten (10) foot straightedge. Intervals of tests shall be as directed by the owner. Surfaces will not be acceptable if exceeding the following: 
a.  Base Course: one-quarter (0.25) inch in sixteen (16) feet. 
b.  Surface Course: one-eighth (0.125) inch in ten (10) feet. 
8.  Contractor's Duties Relative to Testing. 
a.  Notifying laboratory of conditions requiring testing. 
b.  Coordinating with laboratory for field testing. 
c.  Paying costs for additional testing performed beyond the scope of that required and for retesting, where initial tests reveal non-conformance with specified requirements. 
d.  Paying the cost of overlays or pavement removal and replacement, which does not comply with the specified testing limits. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.507. - Materials. 
1.  Materials used in the construction of concrete trails shall conform, unless otherwise stipulated, to the following: 
a.  Portland cement shall conform to ASTM C 150, Type 1. 
b.  Graded aggregate base shall be uniform throughout and conform to requirements of Section 815.01 of the Georgia Department of Transportation Specifications. 
c.  Sand: Dune sand, bank-run sand and manufactured sand are not acceptable. Only builder's sand shall be used. 
d.  Fiber Reinforcement. Engineered polypropylene fibers designed for secondary reinforcement of concrete slabs. 
e.  Premolded joint filler for expansion joints shall conform to the requirements of ASTM D 1751 or ASTM D 1752. The joint sealer for the joints in the concrete pavement shall meet the requirements of Federal Specification SS-S-164 and shall be hot-poured type. 
f.  Concrete Color. Concrete shall be grey concrete mix and shall be from same supplier and same batch mixture. Finished concrete shall have a medium broom finish parallel to traffic flow on all trail sections. 
g.  All concrete, except where shown or specified otherwise, shall have the following minimum compressive strengths at twenty-eight (28) days, and slump at time of placement: 
Location Strength Maximum 
Aggregate Size Slump Footings, bases 3000 psi 1 1/2" 1" Walls 3000 psi 3/4" 1" Pavement, trails 4000 psi 1 1/2" 1"  
2.  Staking materials shall be placed in field according to the plans and shall consist of the following: 
a.  One (1) inch by two (2) inch by three (3) foot tall stakes for center line stakeout. 
b.  One (1) inch by two (2) inch by eighteen (18) inch short stakes for corners. 
c.  Plastic flagging tape: 
Red-Indicates trees to remove. 
Yellow-Indicates trees to save. 
White-Indicates centerline. 
Pink-Control points. 
d.  Wire flags (pink). 
e.  Two (2) inch by two (2) inch by twelve (12) inch hub stakes. 
f.  Mallet-short handle for driving stakes. 
3.  Plastic Pipe. Four (4) inch perforated Schedule 40 ultra violet light resistant PVC. 
4.  Geosynthetic Materials. 
a.  Filter Fabric. Filter fabric utilized for separation of aggregate base or controlled fill materials from existing subgrades or sediment deposition shall conform to the requirements of the currently approved edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, Section 881.06 for non-woven, needle-punched filter fabrics. The requirements outlined under Item 2.01.D.2 of this specification section will typically be sufficient for most applications. Filter fabric samples, as well as specific manufacturer's property characteristics and installation guidelines, shall be submitted to the City for review and approval with specific identification of each proposed application. 
b.  Geogrid Reinforcement Materials. Geogrid reinforcement materials utilized for subgrade stabilization applications shall be a regular grid structure formed by biaxially drawing a continuous sheet of select polypropylene material and shall have aperture geometry and rib and junction cross-sections sufficient to permit significant mechanical interlock with the material being reinforced. The geogrid shall have high flexural rigidity and high tensile strength at ribs and junctions of the grid structure. The geogrid shall maintain its reinforcement and interlock capabilities under repeated dynamic loads while in service and shall also be resistant to ultraviolet degradation normally encountered in the material being reinforced. Geogrid reinforcing material samples, as well as specific manufacturer's property characteristics and installation guidelines, shall be submitted to the City for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.508. - Equipment. 
1.  No track type equipment shall be used in the construction of this work. Rubber tire vehicles shall be used exclusively and shall be limited to small back hoes, bobcats, pickup trucks, dump trucks and small concrete mixers. 
2.  Concrete placing machinery shall have a total width not to exceed width of trail plus two (2) feet. No large heavy-duty track vehicles are allowed. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.509. - Layout. 
1.  Contractor shall stake trail coordinate control points as per the plans with hub stakes and tall stakes shall flag stakes with pink tape. 
2.  Contractor shall stake the centerline of the proposed trail layout as per the plans with wire/flag stakes to indicate routes. 
3.  Contractor and a representative from the City shall walk the stakeout to make adjustments to the layout and flag trees to be removed with red tape. 
4.  The owner's surveyor shall make field notes and transfer field adjustments to the construction documents. 
5.  Contractor shall prepare a construction stakeout of the trail based on the revised layout and grading plans. Stakeout shall include horizontal and vertical (i.e., spot elevations) information. 
6.  Contractor and a representative from the City shall walk the stakeout again to make minor horizontal adjustments and to adjust the vertical grading. 
7.  The owner's surveyor shall transfer revised data to the construction documents for contractor's reference. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.510. - Clearing and Grubbing. 
1.  Clearing and grubbing shall be performed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
2.  Contractor shall remove trees and underbrush from the trail corridor. This shall be accomplished with a rubber tire tractor and bush hog. Small trees shall be cut off flush with the ground. Large trees shall be cut down by hand saws or uprooted and removed by knocking the tree down so that it falls within the trail corridor. All stumps shall be ground down eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches below finished subgrade. Trees shall be cut into pieces and removed by small truck. No dragging of cut trees, tree trunks or limbs shall be permitted. No root rakes shall be permitted. 
3.  Limbs, brush and treetops shall be removed or chipped and stock-piled for later use in areas approved by the City. 
4.  Contractor shall hand rake surface leaf mulch and humus away from trail bed. Contractor shall scatter this material in designated areas that will not be disturbed by construction. Soil mixed with ground up stump litter shall be removed from the trail corridor and not be left under the trail surface. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.511. - Removal of Structures and Obstructions. 
    Unless otherwise indicated or stipulated, the removal of structures, obstructions, etc., will be performed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.512. - Trail and Drainage Excavation. 
    Trail and drainage excavation, as indicated on the drawings or as directed by the City, shall be performed in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.513. - Embankment Construction. 
    Embankment construction, as indicated on the drawings or as indicated by the City, shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the City LDO, Chapter XV, Section 15.202.2. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.514. - Subgrade Preparation. 
1.  Fine grading shall proceed to remove bumps, dips and holes from the trail bed. Stump holes must be filled and compacted. Drainage pipes, walls, bridge abutment etc. may be constructed using the trail as an access route. 
2.  The subgrade shall be shaped so that the finished concrete surface will slope to direct water into the natural drainage swales and conform to natural drainage patterns to the greatest extent possible, within the limits imposed by the drawings and specifications. Cross slope shall be downhill at two (2) percent. 
3.  The subgrade for the trails shall be formed by excavation to a depth equal to the thickness of the concrete plus the base course, except where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees. Contractor shall not excavate where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees unless the soils are determined by the geotechnical engineer to be unstable. 
4.  Yielding or unsuitable material shall be removed and backfilled with satisfactory material except where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.515. - Base Course. 
1.  Contractor shall work from within the proposed paving edges. 
2.  Contractor shall place a minimum of six (6) inches of graded aggregate under trails, as determined by the geotechnical consultant, compacted thoroughly and finished to a smooth, unyielding surface and proper line, grade and cross-section of the proposed construction. 
3.  All subgrade shall be of such width as to permit the proper installation and bracing of the forms. 
4.  Additional stabilization of poor subgrade areas may be necessary to achieve compaction criteria for aggregate base. These additional subgrade stabilization measures shall be performed under the direct supervision of the geotechnical consultant. These measures may include, but are not limited to, placement of geogrid reinforcement materials, aggregate bridge lifts, undercutting of unsuitable soils, and soil cement admixtures. 
5.  Where the trail passes under or through the drip line of a tree or trees, the contractor shall place a special fill material system consisting of, as determined by the geotechnical consultant, varying depths of graded gravel fill placed over geotextile fabrics or geogrid subgrade reinforcements which are placed on or above the subgrade. The geotechnical consultant shall be utilized to take soil borings as necessary to determine the subsurface conditions, to verify that base material specifications and details are sufficient to support the trails and specified uses. Geotechnical test results for base material shall be submitted to the City for any base specification revisions prior to beginning work. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.516. - Forms. 
1.  All forms shall be set upon the prepared subgrade, true to lines and grade, and held rigidly in place so as not to be disturbed or displaced during the placing of the concrete. The top of the form shall be set to exact grade and the height shall be equal to, not less than, the thickness of the proposed concrete. 
2.  Design framework to be readily removable without impact, shock, or damage to cast-in-place concrete surfaces and adjacent materials. 
3.  Construct forms complying with ACI 347, to sizes, shapes, lines and dimensions shown, and to obtain accurate alignment, location, grades, level and plumb work in finished structures. Provide for opening, offsets, sinkages, keyways, recesses, moldings, rustifications, reglets, chamfers, blocking, screeds, bulkheads, anchorages, inserts, and other features required in work. Use selected materials to obtain finishes. Solidly butt joints and provide back-up at joints to prevent leakage of cement paste. 
4.  Fabricate forms for easy removal without hammering or prying against concrete surfaces. Provide crush plates or wrecking plates where stripping may damage cast concrete surfaces. Provide top forms for inclined surfaces where slope is too steep to place concrete with bottom forms only. Kerf wood inserts for forming keyways, reglets, recesses, and the like to prevent swelling and for easy removal. 
5.  Immediately before placing the concrete, the forms shall be given a coat of light oil and where being removed and used again, the forms shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled each time. 
6.  Forms shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after placing concrete, and no pressure shall be exerted upon the concrete in removing the forms. 
7.  Where the concrete trail is to be joined to an existing trail or sidewalk, the existing sidewalk, if not in proper condition for the junction, shall be cut to a neat line perpendicular to both the centerline and the surface of the trail, or as indicated by the City. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.517. - Expansion Joints. 
1.  Trail designed to accommodate bike, skateboards, and blades shall not have trowel joints. Only saw joints are permitted. 
2.  Unless otherwise indicated on the drawings or as directed by the owner, premoulded expansion joint filler, one-half (0.5) inch in thickness, shall be placed at the locations and in line with expansion joints in the adjoining pavement, gutter or curb. Transverse expansion joints for concrete trails shall be one-half (0.5) inch thick. When expansion joints are not required in the adjoining pavement or gutter, and not otherwise indicated on the drawings, a one-half (0.5) inch premoulded expansion joint filler shall be placed at intervals of not over thirty (30) feet apart. All premoulded expansion joint filler must be cut to full width or length of the proposed construction and shall protrude within one-half (0.5) inch of the top or finished surface. All longitudinal expansion joints shall be placed as indicated on the drawings or as directed by the City. 
3.  All expansion joints shall be true, even and present a satisfactory appearance. 
4.  All expansion joint material protruding after the concrete has been finished shall be trimmed as directed by the City. 
5.  Control Joints. Locate and install construction joints not shown on the drawings, so as not to impair strength and appearance of the structure, as acceptable to the City. Review need for additional joints or scores with the City prior to construction. 
6.  Control Joints in Slabs-on-Ground. Construct control joints in slabs-on-ground to form panels of patterns as shown. Locate expansion type joint at spacing recommended by Portland Cement Association and review with the City prior to construction. 
7.  Control Joints in Trailway. Provide joints in pattern as indicated. Locate expansion type joints at spacing as indicated. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.518. - Manufacturing and Placing Concrete. 
1.  Immediately before placing concrete, the depth of the proposed concrete shall be checked by means of a template cut true to the cross section of the proposed construction and any irregularities shall be corrected. 
2.  Immediately before placing concrete, all subgrade shall be thoroughly sprinkled or wetted. 
3.  Concrete shall not be placed upon a frozen subgrade or subbase. 
4.  Construction joints will be permitted only at grooves or at expansion joints, unless otherwise approved by the owner. 
5.  The concrete shall be manufactured and placed in accordance with the currently approved edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
6.  The concrete shall be placed immediately after mixing; the edges, sides, etc., shall be thoroughly spaded and the surfaces tamped sufficiently to thoroughly compact the concrete and bring the mortar to the surface. The concrete shall be deposited and compacted in a single layer. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.519. - Finishing. 
1.  The concrete shall be stuck-off with a transverse template resting upon the side forms and then shall be floated with a ten (10) foot longitudinal float, working the float transversely across the concrete with a sawing motion, always maintaining it parallel to the edges of the trail where practical, and in such a manner that all surplus water, laitance and inert material shall be removed from the surface. This operation shall be continued until the surface of the concrete shows no variation from a ten (10) foot straightedge. If necessary, additional concrete shall be added to fill depressions, and longitudinal float used again. The longitudinal float shall not be moved ahead more than one-half (0.5) its length at any time. 
2.  When the surface of the concrete is free from water and just before the concrete obtains its initial set, it shall be gone over and finished with a wooden float so as to produce a sandy texture. The longitudinal surface variations shall be not more than one-quarter (0.25) inch under a ten (10) foot straightedge, nor more than one-eighth (0.125) inch on a five (5) foot transverse section. The surface of the concrete must be finished so as to drain completely at all times. 
3.  The edges of the trail shall be carefully finished and rounded with an edging tool having a radius of one-half (0.5) inch. 
4.  The surface of the trail shall be divided into blocks by use of a saw cut joint. The joints shall be spaced equal to the trail width, but not to exceed ten (10) feet spacing between joints. The joints shall be cut to a depth of one (1) inch deep by one-quarter (0.25) inch wide. The joints shall be perpendicular, and any marks caused by edging or otherwise shall be removed with a wetted brush or wooden float, so as to give the surface a uniform texture and finish. 
5.  All expansion joints shall be caulked flush with trail elevation. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.520. - Protection and Curing. 
1.  Immediately after finishing the concrete, it shall be covered and cured in accordance with the requirements of the currently approved edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. Curing materials shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C 309 (liquid membrane compound) or ASTM C 171. If the temperature falls below freezing, satisfactory heating devices shall be placed under suitable covers to keep the temperature around the concrete at above forty-five (45) degrees Fahrenheit. 
2.  Pedestrians will not be allowed upon concrete sidewalks or trails until twelve (12) hours after finishing concrete, and no vehicles or loads shall be permitted upon any sidewalk or driveway until the concrete has attained sufficient strength for such traffic. 
3.  The contractor shall construct such barricades and protection devices as are necessary to keep pedestrians and traffic off the sidewalks or trails. 
4.  If any portion of the trail is damaged at any time prior to final acceptance of the project, it shall be repaired by removing all concrete within the limits of the grooves, and be replaced, at the contractor's expense, with concrete of the type, kind and finish in the original construction. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.521. - Backfilling. 
    Contractor shall fine grade the outside edges of the trail to transition to base grade by spreading native soil. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.522. - Cleaning. 
1.  All excess or unsuitable material shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with the currently approved edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications. 
2.  Final clean-up shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of these specifications. 
3.  All material becoming the property of the owner shall be stored in a manner and at locations near or on the project as directed by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 3998, § 1, 7-11-2016) 
15.523. - Supervision and Approval. 
    Pavement shall meet the requirements of the regulatory agency responsible for maintenance of pavement. Obtain agency approval of pavement before requesting final payment. 
15.524-15.599. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADDITIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE STANDARDS 

15.600. - Requirements for Retaining Wall and Stormwater Management Facility Barriers. 
1.  Barrier Required. Any retaining wall or stormwater management facility walls proposed for construction at a height of four (4) feet or greater from the base of the footing, shall comply with the following provisions as determined by the building official: 
a.  Installation of a fence or physical barrier as approved by the building official or designee. Approval of fence or barrier materials may be required by the Director of Community Development or designee for zoning standards; or 
b.  Installation of a guardrail compliant with the International Building Code Edition adopted at the time of permit review. 
c.  Plants, trees, shrubs, or similar landscaping features shall not be considered wall, fence, or barrier materials. 
(Ord. No. 4010, § 2, 7-11-2016) 
Appendix A. - Standard Street Design Details 




(Ord. of 11-14-2016(2); §§ 2(Exh. A), 3(Exh. B)) 
Chapter XVI - TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWERS STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
    As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: Alternative Tower Structure: Shall mean man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. Antenna: Shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television communication through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. FAA: Shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. FCC: Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. Governing Authority: Shall mean the Woodstock City Council. Pre-Existing Towers and Antennas: Shall have the meaning set forth in Article II of this Ordinance. Height: Shall mean, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from the ground level at the base of the tower or other structure to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. Public Officer: As used in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-17 shall mean the Mayor of the City of Woodstock. Tower: Shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one (1) or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICABILITY 

16.210. - District Height Limitations. 
    The requirements set forth in this Ordinance shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet. 
16.220. - Public Property. 
    Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the governing authority and that said license or lease sets forth the maximum height allowed. 
16.230. - Amateur Radio: Receive-Only Antennas. 
    This Ordinance shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna, that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
16.240. - Pre-existing Towers and Antennas. 
    Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be required to meet the requirements of this Ordinance, other than the requirements of sections 16.350, 16.360, 16.380.2 and 16.380. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this Ordinance as "pre-existing towers" or "pre-existing antennas". No changes may be made to any pre-existing towers or pre-existing antennas without bringing the pre-existing towers or pre-existing antennas into conformity with the terms of this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL GUIDELINES AND REQUIREMENTS 

16.310. - Purpose and Goals. 
    The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish general guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this Ordinance are to: 
1.  Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
2.  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; 
3.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
4.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and 
5.  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently. 
16.320. - Principal or Accessory Use. 
    Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot as an accessory use. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulation, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are constructed and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of an nonconforming use or structure. 
16.330. - Inventory of Existing Sites. 
    Each applicant for an antenna and or tower shall provide the Planning and Zoning Department an inventory of its existing towers, which are either within the jurisdiction of the governing authority or within one-quarter-mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height and design of each tower. The Planning and Zoning Department may share such information with other applicants applying for special use permits under this Ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority, provided, however that the Planning and Zoning Department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
16.340. - Aesthetics; Lighting. 
    The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the location of all towers and the installation of all antennas governing by this Ordinance; 
1.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce the visual obtrusiveness. 
2.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
3.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
4.  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
16.350. - Federal Requirements. 
    All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the Federal Government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this Ordinance shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlled Federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17. 
16.360. - Building Codes: Safety Standards. 
    To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronics Industries Association, as amended from time to time. 
1.  If, upon inspection, the governing authority concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days, the governing authority may remove such tower at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the governing authority shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17. 
2.  At the time of application for building permit, the plans for tower or antenna construction shall be certified by an independent registered Structural Engineer as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable codes. 
16.370. - Setbacks and Separation: Security Fencing. 
1.  The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers or antennas; 
a.  Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. 
b.  Towers, guys and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
2.  Security Fencing - Towers shall be enclosed by a security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. 
16.380. - Liability Insurance. 
    Owners and operators of antennas or towers shall provide satisfactory evidence of liability insurance coverage with a reputable company in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect during the existence of and until after the removal of the tower or antenna. 
16.390. - Landscaping. 
    The following requirement shall govern landscaping surrounding towers: 
1.  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compounded from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least ten (10) feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. 
2.  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirements may be reduced or waived altogether. 
3.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer. 
ARTICLE IV. - PERMITTED USES 

16.410. - General. 
    The uses listed in this article are deemed to be specific permitted uses and shall not require a special use permit. Nevertheless, all such uses shall comply with the provisions of Article III of this Ordinance and all other applicable Ordinances. 
1.  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, in any industrial (LI or HI) zoning district; 
2.  Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other free-standing non-residential structure), so long as said additional antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing structure; 
3.  Installing an antenna on any existing tower of any height, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing tower and said existing tower is not a pre-existing tower. 
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL USE PERMIT 

16.510. - General. 
    The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits: 
1.  If the tower or antenna is not permitted use under Article IV of this Ordinance, then a special use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts. 
2.  The Woodstock Zoning Board of Appeals, hereafter "the Board" shall consider all applications for special use permits at an advertised public hearing according to the procedures contained in Chapter VII and XI of this Ordinance. 
3.  In granting a special use permit, the Board may impose conditions to the extent the Board concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
4.  Each applicant for special use permit shall apply to the Planning and Zoning Department, providing the information set forth in sections 16.520 and 16.540 of this Ordinance. The applicant shall submit an application fee in accordance with Chapter X, section 10.103 of this Ordinance. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be certified by a licensed professional Engineer. 
5.  The Planning and Zoning Department shall review each such application within fifteen (15) days after receiving it and schedule the hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the Planning and Zoning Department shall notify the applicant of the erroneous or missing information within fifteen (15) days after receipt. 
16.520. - Information Required. 
    Each applicant requesting a special use permit under this Ordinance shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the governing authority to be necessary to assess compliance with this Ordinance. 
16.530. - Factors Considered in Granting Special Use Permits. 
    The Board shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit: 
1.  Height of the proposed tower; 
2.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
3.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
4.  Surrounding topography; 
5.  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
6.  Design of the tower, the particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
7.  Proposed ingress and egress; 
8.  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed in section 16.540 of this Ordinance; and 
9.  Conformity with the goals set forth in section 16.310 of this Ordinance. 
16.540. - Availability of Suitable Towers or Other Structures. 
    No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of the following: 
1.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
2.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
3.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
4.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
5.  The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
6.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
16.550. - Setbacks and Separation. 
    The following requirement shall apply to all towers or antennas for which a special use permit is required in addition to the requirements of section 16.370; In zoning districts other than industrial zoning districts, towers over ninety (90) feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter-mile from any existing tower that is over ninety (90) feet in height. 
ARTICLE VI. - REMOVAL OR ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS 
    Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the governing authority may, in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
Chapter XVII - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - FINDINGS AND PURPOSES 

17.110. - Findings. 
    Whereas, the City of Woodstock, Georgia (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "City"), finds that Buffer Areas adjacent to Streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(1)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of Streams and their water resources; 
(2)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban Stormwater; 
(3)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(4)  Protecting and stabilizing Stream Banks; 
(5)  Providing for Infiltration of Stormwater Runoff; 
(6)  Maintaining base flow of Streams; 
(7)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(8)  Providing tree canopy to shade Streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(9)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(10)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; 
(11)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
17.120. - Purposes. 
    It is the purpose of this Ordinance to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create Stream Buffer Protection Areas along the Streams of the City for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize Land Development within such Stream Buffer Protection Areas by establishing Stream Buffer requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS AND APPLICABILITY 
    All defined terms throughout this chapter are capitalized, and the definitions are contained in Chapter II of this Land Development Ordinance. 
    This Ordinance shall apply to all Land Development Activity on property containing a Stream Buffer Protection Area. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 

17.210. - Grandfather Provisions. 
    This Ordinance shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this Ordinance. 
(2)  Existing development and on-going Land-Disturbing Activity including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or Land-Disturbing Activity not otherwise approved by the City on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any Land Development Activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this chapter. 
(4)  Land Development Activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two (2) years of the effective date of this chapter. 
17.220. - Exemptions. 
    The following specific activities are exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one (1) of the following: 
-  a Stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
-  public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
-  intrusions necessary to provide Access to a property; 
-  public Access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
-  unpaved foot trails and paths; 
-  activities to restore and enhance Stream Bank Stabilization, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line Easements paralleling a creek, except that all Easements (permanent and construction) and Land Disturbance should be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the Top Of The Stream Bank. This includes such Impervious Cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of utilities, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such Easements, regardless of paving material, except for Access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (1) above. 
(3)  Land Development Activity within a Right-Of-Way existing at the time this Ordinance takes effect or approved under the terms of this Ordinance. 
(4)  Within an Easement of any utility existing at the time this Ordinance takes effect or approved under the terms of this Ordinance, Land-Disturbing Activity and such Impervious Cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of such utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the City's Community Development Department on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within 10 days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work (within such time period as may be determined by the City's Community Development Department) to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the Stream Buffer Protection Area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other Land Development Activity. If such activity results in Land Disturbance in the Stream Buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other Land-Disturbing Activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three (3) years after the end of the activities that intruded on the Stream Buffer. 
Any Land Development Activity within a Stream Buffer established hereunder or any Impervious Cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to Chapter X of this Land Development Ordinance. 
ARTICLE III. - BUFFER AND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS 
    All Land Development Activity subject to this Ordinance shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative Stream Buffer shall be maintained for fifty (50) feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of a stream as measured from the Top Of The Stream Bank. 
(2)  An additional Stream Setback shall be maintained for twenty-five (25) feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative Stream Buffer, in which all Impervious Cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the Stream Setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the Stream Buffer or Stream Setback. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER BUFFER REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
    This Ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this Ordinance should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this Ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
ARTICLE V. - ADDITIONAL INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR DEVELOPMENT ON STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION AREA PROPERTIES 
    Any permit applications for property requiring Stream Buffers and Stream Setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required Stream Buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Stream Buffer Protection Area topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the Stream Buffer Protection Area; and, 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the Stream Buffer and of all proposed Impervious Cover within the Stream Setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the Stream Buffer and Stream Setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the City's Community Development Department may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that this chapter is addressed in the approval process. 
All Stream Buffer and Stream Setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESPONSIBILITY 
    Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this Ordinance shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the City of Woodstock, Georgia, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
ARTICLE VII. - INSPECTION 
    The City's Community Development Department may cause inspections of the work in the Stream Buffer or Stream Setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the City's Community Development Department in making such inspections. The City shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this Ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any Land Development Activity within the Stream Buffer Protection Area. 
    No person shall refuse entry or Access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
ARTICLE VIII. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Ordinance or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 

17.810. - Notice of Violation. 
    If the City's Community Development Department determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this Ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person and mail said notice via U.S. Mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested) to the address found on the permit. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Ordinance without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site by placing same in the U.S. Mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested) addressed to the property owner or other responsible person. 
    The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this Ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days after the notice of violation is served. 
17.820. - Penalties and Enforcement. 
    In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City's Community Development Department shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing via U.S. Mail (Certified Mail Return Receipt Requested) of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, a time frame of not less than twenty-four (24) hours shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City's Community Development Department may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop Work Order. The City's Community Development Department may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold Certificate of Occupancy. The City's Community Development may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the Building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. The City's Community Development Department may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the Land Development Activity. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City's Community Development Department may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days (or such greater period as the City's Community Development Department shall deem appropriate) or within twenty-four (24) hours in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety and after the City's Community Development Department has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the City's Community Development Department may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal Penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this Ordinance, the City's Community Development Department may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Woodstock Municipal Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each violation and each day upon which any violation remains uncured shall constitute a separate offense. 
ARTICLE IX. - APPEAL AND VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

17.910. - Appeals, 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision or order, as it relates to this chapter, may appeal in writing, as outlined in Chapter X, section 10.162, of this Land Development Ordinance. 
17.920. - Variance Procedures, 
    Variances from the buffer and setback requirements contained herein may be granted in accordance with the provisions outlined in Chapter X, section 10.160 of this Land Development Ordinance. 
ARTICLE X. - SEVERABILITY 
    If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this Ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect or invalidate the remaining portions of this Ordinance. 
Chapter XVIII - FORM-BASED CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the City's Form-Based Code, as adopted on September 24, 2012. Amendments to the Form-Based Code are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. 

ARTICLE 1. - TITLE AND PURPOSE 
1.  There is hereby adopted, ordained, and enacted into law this Ordinance to wit, the Woodstock Form-Based Ordinance, and the zoning classifications stated therein for the use of property in the incorporated area of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 

18.101. - Authority and Applicability. 
1.  Authority. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Article IX, Section IV of the Georgia Constitution. (O.C.G.A. § 32-6102) 
2.  Enactment. For the purposes cited above and for the general purposes of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, the city council hereby ordains, adopts and enacts this chapter in its entirety, including text, map, and all regulations, all of which shall be known as the Woodstock Land Development Code. This chapter shall apply to all land within the corporate limits of the corporation, as shown on the official zoning map or described by ordinance. 
3.  Conflicting ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter or inconsistent with its provisions in the City of Woodstock Code of Ordinances (including, without limitation, the City of Land Development Code incorporated by reference in the City of Woodstock Code of Ordinances), are hereby superseded to the full extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect. 
4.  Purpose. This chapter shall only apply to parcels zoned FBC-NC, T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, and shall not apply to any other parcels within the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
5.  Severability. Should any provision of this be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect this chapter as a whole or any part hereof except that specific provision which was the subject of the declaration. 
6.  Construction. The following general rules of construction shall apply to regulations governing this chapter: 
a.  Numerical metrics shall take precedence over graphic metrics. 
b.  The definition of a term in this section shall take precedence over the definition of the same term elsewhere in the City of Woodstock Code of Ordinances. 
7.  Definitions. 18.106 Definitions contains regulatory language that is integral to this chapter. Those terms not defined in this chapter shall be accorded their commonly accepted meanings. In the event of conflicts between these definitions and other definitions in the City of Woodstock Code of Ordinances, those of this chapter shall take precedence. 
8.  The metrics of the standards and tables are an integral part of this chapter. However, the diagrams and illustrations that accompany them should be considered guidelines, with the exception of those on Table 10. T3 Standards, Table 11. T4/T4O Standards, and Table 12. T5 Standards, which are legally binding. 
18.102. - Intent. 
1.  The intent and purpose of this Chapter is to enable, encourage and qualify the implementation of the city, the community, the block and the building, and the Transect. 
2.  The city. 
a.  That the city should retain its natural infrastructure and visual character derived from topography, woodlands, and riparian corridors. 
b.  That growth strategies should encourage Infill and redevelopment in parity with new communities. 
c.  That development contiguous to urban areas should be structured in the pattern of Town Center (TCT) or Village (VIL) and be integrated with the existing urban pattern. 
d.  That transportation corridors should be planned and reserved in coordination with land use. 
e.  That green corridors should be used to define and connect the urbanized areas. 
f.  That the city should include a framework of transit, pedestrian, and bicycle systems that provide alternatives to the automobile. 
3.  The community. 
a.  That neighborhoods and town centers should be compact, pedestrian-oriented and mixed use. 
b.  That neighborhoods and the town centers should be the preferred pattern of development and that districts specializing in a single use should be the exception. 
c.  That ordinary activities of daily living should occur within walking distance of most dwellings, allowing independence to those who do not drive. 
d.  That interconnected networks of thoroughfares should be designed to disperse traffic and reduce the length of automobile trips. 
e.  That within neighborhoods, a range of housing types and price levels should be provided to accommodate diverse ages and incomes. 
f.  That appropriate building densities and land uses should be provided within walking distance of transit stops. 
g.  That civic, institutional, and commercial activity should be embedded in the town center and neighborhoods, not isolated in remote single-use complexes. 
h.  That schools should be sized and located to enable children to walk or bicycle to them. 
i.  That a range of open space including parks, squares, and playgrounds should be distributed within neighborhoods and the town center. 
4.  The block and the building. 
a.  That buildings and landscaping should contribute to the physical definition of thoroughfares as civic places. 
b.  That development should adequately accommodate automobiles while respecting the pedestrian and the spatial form of public areas. 
c.  That architecture and landscape design should grow from local climate, topography, history, and building practice. 
d.  That buildings should provide their inhabitants with a clear sense of geography and climate through energy efficient methods. 
e.  That civic buildings and public gathering places should be provided as locations that reinforce community identity. 
f.  That civic buildings should be distinctive and appropriate to a role more important than the other buildings that constitute the fabric of the city. 
g.  That the preservation and renewal of historic buildings should be facilitated, to affirm the continuity and evolution of society. 
5.  The Transect. 
a.  That communities should provide meaningful choices in living arrangements as manifested by distinct physical environments. 
b.  That the Transect District descriptions in 18.104 Transect Districts shall constitute the intent of this Chapter with regard to the general character of each of these environments. 
18.103. - Rezoning. 
1.  General Procedures: This section shall be administered in accordance with the procedural requirements of Chapter III (Land Development Standards), Chapter X (Administration and Enforcement and Chapter XI (Zoning Policy and Procedures) of the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance except when those requirements conflict with this section. 
2.  Re-zoning Procedures: The procedure for rezoning to Form Based Code New Community (FBCNC) or Transect Districts (T3, T4, T5) as part of an Infill Community Plan or as standalone Transect Districts (T3, T4, T5) shall be the same as required for any other zoning district change as described in Sec. 11.200 of the City of Woodstock Land Development Code: 
3.  Re-zoning Application Requirements: 
a.  Application for rezoning to a Form Based Code District shall include all of the following in addition to those required by Sec. 11.200: 
1.  adjoining streets and widths 
2.  existing structures 
3.  proposed points of connection for off-site thoroughfares 
4.  proposed maximum density 
5.  proposed community unit type(s) 
6.  proposed designation of Transect districts at perimeter (1 lot deep, or 80' minimum) 
b.  Application for rezoning to Transect Districts and Special Districts (T3, T4, T5, SD1) as part of an Infill Community Plan shall include all of the following in addition to those required by Sec. 11.200: 
1.  adjoining streets and widths 
2.  existing structures 
3.  proposed points of connection for off-site thoroughfares 
4.  proposed maximum density 
5.  proposed community unit type(s) 
6.  proposed designation of Transect districts 
c.  Application for rezoning to a Transect Districts and Special Districts (T3, T4, T5, SD1) not as part of an Infill Community Plan shall include all of the following in addition to those required by Sec. 11.200: 
1.  proposed points of connection for off-site thoroughfares 
2.  proposed designation of Transect districts 
3.  statement describing how the requested change enhances the surrounding neighbor-hood structure per Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
4.  The following acreage requirements are necessary for any rezoning to the Form Based Code New Community District (FBC-NC): 
a.  Village (VIL): No fewer than 40 acres and no more than 200 acres per VIL 
b.  Town Center (TCT): No fewer than 20 acres and no more than 200 acres per TCT 
5.  Once the City Council approves a rezoning under this Chapter, the parcel(s) shall be designated FBC-NC (Form Based Code - New Community) on the City of Woodstock zoning map. Once the City Council approves Transect districts as part of an Infill Community Plan or as standalone Transect districts, the parcel(s) shall be designated T3 (Sub-Urban), T4 (General Urban), T5 (Urban Center), or SD (Special District) on the City of Woodstock zoning map. 
18.104. - Transect Districts. 
1.  Zoning districts under this Chapter are limited to the following Transect District designations: 
a.  T5 Urban Center (T5): This district consists of higher density mixed-use buildings that accommodate retail, offices, townhouses and apartments. It has a tight network of thoroughfares, with wide sidewalks, regularly spaced street tree planting and buildings set close to the sidewalks. 
b.  T4 General Urban (T4): This district includes a mix of uses but is primarily mixed density residential. It may have a wide range of building types: houses, townhouses, duplexes, small apartment buildings, and live-work units. Setbacks and landscaping are variable. Streets and sidewalks define medium-sized blocks. 
c.  T3 Sub-Urban (T3): This district consists of low density residential areas, with some mix of use, home occupations and outbuildings, in accordance with Sections 7.507. Street and yard planting are naturalistic and building setbacks are relatively deep. Blocks may be large and thoroughfare networks irregular. 
d.  T2 Rural (T2): This district consists of sparsely settled lands in open or cultivated states. These include woodland, agricultural land, and pasture. Typical buildings are farmhouses and agricultural buildings. Roads are rural in character had have no pedestrian facilities. Landscaping is naturally occurring. 
e.  T1 Natural (T1): This district consists of lands approximating or reverting to a wilderness condition, including lands unsuitable for settlement due to topography, hydrology or vegetation. Public parks may occur, but general development is prohibited. 
2.  All or a portion of the property within a designated Transect District may be further subject to the following sub-district: 
a.  T4 Open (T4O): a transition zone modifying T4 by permitting more commercial uses. 
3.  The following special district is designated for uses and configurations that are incompatible with Transect districts, but that are consistent with Sec. 18.102 Intent: 
a.  Business Special District (SD1): a primarily single-use district for business, manufacturing, warehousing and light industrial uses. 
18.105. - Deviations. 
1.  There shall be three types of deviation from the requirements of this Chapter: administrative waivers, waivers, and variances. Whether a deviation requires an administrative waiver, a waiver, or variance shall be determined by the Community Development Director or his designee. 
2.  Administrative Waivers. 
a.  An administrative waiver is a ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent with a specific provision of this Chapter but is justified by the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. The Development Process Committee (DPC) shall have the authority to approve or disapprove administratively a request for an administrative waiver if listed as eligible for an administrative waiver within this Chapter. 
b.  General Standards. No administrative waiver shall be approved unless the Community Development Director or his designee shall find: 
1.  The administrative waiver is consistent with Sec. 18.102 Intent of this Chapter. 
2.  The administrative waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The administrative waiver will not materially endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance if located where proposed and developed according to the plans and information submitted and approved. 
4.  The administrative waiver will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
5.  The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
6.  The administrative waiver will advance the presence of the intended form of the development. 
7.  The administrative waiver will advance pedestrian friendly activity. 
8.  The administrative waiver will provide for the enhancement, coordination or demarcation between the public and private realm. 
c.  Specific Standards. Items eligible for administrative waivers have specific standards in the sections of the Chapter related to those items. 
d.  Any decision regarding a grant or denial of an administrative waiver shall in writing state the reasons for the grant or denial and shall be delivered to the applicant by either first class mail or electronically. 
3.  Waivers. 
a.  For Waivers, the standards and procedures in Chapter III, Article XII, Sec. 3.121 shall apply. 
4.  Variances. 
a.  For variances, the standards and procedures in Chapter X, Article II, Sec. 10.160 and Chapter X, Article II, Sec. 10.160 shall apply. 
5.  The request for an administrative waiver, waiver, or variance shall not subject the entire application to public hearing, but only that portion necessary to rule on the specific issue requiring the relief. 
18.106. - Definitions. 
    This Section provides definitions for terms in this Chapter that are technical in nature or that otherwise may not reflect a common usage of the term. 
    A-Grid: cumulatively, those thoroughfares that by virtue of their pre-existing pedestrian-supportive qualities, or their future importance to pedestrian connectivity, are held to the highest standards prescribed by this Chapter. See B-Grid. (Syn: primary grid) 
    Access lane: an outer vehicular lane or lanes of a thoroughfare, designed for slow speeds and separated from inner lanes that carry higher speed traffic by a planted median. (Syn: service lane) 
    Accessory dwelling unit: A dwelling unit not greater than eight hundred fifty (850) square feet or forty (40) percent of the floor area of the primary dwelling unit, whichever is greater, located in an outbuilding and located on the same lot with a single-family dwelling. 
    Address sign: The official street address of a building or part thereof. 
    Adjusted pedestrian shed: a pedestrian shed that has been adjusted according to Sec. 18.202, creating the regulatory boundary of a community unit. 
    Arcade: a private frontage conventional for retail use wherein the facade is a colonnade supporting habitable space that abuts the sidewalk, while the facade at sidewalk level is setback, providing a private frontage sidewalk. 
    Avenue (AV): a thoroughfare of high vehicular capacity and low to moderate speed, acting as a short distance connector between urban centers, and usually equipped with a landscaped median. 
    B-grid: cumulatively, those thoroughfares that by virtue of their use, location, or absence of pre-existing pedestrian-supportive qualities, may meet a standard lower than that of the A-Grid. See A-Grid. (Syn: secondary grid) 
    Band Sign: A band of text and/or graphics across the width of a building. Band signs may have external illumination, and occur just above the top of the first-level glazing, often on an exposed beam face, if present. 
    Bed & breakfast: an owner-occupied lodging type offering 1 to 6 bedrooms, permitted to serve break-fast in the mornings to guests. 
    Blade Sign: A small sign, which is suspended from an overhang, canopy, marquee, or awning, or is suspended from a mounting attached directly to the building wall, and hangs perpendicular to the building wall. An 8-foot clearance is required between a blade sign and finished grade. 
    Block face: the aggregate of all the building facades on one side of a block. 
    Boulevard (BV): a thoroughfare designed for high vehicular capacity and moderate speed, traversing an urbanized area. Boulevards are usually equipped with access lanes buffering sidewalks and buildings. 
    Building intensity: use intensities within each Transect District may be modified by Restricted, Limited and Open designations pursuant to Table 6. These intensities shall be modified by parking requirements on site as well as permissive or limited use parameters. 
    Limited: the normative building intensity for the T4 District permits medium density residential, with small-scale lodging, office, and retail. Commercial building use is limited by location and area within the building. 
    Open: the normative building intensity for the T5 District permits high density residential, with open lodging, office, and retail. Commercial building uses are not limited by size or location within the building. 
    Restricted: the normative building intensity for the T3 District permits low density residential, with home occupations and very small-scale lodging, office, and retail. Commercial building use is restricted by location, area within the building, and parking. 
    Build-to line: the build-to line is the line along which the building facade is permitted to be located. 
    Caliper: diameter of a tree trunk. The term "caliper" is used for trees less than twelve (12) inches in diameter. For trees less than four (4) inches in diameter, it its measured six (6) inches from the ground. For trees between four (4) inches and twelve (12) inches in diameter, it is measured twelve (12) inches from the ground. 
    Civic: the term defining not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, and municipal parking. 
    Civic building: a building operated by not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, worship, recreation, government, transit, and municipal parking, or for use approved by the legislative body. 
    Civic parking reserve: parking structure or parking lot within a quarter-mile of the site that it serves. 
    Civic space: an outdoor area permanently dedicated for public use. Civic space types are defined by the combination of certain physical constants including the relationships among their intended use, their size, their landscaping and their facing buildings. 
    Commercial: the term collectively defining workplace, office, retail, and lodging uses. 
    Common destination: an area of focused community activity, usually defining the approximate center of a pedestrian shed. It may include without limitation one or more of the following: a civic space, a civic building, a commercial center, or a transit station, and may act as the social center of a neighborhood. 
    Common entry: a private frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with the building entrance at sidewalk grade, allowing shared entry into a multi-unit residential, office, or mixed use building. An optional shallow planter may line the facade. 
    Common lawn: a planted private frontage wherein the facade is set back from the frontage line. It is visually continuous with adjacent yards. 
    Community unit: a regulatory category defining the physical form, density, and extent of a settlement. The two community unit types addressed in this Chapter are VIL and TCT. The context for these community units may be infill or greenfield. 
    Configuration: the form of a building, based on its massing, private frontage, and height. 
    Developable areas: lands other than those legally protected such as wetlands, stream buffers and steep slopes. 
    DPC: Development Process Committee 
    Drive: a thoroughfare along the boundary between an urbanized and a natural condition, usually along a waterfront, park, or promontory. One side has the urban character of a thoroughfare, with sidewalk and building, while the other has the qualities of a road or parkway, with naturalistic planting and rural details. 
    Effective parking: the amount of parking required for mixed use after adjustment by the parking occupancy rate. 
    Effective turning radius: the measurement of the inside turning radius taking parked cars into account. 
    Elevation: an exterior wall of a building not along a frontage line. See: facade. 
    Encroach: to break the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit with a structural element, so that it extends into a setback, into the public frontage, or above a height limit. 
    Encroachment: any structural element that breaks the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit, extending into a setback, into the public frontage, or above a height limit. 
    Expression line: a line prescribed at a certain level of a building for the major part of the width of a facade, expressed by a variation in material or by a limited projection such as a molding or continuous balcony. (Syn: transition line) 
    Facade: the exterior wall of a building that is set along a frontage line. See elevation. 
    Fenced lawn: a planted private frontage wherein the facade is set back from the frontage line. A fence at the frontage line maintains street spatial definition. 
    Forecourt: a private frontage wherein a portion of the facade is close to the frontage line and the central portion is set back. 
    Frontage: the area between a building facade and the vehicular lanes, inclusive of its built and planted components. Frontage is divided into private frontage and public frontage. 
    Frontage buildout: the percentage of the lot width that is occupied by the building facade at the front setback or build-to line. 
    Frontage line: a lot line bordering a public frontage. Facades facing frontage lines define the public realm and are therefore more regulated than the elevations facing other lot lines. 
    Gallery: a private frontage conventional for retail use wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with an attached cantilevered shed or lightweight colonnade overlapping the sidewalk. 
    Greenway trail: a multi-purpose trail with a minimum width of twelve (12) feet with greenspace on either side for use by pedestrians and non-motorized vehicles. Boardwalks, bridges, and pervious concrete are permitted within floodplain and stream buffers. 
    Green: a civic space type for unstructured recreation, spatially defined by landscaping rather than building frontages. 
    Greenfield: an area that consists of open or wooded land or farmland that has not been previously developed. 
    Habitable space: covered and conditioned building floor area utilized for any principal permitted use except parking, storage, digital industry switchboards, power generators, and other relay equipment. 
    Highway: a rural and suburban thoroughfare of high vehicular speed and capacity. This type is allocated to the more rural Transect Districts (T1, T2, and T3). 
    Infill: noun - new development on land that had been previously developed, including most greyfield and brownfield sites and cleared land within urbanized areas. verb - to develop such areas. 
    Infill VIL: a community unit type within an urbanized, greyfield, or brownfield area based on a standard pedestrian shed and consisting of T3, T4, and/or T5 Districts. (Var: neighborhood) 
    Infill Town Center (TCT): a community unit type structured by a long or linear pedestrian shed that may be adjoined without buffers by one or several standard pedestrian sheds, each with the individual Transect District requirements of a TCT. A TCT takes the forms of a high-density mixed use center. (Syn: downtown, regional center) 
    Inn: a lodging type, offering 7 to 12 bedrooms, permitted to serve breakfast in the mornings to guests. 
    Landscape area: the area of a lot or parcel exclusive of building footprints, driveway and walkway pavements, and other impervious hardscape areas, and inclusive of ponds, pools and water features. 
    Layer: a range of depth of a lot within which certain elements are permitted. 
    Lightwell: A private frontage type that is a below-grade entrance or recess designed to allow light into basements. (Syn: light court) 
    Liner building: a building specifically designed to mask a parking lot or a parking structure from a frontage. 
    Live-work: a mixed use unit consisting of a commercial and residential use. The commercial use may be anywhere in the unit, but is required at the frontage line of the unit. (Syn: flexhouse) 
    Lodging: premises available for daily and weekly renting of bedrooms. 
    Lot coverage: the percentage of a lot that is covered by buildings and other roofed structures. 
    Main civic space: the primary outdoor gathering place for a community, such as a green, a square, or a plaza. The main civic space is often, but not always, associated with an important civic building. 
    Manufacturing: premises available for the creation, assemblage and/or repair of artifacts, using table-mounted electrical machinery or artisan equipment, and including their retail sale. 
    Meeting hall: a building available for gatherings, including conferences. 
    Mixed use: multiple uses within the same building through superimposition or adjacency, or in multiple buildings by adjacency, or at a proximity determined by warrant. 
    Neighborhood multipurpose field: a civic space type for structured recreation and stormwater management. It may be spatially defined by landscaping rather than building frontages. 
    Net site area: all developable land within a site including thoroughfares. 
    Office: premises available for the transaction of general business but excluding retail, artisan and manufacturing uses. 
    Open space: land intended to remain undeveloped; it may be for civic space. 
    Outbuilding: an ancillary building, usually located toward the rear of the same lot as a principal building. 
    Outdoor display case sign: A display case located on the facade of a building which displays menus, handbills or posters advertising a scheduled event, performance or film, and merchandise associated with the event, performance or film. 
    Park: a civic space type that is a natural preserve available for unstructured recreation. 
    Parking occupancy rate: an accounting for parking spaces that are available to more than one use. 
    Passage (PS): a pedestrian connector, open or roofed, that passes between buildings to provide shortcuts through long blocks and connect rear parking areas to frontages. 
    Path (PT): a pedestrian way traversing a park or rural area, with landscape matching the contiguous open space, ideally connecting directly with the urban sidewalk network. 
    Pedestrian shed: An area that is centered on a common destination. Its size is an average 1/4 mile radius or 1,320 feet, about the distance of a five-minute walk at a leisurely pace. Pedestrian sheds are applied to structure communities. See standard, long, or linear pedestrian shed. (Syn: walkshed, walkable catchment) 
    Planter: the element of the public frontage which accommodates street trees, whether continuous or individual. 
    Playground: an open space designed and equipped for the recreation of children. 
    Plaza: a civic space type designed for civic purposes and commercial activities in the more urban Transect Districts, generally paved and spatially defined by building frontages. 
    Principal entrance: the main point of access for pedestrians into a building. 
    Principal frontage: On corner lots, the private frontage designated to bear the address and principal entrance to the building, and the measure of minimum lot width. Prescriptions for the parking layers pertain only to the principal frontage. Prescriptions for the first layer pertain to both frontages of a corner lot. See frontage. 
    Private frontage: the privately held layer between the frontage line and the principal building facade. 
    Public frontage: the area between the curb of the vehicular lanes and the frontage line. This definition supersedes Chapter II, Article II: Definitions. See Table 23. Public Frontage Types. 
    Rear alley (RA): a vehicular way located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas, parking, and outbuildings and containing utility easements. Rear alleys should be paved from building face to building face, with drainage by inverted crown at the center or with roll curbs at the edges. 
    Rear lane (RL): a vehicular way located to the rear of lots providing access to service areas, parking, and outbuildings and containing utility easements. Rear lanes may be paved lightly to driveway standards. The streetscape consists of gravel or landscaped edges, has no raised curb, and is drained by percolation. 
    Regulating plan: a zoning map or set of maps that shows the Transect Districts, civic zones, special districts if any, and special requirements if any, of areas subject to, or potentially subject to, regulation by this Chapter. 
    Residential: characterizing premises available for long-term human dwelling. 
    Retail: characterizing premises available for the sale of merchandise and food service. 
    Retail frontage: Frontage designated on a regulating plan that requires or recommends the provision of a storefront, encouraging the ground level to be available for retail use. See special requirements. 
    Road (RD): a local, rural and suburban thoroughfare of low-to-moderate vehicular speed and capacity. This type is allocated to the more rural Transect Districts (T3). 
    Secondary frontage: on corner lots, the private frontage that is not the principal frontage. As it affects the public realm, its first layer is regulated. 
    Setback: The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front line of a building, with the exception of encroachments listed in 18.406 Building Configuration. (Var: build-to line) Note: This definition supersedes the LDC Chapter II: Definitions. 
    Shingle sign: A small sign, which is either suspended from an overhang, canopy, marquee or awning, or is suspended from a mounting attached directly to the building wall. Can be placed parallel or perpendicular to the face of a building. 
    Sidewalk sign: A freestanding, double-sided temporary sign placed at the entrance to a private front-age in a primarily pedestrian environment. 
    Special district (SD): an area that, by its intrinsic use, placement, or configuration, cannot or should not conform to one or more of the normative community unit types or Transect Districts specified by this Chapter. Special districts may be mapped and regulated at the regional scale and/or the community scale. 
    Special district 1 (SD1): Business: A special-use area comprised of primarily light industrial, office and warehouse buildings with some corner stores. This area allows large parking lots generally buffered from main streets. Pedestrian walkability and automobile access are balanced on a per-street basis. Open space is generally absent from this area. 
    Special requirements: provisions for A-Grid, B-Grid, required retail frontage, required gallery frontage, required arcade frontage, build-to lines, coordinated frontages, terminated vistas, or cross block passages on a regulating plan or other map for those provisions. 
    Square: a civic space type designed for unstructured recreation and civic purposes, spatially defined by building frontages and consisting of paths, lawns and trees, formally disposed. 
    Stoop: a private frontage wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with the first story elevated from the sidewalk for privacy, with an exterior stair and landing at the entrance. 
    Storefront: a private frontage conventional for retail use, with substantial glazing, wherein the facade is aligned close to the frontage line with the building entrance at sidewalk grade. 
    Story: a habitable level within a building, excluding an attic or raised basement. See Table 19. 
    Street (ST): a local urban thoroughfare of low speed and capacity. See Table 5 and Table 7. 
    Street wall: a freestanding wall built along the frontage line, or coplanar with the facade. It may mask a parking lot from the thoroughfare, provide privacy to a side yard, and/or strengthen the spatial definition of the public realm. (Syn: streetwall) This definition supersedes Chapter II, Article II: Definitions. 
    Substantial modification: alteration to a building that is valued at more than 50% of the replacement cost of the entire building, if new. 
    Swale: a low or slightly depressed natural area for drainage. 
    Target speed: is the velocity at which a thoroughfare tends to be driven without the constraints of signage or enforcement. There are four ranges of speed: very low: (below 20 MPH); low: (20-25 MPH); moderate: (25-35 MPH); high: (above 35 MPH). Lane width is determined by desired target speed. 
    Terminated vista: a location at the axial conclusion of a thoroughfare. A building located at a terminated vista designated on a regulating plan is required or recommended to be designed in response to the axis, and is frequently a vertical element. 
    Terrace: a private frontage wherein the facade is set back from the frontage line by an elevated terrace. This type buffers residential uses from urban sidewalks and is also suitable for outdoor cafes. 
    Third place: a term used in the concept of community building to refer to social surroundings separate from the two usual social environments of home and workplace. Criteria for a third place include the following: highly accessible, proximate for many within walking distance, involve regulars, and inexpensive food and drink. Coffee shops and cafes are often used as a neighborhood's third place. 
    Thoroughfare: a way for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic and to provide access to lots and open spaces, consisting of vehicular lanes and the public frontage. 
    TOD: transit oriented development. A TOD is created by an overlay on all or part of a VIL or TCT, or by designation on a regional plan, permitting increased density to support transit or bus rapid transit. 
    Town Center (TCT): a community unit type structured by a long or linear pedestrian shed that may be adjoined without buffers by one or several standard pedestrian sheds, each with the individual Transect District requirements of a TCT. A TCT takes the forms of a high-density mixed use center. (Syn: downtown, regional center.) (Regional example: Downtown Woodstock) 
    Townhouse: a single-family dwelling that shares a party wall with another of the same type and occupies the full frontage line. See rearyard building. (Syn: rowhouse) 
    Transect: a cross-section of the environment showing a range of different habitats. The rural-urban Transect of the human environment used in this Chapter is divided into six Transect Districts. These districts describe the physical form and character of a place, according to the density and intensity of its land use and urbanism. 
    Transect District: One of several areas on a zoning map regulated by this Chapter. 
    Tree: a woody plant with an expected mature height of thirty feet or more and possessing either a single trunk or multiple trunks. Trees are often described in subcategories by common attributes and the uses they serve, such as: 
i.  Shade tree: typically a deciduous tree - rarely an evergreen - planted primarily for its overhead canopy and the quality of the shade it provides. 
ii.  Small/medium/large (tree or shrub): a means of categorizing trees or shrubs based upon their canopy or spread at maturity assuming proper maintenance and normal growing conditions and which serves the purpose of allowing for their proper spacing in landscape plans. 
iii.  Street tree: a tree planted that is an element of a thoroughfare assembly. 
iv.  Specimen tree: a particularly impressive or unusual example of a species due to its size, shade, age, or any other trait that epitomizes the character of the species. 
v.  Understory tree: a small to medium sized tree with an expected mature height less than thirty feet and a canopy which may or may not offer a sufficient clearance height for pedestrians beneath. 
    Turning radius: the curved edge of a thoroughfare at an intersection, measured at the inside edge of the vehicular tracking. The smaller the turning radius, the smaller the pedestrian crossing distance and the more slowly the vehicle is forced to make the turn. 
    Urbanized area: all developable land within a site within Transect Districts T3, T4 and T5. Transect Districts T1 and T2 are not considered urbanized area. 
    Village (VIL): a community unit type structured by a standard pedestrian shed oriented toward a common destination consisting of a mixed use center or corridor, and in the form of a medium-sized settlement near a transportation route. (Syn: traditional neighborhood development; neighborhood) 
    Yield: characterizing a thoroughfare that has two-way traffic but only one effective travel lane because of parked cars, necessitating slow movement and driver negotiation. Also, characterizing parking on such a thoroughfare. 
ARTICLE 2. - NEW COMMUNITY PLANS 

18.201. - Instructions. 
1.  The provisions of this Chapter shall be utilized upon re-zoning to the Form-Based Code New Community (FBC-NC) District. 
2.  New community plans may contain more than one community unit and/or more than one community unit type. 
3.  Once the City Council approves rezoning to the FBC-NC District, the parcel shall be marked as such on the zoning map of the City of Woodstock. Within the FBC-NC District, this Chapter shall be the exclusive and mandatory zoning regulation, and its provisions shall be applied in their entirety. 
4.  After rezoning is complete, the following approvals will be required: 
a.  Pre-application conference on the subdivision with Community Development Staff, including a Sketch Plat and discussion of the proposed area(s) to be subdivided; 
b.  New Community Sketch Plat. New Community Sketch Plats shall comply with Chapter III, Article III. In addition, the New Community Sketch Plat shall include: 
1.  Designation of community unit type. 
2.  Boundaries of community units based on adjusted pedestrian sheds. 
3.  Total site acreage. 
4.  Transect district locations with acreages and %. 
5.  Block sizes. 
6.  Thoroughfares: location and designation of thoroughfare types. 
7.  Civic space types, acreages, percentage and location. 
8.  Special requirements, if applicable (See Sec. 18.211). 
9.  Special district locations with acreages and percentage of community unit, if applicable. 
10.  Any requested administrative waivers, waivers, or variances. 
c.  New Community Preliminary Plat. New Community Preliminary Plats shall be approved by the DPC per the standards in Chapter III, Sec. 3.402 and Chapter XVIII, Article 4; 
d.  Securing the approval of the required public improvements or an acceptable bond; 
e.  Final Plat. Final Plat standards and procedures shall be per Chapter III, Sec. 3.500, Sec. 3.502, Sec. 10.140 § 2, and Chapter XVIII, Article 4. Final Plat shall receive ministerial approval by the Planning Commission and shall be signed by the Development Process Committee Chairman. 
18.202. - Sequence of Community Design. 
1.  The new community regulating plan shall be structured using one or several pedestrian sheds applicable to its community unit type as required in Sec. 18.203. The pedestrian shed(s) should be located according to existing conditions, such as traffic intersections, adjacent developments, and natural features. The site or any community unit within it may be smaller or larger than its pedestrian shed. The pedestrian shed is a planning guide, not a regulatory unit. 
2.  The pedestrian sheds shall be adjusted to include land falling between or outside them. Community unit boundaries are determined by the boundaries of these adjusted pedestrian sheds and/or partial pedestrian sheds, herein after known as the community unit. 
3.  Areas of Transect District subdistricts (Sec. 18.204) shall be allocated within the boundaries of each community unit as appropriate to its type. See Sec. 18.203 and Table 2. 
4.  Civic districts shall be assigned according to Sec. 18.208. 
5.  Special districts, if any, shall be assigned according to Sec. 18.209 and Article 5. Special Districts. 
6.  The thoroughfare network shall be laid out according to Sec. 18.602. 
7.  Density shall be calculated according to Sec. 18.210 and Sec. 18.407. 
8.  Upon submittal, the DPC shall review and may administratively approve only if the submittal is consistent with the provisions of this Chapter. Any amendment(s) or alteration(s) to the approved new community regulating plan shall require a new submittal, but only of the portions altered. 
18.203. - Community Unit Types. 
1.  Village (VIL). 
a.  A VIL shall be structured by one pedestrian shed and shall be no fewer than 40 acres and no more than 200 acres, as allocated on Table 1. See Article 3 for infill VIL acreage requirements. 
b.  A VIL shall include Transect Districts as allocated on Table 2. 
c.  Larger sites shall be designed and developed as multiple communities, each subject to the individual Transect District requirements for its type as allocated on Table 2. The simultaneous planning of adjacent parcels is encouraged. 
2.  Town Center (TCT). 
a.  A TCT shall be structured by one pedestrian shed that may be adjoined without buffers by one or several pedestrian sheds, and shall be no fewer than 20 acres and no more than 200 acres, as allocated on Table 1. See Article 3 for infill TCT acreage requirements. 
b.  A TCT shall include Transect Districts as allocated on Table 2. 
c.  Larger sites shall be designed and developed as multiple communities, each subject to the individual Transect District requirements for its type as allocated on Table 2. The simultaneous planning of adjacent parcels is encouraged. 
18.204. - Transect Districts. 
1.  Transect District subdistricts shall be assigned and mapped on each new community regulating plan according to the percentages allocated on Table 2. 
2.  A Transect District subdistrict may include any of the elements indicated for its Transect District number throughout this Chapter, in accordance with 18.104 Transect Districts and the metric standards summarized in Table 9, Table 11, and Table 11. 
3.  Where practical, existing single-family residential dwellings shall be abutted by the T3 or T4 Transect Districts. 
18.205. - Thoroughfares and Block Standards. 
1.  The thoroughfare network shall be structured to define blocks with the following maximum block face lengths and block perimeters: 
a.  T3   2,640 ft. perimeter. 
b.  T4   2,400 ft. perimeter. 
c.  T5   2,000 ft. perimeter. 
d.  SD1  2,800 ft. perimeter. 
2.  Block faces exceeding 400 feet shall be equipped with a pedestrian passage that is a minimum of 8 ft. wide. 
3.  Blocks adjacent to undeveloped land, areas unsuitable for development, or pre-existing incomplete blocks may be exempt from block face length and block perimeter requirements by administrative waiver. The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
a.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
b.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  The reduced thoroughfare network will not materially endanger the public health or safety. 
d.  The lack of connectivity will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
e.  The location and character of the block structure, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
f.  The block size will not adversely affect the district by impeding walkability. 
4.  Rear access for all lots within T4 shall be provided by a rear lane or rear alley. 
5.  Rear access for all lots within T5 shall be provided by a rear alley. 
6.  Blocks with more than one Transect District designation shall use the highest designation to determine the block face length, block perimeter, and rear alley or rear lane requirements. 
18.206. - Lot Structure. 
1.  Within each Transect District, lots shall be platted to have the following minimum and maximum lot widths, measured at the frontage line: 
a.  T3   50 ft. min.-150 ft. max. 
b.  T4   20 ft. min.-96 ft. max. 
c.  T5   20 ft. min.-200 ft. max. 
d.  SD1  60 ft. min.-300 ft. max. 
2.  Each lot shall have a primary frontage abutting a vehicular thoroughfare, except that 20% of the lots within the FBC-NC District may have their primary frontage along a publicly accessible passage, or sidewalk. 
3.  Lots may have multiple frontages as illustrated on Table 14. One frontage line is designated the principal frontage line and all remaining frontage lines are designated as secondary. 
4.  Lots shall be divided into regulatory layers to control development as illustrated on Table 13. Prescriptions for the second, third and fourth layers pertain only to the primary frontage. Prescriptions for the first layer pertain to both frontages. 
18.207. - Thoroughfare Network Standards. 
1.  Community plans must map a thoroughfare network plan including the following: 
a.  The major thoroughfare network. 
b.  Modifications to existing thoroughfares, if any. 
2.  Community plans must include a major thoroughfare network in accordance with Sec. 18.602. 
3.  The thoroughfare network plan must map thoroughfares and intersections according to Sec. 18.602. 
a.  Thoroughfare assemblies must be included for each mapped thoroughfare in accordance with Article 6. 
b.  All thoroughfares must connect to other thoroughfares, forming a network. 
c.  New thoroughfares must connect wherever possible to thoroughfares outside of the community unit. 
d.  The thoroughfares must be configured as a network creating blocks sized according to Sec. 18.205. 
e.  The thoroughfares may deviate from the network outside of the pedestrian shed, to accommodate natural conditions, and to intersect major thoroughfares. 
18.208. - Civic Standards. 
1.  Civic Space (CS) Specific to T3-T5 Districts 
a.  Each pedestrian shed shall assign 5-20% of its urbanized area to civic space. 
b.  Civic spaces shall be designed as described in Table 27 and distributed throughout Transect Districts as described in Table 27. 
c.  Each pedestrian shed shall contain at least one main civic space. The main civic space shall be within 800 feet of the geographic center of each pedestrian shed, unless topographic conditions, pre-existing thoroughfare alignments or other circumstances prevent such location. A main civic space shall conform to one of the types specified in Table 27.b, Table 27.c, or Table 27.d. 
d.  Within 1,000 feet of every lot in residential use, a civic space designed and equipped as a playground shall be provided. A playground shall conform to Table 27.e. 
e.  Each civic space of type Table 27.c or Table 27.d shall have a minimum of 50% of its perimeter facing a Thoroughfare. 
f.  Parks may be permitted in T5 by Administrative Waiver. 
g.  The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
1.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
2.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The use will not materially endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance if located where proposed and developed according to the plans and information submitted and approved. 
4.  The use will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
5.  The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
6.  The location and character of the park design is such that it will not impede walkability and will provide adequate connections to nearby thoroughfares. 
2.  Civic Buildings (CB) Specific to T3-T5 Districts 
a.  The owner shall covenant to construct a meeting hall or a third place in proximity to the main civic space of each pedestrian shed. Its corresponding public frontage shall be equipped with a shelter and bench for a transit stop, if on an existing or planned transit route. 
b.  Civic building sites shall not occupy more than 20% of the area of each pedestrian shed. 
c.  The particulars of Civic Building design may be determined by Waiver if they do not meet the standards of Article 4. The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
1.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
2.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The use will not materially endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance if located where proposed and developed according to the plans and information submitted and approved. 
4.  The use will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
5.  The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
6.  The items regulated in Article 4 vary by no more than 25% from the standards for the Transect Districts of adjacent properties. 
18.209. - Special Districts. 
1.  Special district designations shall be assigned to areas that, by their intrinsic size, use, or configuration, cannot conform to the requirements of any Transect District or combination of districts. Conditions of development for special districts not included in Article 5 shall be recommended by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council and recorded in Article 5. Special districts may be mapped within or outside of community units. If mapped within a community unit, a special district shall not exceed 20% of the net site area. See Article 5. 
2.  Business Special District (SD1) 
a.  SD1 is available for industrial and manufacturing areas and areas with a high concentration of office and light industrial uses. 
b.  SD1 is limited to a maximum size of 120 acres. 
c.  SD1 may be mapped within or adjacent to village and town center community units. 
18.210. - Density Calculations. 
1.  All developable areas of the community unit shall be considered cumulatively the net site area. The net site area shall be allocated to the various Transect Districts according to the parameters specified in Table 2. 
2.  Density shall be expressed in terms of housing units per acre. The housing and other uses for each Transect District shall be determined at the building scale as limited by Table 7, Table 8 and Sec. 18.407. 
18.211. - Special Requirements. 
1.  A new community regulating plan may designate any of the following special requirements: 
a.  A differentiation of the thoroughfares as A-Grid and B-Grid. Buildings along the A-Grid shall be held to the highest standard of this Chapter in support of pedestrian activity. Buildings along the B-Grid may be more readily considered for administrative waivers allowing automobile-oriented standards. The frontages assigned to the B-Grid shall not exceed 30% of the total length of frontages within a pedestrian shed. B-grid signage may utilize the Chapter VI, Sign Standards. 
b.  Mandatory and/or recommended retail frontage, requiring or advising that a building provide a storefront at sidewalk level along the entire length of its private frontage. The storefront shall be no less than 50% glazed in clear glass as generally described in Table 4 and specified in Sec. 18.406.4.c. 
c.  Mandatory and/or recommended gallery frontage, requiring or advising that a building provide a permanent cover over the sidewalk, either cantilevered or supported by columns. The gallery frontage designation may be combined with a retail frontage designation. 
d.  Mandatory and/or recommended porch front, requiring or advising that a porch be included in the private frontage. 
e.  Build-to line, requiring the placement of the building facade along the line. 
f.  Coordinated frontage, requiring that the public frontage (Table 29) and private frontage (Table 5) be coordinated as a single, coherent landscape and paving design. 
g.  Mandatory and/or recommended terminated vista locations, requiring or advising that the building be provided with architectural articulation of a type and character that responds visually to the location. 
h.  Cross block passages, requiring that a minimum 8-foot-wide pedestrian access be reserved between buildings. 
TABLE 1. COMMUNITY UNIT CONFIGURATION 
Community Unit INTENSITY LOCATION ACREAGE Village LOW Villages should be situated adjacent to towns and cities, along or adjacent to existing regional thoroughfares and transit that will support a medium intensity, mixed-use neighborhood. 40-100 MEDIUM 80-160 HIGH 100-200 Town Center LOW Town centers should be situated adjacent to existing neighborhoods, along or adjacent to existing regional thoroughfares and transit that will support an urban, mixed-use center. 20-80 MEDIUM> 60-160 HIGH 100-200  
TABLE 2. FBC-NC PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
TYPE INTENSITY CIVIC SPACE PERCENTAGE BLOCK SIZE T3 T4 T5 R L O L O Village LOW 10-30% 30-60% 10% max. 10% max. 20% max. 5-20% 5-8 acres MEDIUM 30% max. 30-60% 20% max. 20% max. 5-25% 5-20% 5-8 acres HIGH 20% max. 40-60% 30% max. 30% max. 10-30% 5-20% 5-8 acres Town Center LOW 30% max. 40-60% 20% max. 20% max. 10-20% 5-20% 5 acres max. MEDIUM 20% max. 40-60% 30% max. 30% max. 20-30% 5-20% 5 acres max. HIGH 10% max. 30-40% 20% max. 40% max. 30-40% 5-20% 5 acres max.  
ARTICLE 3. - INFILL COMMUNITY PLANS 

18.301. - Instructions. 
1.  For Infill Community Plans, Infill Plans shall be submitted and approved as part of a rezoning application to Transect Districts. 
2.  Infill Community Plans shall plan, at minimum, an area the size of the pedestrian shed commensurate with its community unit type as listed in Sec. 18.302, and may regulate an area as small as 5 acres. The Planning Commission shall recommend and City Council shall approve the community unit type based on existing conditions and intended evolution in the plan area. 
3.  After rezoning to Transect Districts is complete, the following approvals will be required when subdivision is necessary: 
a.  Infill Community Sketch Plat. Infill Community Sketch Plats shall comply with Chapter III, Article III. In addition, the Infill Community Sketch Plat shall include: 
1.  Designation of community unit type. 
2.  Boundaries of community unit based on adjusted pedestrian shed. 
3.  Total site acreage. 
4.  Transect district locations with acreages and %. 
5.  Block sizes. 
6.  Thoroughfares: location and designation of thoroughfare types. 
7.  Civic space types, acreages, percentage and location. 
8.  Special requirements, if applicable (See Sec. 18.211). 
9.  Special district locations with acreages and percentage of community unit, if applicable. 
10.  Any requested administrative waivers, waivers, or variances. 
b.  Infill Community Preliminary Plat. Infill Community Preliminary Plats shall be approved by the DPC per the standards in Chapter III, Sec. 3.402 and Chapter XVIII, Article 4. 
c.  Final Plat. Final Plat standards and procedures shall be per Chapter III, Sec 3.500, Sec. 3.502, Sec. 10.140 § 2, and Chapter XVIII, Article 4. Final Plat shall receive ministerial approval by the Planning Commission and shall be signed by the Development Process Committee Chairman. 
4.  After rezoning to Transect Districts is complete, the following approvals will be required when subdivision is not necessary: 
a.  Site Plan. Site Plans for development in Transect Districts shall be approved by the Community Development Staff per the standards and procedures in Article 4. 
18.302. - Community Unit Types. 
1.  Infill regulating plans shall encompass one or more of the following community unit types. The allocation percentages of Article 4 and Table 3 shall be used as guidelines. 
2.  Infill VIL (Village). 
a.  An infill VIL should be assigned to neighborhood areas that are predominantly residential with one or more mixed use corridors or centers. An infill VIL shall be planned as at least one complete pedestrian shed, oriented around one or more existing or planned common destinations. 
b.  The edges of an infill VIL should blend into adjacent neighborhoods and/or downtown without buffers. 
3.  Infill TCT (Town Center). 
a.  An infill TCT should be assigned to neighborhood areas that are predominantly mixed use centers. An infill TCT shall be planned one complete standard pedestrian shed, oriented around one or more existing or planned mixed use corridors or centers. 
b.  The edges of an infill TCT should blend into adjacent neighborhoods and/or downtown without buffers. 
18.303. - Transect Districts. 
1.  A Transect District shall include elements indicated by Article 1, Article 2, Article 4, and Article 6. 
18.304. - Thoroughfares and Block Standards. 
1.  If the Infill Community Plan exceeds ten (10) acres, maximum block size requirements shall apply. The owner is responsible for the dedication of the right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of The City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance. 
2.  The thoroughfare network shall be structured to define blocks with the following maximum block face lengths and block perimeters: 
a.  T3 - 600 ft./2,000 ft. perimeter. 
b.  T4 - 600 ft./1,800 ft. perimeter. 
c.  T5 - 600 ft./1,800 ft. perimeter. 
3.  Block faces exceeding 400 feet shall be equipped with a pedestrian passage that is a minimum of 8 ft. in width. 
4.  Blocks adjacent to undeveloped land, areas unsuitable for development, or pre-existing incomplete blocks may be exempt from block face length and block perimeter requirements by administrative waiver. The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
a.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Section 18.102 Intent. 
b.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  The reduced thoroughfare network will not materially endanger the public health or safety. 
d.  The lack of connectivity will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
e.  The location and character of the block structure, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
f.  The block size will not adversely affect the district by impeding walkability. 
5.  Rear access for all lots within T4 shall be provided by a rear lane or rear alley. 
6.  Rear access for all lots within T5 shall be provided by a rear alley. 
7.  Blocks with more than one Transect District designation shall use the highest designation to determine the block face length, block perimeter, and rear alley or rear lane requirements. 
8.  Lots within the IN-VIL and IN-TCT Districts may have their primary frontage along a publicly accessible passage, sidewalk, or Civic Space as defined in Table 27 instead of a thoroughfare, if granted by administrative waiver. The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
a.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
b.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  The waiver will not materially endanger the public health or safety. 
d.  The waiver will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property. 
e.  The waiver will be in harmony with proximate land uses, useful to and useable by the public during daylight hours, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
f.  The waiver will not adversely affect the district by impeding walkability. 
g.  The park is usable for recreation and/or viewing for the homes fronting the park, is substantial enough to warrant the waiver and access to the homes is not impeded by the lack of a public thoroughfare. 
(Ord. No. 5-18-2015(4), § 1(Exh. A)) 
18.305. - Special Districts. 
1.  Areas that, by their intrinsic size, use, or configuration, cannot conform to the requirements of any Transect District or combination of districts shall be designated as special districts as indicated by Article 5. 
18.306. - Special Requirements. 
1.  An infill community regulating plan may designate any of the following special requirements: 
a.  A differentiation of the thoroughfares as A-Grid and B-Grid. Buildings along the A-Grid shall be held to the highest standard of this Chapter in support of pedestrian activity. Buildings along the B-Grid may be more readily considered for administrative waivers allowing automobile-oriented standards. The frontages assigned to the B-Grid shall not exceed 30% of the total length of frontages within a pedestrian shed. B-grid signage may utilize the Chapter VI, Sign Standards. 
b.  Mandatory and/or recommended retail frontage, requiring or advising that a building provide a storefront at sidewalk level along the entire length of its private frontage. The storefront shall be no less than 50% glazed in clear glass as generally described in Table 5 and specified in 18.406.4.c. 
c.  Mandatory and/or recommended gallery frontage, requiring or advising that a building provide a permanent cover over the sidewalk, either cantilevered or supported by columns. The gallery frontage designation may be combined with a retail frontage designation. 
d.  Mandatory and/or recommended porch front, requiring or advising that a porch be included in the private frontage. 
e.  Build-to line, requiring the placement of the building facade along the line. 
f.  Coordinated frontage, requiring that the public frontage (Table 23) and private frontage (Table 5) be coordinated as a single, coherent landscape and paving design. 
g.  Mandatory and/or recommended terminated vista locations, requiring or advising that the building be provided with architectural articulation of a type and character that responds visually to the location. 
h.  Cross block passages, requiring that a minimum 8-foot-wide pedestrian access be reserved between buildings. 
TABLE 3. INFILL COMMUNITY GUIDELINES 
TYPE INTENSITY CIVIC SPACE PERCENTAGE BLOCK SIZE T3 T4 T5 R L O L O Village LOW 10-30% 30-60% 10% max. 10% max. 20% max. 5-20% 5-8 acres MEDIUM 30% max. 30-60% 20% max. 20% max. 5-25% 5-20% 5-8 acres HIGH 20% max. 40-60% 30% max. 30% max. 10-30% 5-20% 5-8 acres Town Center LOW 30% max. 40-60% 20% max. 20% max. 10-20% 5-20% 5 acres max. MEDIUM 20% max. 40-60% 30% max. 30% max. 20-30% 5-20% 5 acres max. HIGH 10% max. 30-40% 20% max. 40% max. 30-40% 5-20% 5 acres max.  
ARTICLE 4. - SUBDIVISION & ZONING 

18.401. - Instructions. 
1.  Lot and building plan approval for areas subject to a regulating plan approved under either Article 2 or Article 3 shall be subject to the following requirements of this Chapter. 
2.  Site and buildings plans submitted under this Chapter require administrative approval by the Community Development Department. 
3.  Building and site plans submitted under this Chapter shall show the following, in compliance with the standards described in this Chapter: 
a.  Preliminary plat approval shall comply with the standards in Chapter III, Sec. 3.402: The subdivider shall also file: 
1.  Civic space acreages, percentage and location. 
2.  Total number of lots in each Transect District with acreages and %. 
a.  Number of units per lot and total units. 
b.  The layout of all proposed and existing lots with lot widths for each lot and building setback lines. 
c.  The locations, width, and names of proposed streets and alleys (street names shall not be duplicated, and they shall be reviewed and approved by the DPC). 
d.  Site Improvements. 
1.  Street tree and Public Landscaping Plan. 
2.  Public Lighting Plan. 
b.  Final Plat - Final Plat standards and procedures shall be per Chapter III, Sec. 3.500, Sec. 3.502, Sec. 10.140 § 2. The subdivider shall also file: 
1.  Lot coverage. 
2.  Building placement. 
3.  Use. 
4.  Architectural standards. 
5.  Signage. 
6.  Private frontage type. 
7.  Building Height. 
8.  Parking - location and number of spaces. 
9.  Driveways. 
4.  The City Planner shall review and may approve only if the submittal is consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and past required approvals (Article 2 or Article 3). Any amendment(s) or alternation(s) to the approved building and site plan shall require a new submittal, but only of the portions altered. 
18.402. - Pre-existing Conditions. 
1.  Existing buildings and appurtenances that do not conform to the provisions of this Chapter may continue in use as they are until a substantial modification is requested. 
2.  The modification of existing buildings is permitted by right if such changes result in greater conformance with the specifications of this Chapter. 
3.  The restoration or rehabilitation of an existing building shall not require the provision of (a) parking in addition to that existing nor (b) on-site stormwater retention/detention in addition to that existing, unless otherwise required by County or State Code. Existing parking requirements that exceed those for this Chapter may be reduced as provided by Table 8 and Table 9. 
18.403. - Special requirements. 
1.  To the extent that any regulating plan designates any of the following special requirements, standards shall be applied as follows: 
a.  A differentiation of the thoroughfares as A-Grid and B-Grid. Buildings along the A-Grid shall be held to the highest standard of this Chapter in support of pedestrian activity. Buildings along the B-Grid may be more readily considered for administrative waivers allowing automobile-oriented standards. The frontages assigned to the B-Grid shall not exceed 30% of the total length of frontages within a pedestrian shed. B-Grid signage may utilize the Chapter VI, Sign Standards. 
b.  Mandatory and/or recommended retail frontage, requiring or advising that a building provide a storefront at sidewalk level along the entire length of its private frontage. The storefront shall be no less than 50% glazed in clear glass as generally described in Table 5 and specified in 18.406.4.a. 
c.  Mandatory and/or recommended gallery frontage, requiring or advising that a building provide a permanent cover over the sidewalk, either cantilevered or supported by columns. The gallery frontage designation may be combined with a retail frontage designation. 
d.  Mandatory and/or recommended porch front, requiring or advising that a porch be included in the private frontage. 
e.  Build-to line, requiring the placement of the building facade along the line. 
f.  Coordinated frontage, requiring that the public frontage (Table 23) and private frontage (Table 5) be coordinated as a single, coherent landscape and paving design. 
g.  Mandatory and/or recommended terminated vista locations, requiring or advising that the building be provided with architectural articulation of a type and character that responds visually to the location. 
h.  Cross block passages, requiring that a minimum 8-foot-wide pedestrian access be reserved between buildings. 
18.404. - Civic Areas. 
1.  General. 
a.  Civic areas are designated on regulating plans as civic space (CS) or civic building (CB). 
b.  Parking requirements for civic districts shall be determined by Table 8. For parking location standards, see Sec. 18.409. 
2.  Civic Spaces (CS). 
a.  Civic spaces shall be generally designed as described in Table 27 and shall be dedicated, designed and constructed pursuant to the following regulations: 
1.  Detention ponds and required stream buffers shall not be used in civic space calculations. 
2.  The owner shall submit a maintenance agreement establishing a mechanism for maintaining CS dedication located within subject development. 
3.  Civic space requirements shall be constructed or dedicated as part of the first phase of construction, in an amount equivalent to the first phase proportion of the total development. 
4.  Civic Space dedication shall be guaranteed through bonds, conservation easements, land donation to the City or permanent deed restriction. For developments smaller than a pedestrian shed, in lieu of civic space dedication, a cash value contribution shall be provided to the City's open space bank, which contribution shall be equivalent to the square footage value of subject land multiplied times the square footage of such Civic Space requirement. 
5.  Non-residential development shall provide public Civic Space, which shall be open to the public during daylight hours and other hours as determined by the City. 
6.  Where greenway trails are required along streams, there shall be public access along such greenway trails and there shall be a minimum seventy-five (75) feet natural buffer along such streams measured from top of bank, which may include such greenway. Trail and such natural buffer shall be calculated towards Civic Space requirements. 
3.  Civic Buildings (CB). 
a.  The particulars of Civic Building design may be determined by Waiver if they do not meet the standards of this Chapter. Signage requirements, however, shall be in accord with Sec. 18.411. The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
1.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
2.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The use will not materially endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance if located where proposed and developed according to the plans and information submitted and approved. 
4.  The use will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
5.  The location and character of the use, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
6.  The items regulated in Article 4 vary by no more than 25% from the standards for the Transect Districts of adjacent properties. 
18.405. - Building Placement. 
1.  Specific to districts T3, T4, T5. 
a.  Newly platted lots shall be dimensioned according to Table 10-Table 12 and/or Table 19. 
b.  Buildings shall be placed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according to Table 10-Table 12 and/or Table 19. 
c.  One principal building at the frontage, and one outbuilding to the rear of the principal building, may be built on each lot as shown in Table 13. 
d.  Lot coverage by building shall not exceed that recorded in Table 10-Table 12 and/or Table 19. 
e.  Facades shall be built parallel to a rectilinear principal frontage line or to the tangent of a curved principal frontage line, and along a minimum percentage of the frontage width at the setback, as specified as frontage buildout on Table 10-Table 12 and/or Table 19. 
f.  Setbacks for principal buildings shall be as shown in Table 10-Table 12 and/or Table 19. 
g.  Rear setbacks for outbuildings shall be a minimum of 15 feet measured from the centerline of the rear alley or rear lane easement. In the absence of rear alley or rear lane, the rear setback shall be as shown in Table 10-Table 12 and/or Table 19. 
18.406. - Building Configuration. 
1.  General to districts T3, T4, T5. 
a.  The private frontage of buildings shall conform to and be allocated in accordance with Table 5. Private Frontages. 
b.  Buildings on corner lots shall have two private frontages as shown in Table 14. Prescriptions for the second and third layers pertain only to the principal frontage. Prescriptions for the first layer pertain to both frontages. 
c.  All facades shall be glazed with clear glass no less than 15% of the total facade area with each story calculated independently. 
d.  Building heights and expression lines shall conform to Table 4. 
e.  Stories may not exceed 14 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling, except for a first floor commercial use, which shall be a minimum of 11 feet with a maximum of 25 feet. A single floor level exceeding 14 feet, or 25 feet at ground level, shall be counted as two (2) stories. Mezzanines extending beyond 33% of the floor area shall be counted as an additional story. 
f.  In a parking structure or garage, each above-ground level counts as a single story regardless of its relationship to habitable stories. 
g.  Height limits do not apply to attics or raised basements, masts, belfries, clock towers, chimney flues, water tanks, or elevator bulkheads. 
h.  Except for solar panels and geothermal wells, all outdoor electrical, plumbing and mechanical equipment shall be located in the second or third layer and concealed from the frontage view. These facilities are not allowed to encroach into the first layer. 
i.  The habitable area of an accessory unit within a principal building or an outbuilding shall not exceed 850 square feet, excluding the parking area. 
2.  Specific to district T3. 
a.  No portion of the private frontage may encroach the sidewalk. 
b.  Open porches may encroach the first layer 50% of its depth. (Table 13) 
c.  Balconies and bay windows may encroach the first layer 25% of its depth except that balconies on porch roofs may encroach as does the porch. 
3.  Specific to districts T4. 
a.  Balconies, open porches, bay windows and stoops may encroach the first layer 80% of its depth. (Table 13) 
b.  Awnings may encroach the sidewalk to within 2 feet of the curb but must clear the sidewalk vertically by at least 8 feet. 
4.  Specific to districts T4O, T5. 
a.  Awnings and galleries may encroach the sidewalk to within 2 feet of the curb but must clear the sidewalk vertically by at least 8 feet. 
b.  Stoops, lightwells, balconies, bay windows, and terraces may encroach the first layer 100% of its depth. (Table 13) 
c.  The Storefront Private Frontage shall be no less than 60% glazed in clear glass as generally illustrated in Table 5 and specified in this Chapter. 
d.  The minimum building height at the facade shall be eighteen (18) feet. 
e.  Loading docks and service areas shall be permitted on B-Grid frontages and shall not be permitted on or within 100 feet of an A-Grid frontage. 
f.  In the absence of a building facade along any part of a frontage line, a street wall shall be built coplanar with the facade. 
g.  Street walls shall be between 3.5 and 6 feet in height. The street wall may be replaced by a hedge or fence by administrative waiver. Street walls shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
1.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Sec. 18.102 Intent. 
2.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The waiver does not require a Special Exception Permit. 
4.  The fence will not materially endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance if located where proposed and developed according to the plans and information submitted and approved. 
5.  The fence will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
6.  The location and character of the fence, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
7.  The location and character of the fence will not adversely affect the district by impeding walkability. 
h.  A first level residential or lodging use shall be raised a minimum of 1.5 feet from average sidewalk grade. 
18.407. - Building Use. 
1.  Table 7. Building Use lists the land uses that are permitted in the specified zoning districts. If a particular use is not listed but the Zoning Administrator can equate the proposed use to a similar use that is listed, then the use that is not listed may be allowed to locate in the zone district where the equated use is permitted. The uses allowed are those that will benefit from close proximity of uses and foster a pedestrian-oriented environment. 
2.  Residential, retail, office, lodging, and civic are defined broadly and shall be permitted in all urbanized area pursuant to the limitations of Table 6. Building Intensity. See Building Intensity definitions. 
3.  General to districts T3, T4, T4O, T5. 
a.  Buildings in each Transect district shall conform to the intensities and uses on Table 6 and Table 7. 
4.  Specific to district T3. 
a.  Accessory uses of restricted lodging or restricted office shall be permitted. See Table 6. 
b.  First story commercial uses shall be permitted. See Table 6. 
5.  Specific to districts T4. 
a.  Accessory uses of limited lodging or limited office shall be permitted. See Table 6. 
6.  Specific to districts T4O and T5. 
a.  Commercial uses shall be permitted. See Table 6 
b.  Manufacturing uses within the first story may be permitted by waiver. 
7.  The maximum density of each lot is calculated in terms of dwelling units per net acre. 
a.  Maximum density is limited to the following rations: 
T3 6 units per acre T4 12 units per acre T4O 16 units per acre T5 20 units per acre  
18.408. - Parking Standards. 
1.  Specific to district T3, SD1. 
a.  Buildable density on a lot shall be limited by the actual parking provided within the lot as applied to the uses permitted in Table 8. 
2.  Specific to districts T4, T4O, T5. 
a.  Buildable density on a lot shall be limited by the sum of the actual parking calculated as that provided (1) within the lot (2) along the parking lane corresponding to the lot frontage, and (3) by purchase or lease from a civic parking reserve within the community unit, if available. 
b.  The actual parking may be adjusted upward according to the occupancy rate of Table 9 to determine the effective parking. The occupancy rate is available for any uses within any pair of adjacent blocks. 
c.  Based on the effective parking available, the density of the projected use may be limited according to Table 8. 
d.  Accessory units shall be exempt from parking requirements. 
e.  Liner buildings less than 30 feet deep and no more than two stories shall be exempt from parking requirements. 
f.  Shared parking shall require written consent of property owners agreeing to the shared parking arrangement (when provided off-site). 
g.  Copies of parking lease agreement, easements for parking, or notarized letter or sworn affidavit as to the intent of lease agreement, including renewed leases, shall be filed with the Community Development Director. Lapse of a required lease agreement shall terminate approval for shared parking. 
h.  Bicycle or moped parking spaces are required as follows: 
1.  All new non-residential uses shall provide one (1) such space for every twenty (20) automobile spaces and new multifamily uses shall provide one (1) such space for every five (5) units provided that no such uses shall have fewer than two (2) such spaces or be required to exceed thirty (30) spaces. 
2.  Such spaces shall be located within the public frontage a maximum distance of one hundred (100) feet from the primary entrance, or shall be located at least as close as the closest automobile space, except for handicapped parking spaces. Bicycle parking spaces shall include a bike rack with a metal anchor sufficient to secure the bicycle frame when used in conjunction with a user-supplied lock. 
18.409. - Parking Location Standards. 
1.  General to districts T3, T4, T4O, T5, SD1. 
a.  Parking shall be accessed by rear alleys or rear lanes, when such are available on the regulating plan. 
b.  Open parking areas shall be masked from the frontage by a building or street wall. 
c.  For buildings on B-Grids, open parking areas may be allowed unmasked on the frontage, but shall not be permitted on or within 100 feet of an A-Grid frontage. 
2.  Specific to districts T3. 
a.  Open parking areas shall be located at the second and third lot layers, except that driveways, drop-offs and unpaved parking areas may be located at the first lot layer. (Table 13) 
b.  Garages shall be located at the third layer except that side- or rear-entry types may be allowed in the second layer. 
c.  Driveways at frontages shall be no wider than 10 feet in the first layer. 
3.  Specific to districts T4. 
a.  Garages shall be located at the third layer. 
b.  Driveways at frontages shall be no wider than 10 feet in the first layer. 
4.  Specific to districts T4O, T5. 
a.  All parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be located at the third layer. (Table 13) 
b.  Vehicular entrances to parking lots, garages, and parking structures shall be no wider than 24 feet at the frontage. 
c.  Parking structures on the A-Grid shall have liner buildings lining the first story. 
d.  No curb cuts, driveways or circular drives shall be permitted on Main Street, Towne Lake Parkway, or Arnold Mill Road when access can be provided from a side or rear street. Circular drives are prohibited, with the exception of hotel and hospital uses. 
18.410. - Landscape Standards. 
1.  Intent. A Transect-based Landscape Plan provides many aesthetic, ecological, and health/safety benefits. The standards of this section promote public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards for the design, construction and maintenance of landscape improvements for public frontages and private frontages, lots, buildings, civic spaces, thoroughfares and special requirements. 
a.  Aesthetics/Walkability. These standards should enhance the overall aesthetic condition of communities, neighborhoods and the public realm with landscaping by: 
1.  coordinating public frontages and private frontages. 
2.  providing spatial definition to the public realm. 
3.  providing screening of unsightly places and/or mitigation of conditions that are incongruent with Sec. 18.102 Intent of this Chapter, including but not limited to the edges of special districts. 
b.  Health/Safety. These standards should enhance comfort, safety and utilization of the public realm by moderating the local micro-climate through the application of trees and landscaping to: 
1.  improve air quality. 
2.  mitigate noise pollution. 
3.  provide seasonal shade, sun and temperature regulation. 
4.  reduce reflected light. 
5.  mitigate wind gusts. 
6.  provide a partial barrier between sidewalks and vehicular lanes. 
7.  provide areas for the convenient removal and storage of snow. 
c.  Ecology/Energy. These standards should provide ecological benefits including but not limited to: 
1.  conservation of energy used in buildings though strategic shading and wind breaks. 
2.  interception of precipitation by vegetative canopies. 
3.  percolation of precipitation through pervious landscape areas. 
4.  reduction in the insolation of pavements and other hard surfaces associated with urban heat islands through vegetative canopy cover. 
5.  conservation of soil and prevention of soil erosion through vegetative cover, root growth and wind breaks. 
d.  Harmony. The intent for canopy coverage of street trees and civic spaces is to be functional, ecological, and in harmony with the City of Woodstock Chapter IX Tree Preservation Standards. 
2.  General to districts T3, T4, T4O, T5. 
a.  Preservation of on-site existing trees and vegetation is encouraged and may be used to fulfill the landscape requirements. 
1.  The root zones of existing trees and vegetation to be preserved shall be protected from clearing or construction activities. 
2.  The size and limits of existing vegetation shall be indicated on the landscape plan. 
3.  Priority shall be given to preserving and protecting specimen trees that provide screening, buffering, wildlife habitat and/or linkages to wildlife habitat. 
a.  The applicant shall replace specimen trees that are removed on the site with tees of the same or similar species whose combined caliper dimensions equal that of the tree removed. 
b.  During construction, the root zone of existing vegetation to be preserved shall be enclosed by a temporary protective fence. 
b.  Landscape Design Standards. 
1.  The spacing and placement of plants shall be adequate and appropriate for the typical size, shape and habit of the plant species at maturity. 
2.  Proposed trees and understory trees shall be centered horizontally and minimally: 
a.  Two (2) feet from walkways, curbing, and other impervious pavements when planted in a tree well or continuous planter; 
b.  Three (3) feet from walkways, curbing and other impervious pavements when planted in a continuous swale. Root barriers should be used to redirect root growth away from sidewalks, curbs and driveways; 
c.  Five (5) feet from street lights, underground utilities, utility meters and service lines, fences, walls and other ground level obstructions; 
d.  Six (6) feet from porch eaves, and awnings and similar overhead obstructions associated with the ground level of buildings; 
e.  Eight (8) feet from balconies, verandas, building eaves and cornices, and similar overhead obstructions associated with the upper stories of buildings. 
3.  Proposed trees shall be a minimum height of ten (10) feet and/or three (3) inches in caliper. 
4.  Proposed understory trees shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height and/or two-and-one-half (21/2) inches in caliper. 
5.  Proposed shrubs shall be of a five (5) gallon container minimum. Shrubs shall be 18?-24? minimum clear from any sidewalk or pavement edge at the lot line. 
6.  Ground vegetation or shrub planting with spines, thorns or needles that may present hazards to pedestrians, bicyclists or vehicles are prohibited in the first two (2) feet of the first layer. 
7.  Bare and exposed ground on the site and/or in landscaped areas shall be covered with live plant materials and/or mulch, with the following exceptions: 
a.  Agricultural fields seasonally tilled for cultivation. 
b.  Hiking trails and/or traces. 
c.  Clay or sand surfaces associated with recreation fields and facilities. 
8.  Artificial plants or artificial turf are prohibited, excluding active recreation sports fields that are typically subject to intense use and soil compaction which prohibits the establishment of turfgrass, and where paving or grass paving systems will not suffice given the area's purpose and level of use. 
9.  Buffers and screening elements shall be used to screen parking areas from public view, to screen service yards and other places that are unsightly. 
10.  Maintaining healthy urban soils reduces tree stress and improves tree survival, growth, longevity; this improves root structure and reduces the potential for tree failure. 
a.  Adequate soil volume shall be maintained throughout the lifetime of the tree. Planting environment shall provide an average soil depth greater than or equal to 3 feet. Each street tree shall have a minimum area suitable for root growth of 160 square feet provided, however if this minimum square footage is not provided, subsurface soil cells shall be incorporated into the Landscape Plan (includes trees in grates). All applicable details to show an industry standard subsurface soil cell design shall be attached as part of the plan provided. 
b.  Soil organic matter content should be maintained at about 5%. 
c.  Landscape Construction Standards. 
1.  All plant materials shall meet with the minimum container size, class and other requirements outlined in American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1-2004) published by the American Nursery and Landscape Association (ANLA) or other local Nursery Association Standards. 
2.  Plants shall have normal, well-developed branches and vigorous root systems. 
d.  Landscape Maintenance. 
1.  No disturbed ground shall be left exposed. Turfgrass and other approved and appropriate groundcovers or mulch shall cover all non-paved and non-built developed areas. 
2.  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner(s) or his assigned agent(s) to: 
a.  Maintain and keep all screening and fencing in good condition at all times; and 
b.  Maintain landscaping by keeping turfgrass lawns properly mowed and edged, plants properly pruned and disease-free, and planting beds mulched, groomed and weeded, and areas of naturally occurring vegetation and undergrowth; and 
c.  Replace any required planting(s) which are significantly damaged, removed, infested, disease ridden, or dead within one year or the next planting season, whichever occurs first, and other areas of naturally occurring vegetation and undergrowth. 
e.  Preservation, Replacement and Removal of Specimen Trees. 
1.  A Specimen Tree is any tree which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to its size, type and condition. The following criteria are used by the City to identify Specimen Trees. Both the size and condition criteria must be met for a tree to qualify. 
a.  Size Criteria: 
1.  Hardwoods: 24-inch Cal at DBH or larger. 
2.  Softwoods: 30-inch Cal at DBH or larger. 
3.  Understory/Flowering trees: 12-inch Cal at DBH or larger. 
b.  Condition Criteria: 
1.  Life expectancy greater than 15 years; 
2.  Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay; 
3.  No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only); 
4.  No major insect or pathological problem. 
2.  Small trees can be classified as specimen if of a rare or unusual species, of exceptional quality, or socio-historical significance. Small trees may also qualify as specimen if used in a landscape as a focal point of the design. In order to claim this credit, the applicant must submit a letter from a certified arborist stating that the tree(s) meet these qualifications. 
3.  A report for each Specimen Tree that is shown to be impacted by a proposed development requiring an LDP must be submitted to the City to determine whether that tree meets the condition criteria for specimen status. The report must be prepared and signed by a certified arborist or a registered forester. The report must contain the following information: 
a.  Site plan showing an accurate surveyed location of the tree, 
b.  Identification/verification of the tree's size and species, 
c.  Description of the surrounding site conditions, 
d.  Detailed description of the tree's condition, 
e.  Digital photographs to illustrate any defects which would disqualify the tree from specimen status. 
4.  The final determination of Specimen Tree status will be made by City staff after reviewing the report. If a Specimen Tree is to be removed, a plan or written documentation indicating the reason for removal must be submitted to the City. 
3.  Specific to districts T3, T4. 
a.  The first layer may not be paved, with the exception of driveways and sidewalks. (Table 13) 
b.  The minimum required landscape area shall be thirty (30) percent of the first layer of the principal frontage and the secondary frontage. 
c.  Open spaces and civic space shall remain fenced and protected during all adjacent site work and construction activities unless alterations to them are otherwise specified by the plans. 
4.  Specific to district T3. 
a.  One (1) tree shall be planted within the first layer for every 800 square feet of landscape area, or any portion thereof. (Table 13) 
1.  Substitutions: 
a.  One (1) tree may be substituted for two (2) understory trees; 
b.  One (1) understory tree may be substituted for ten (10) Shrubs. 
2.  Tree Preservation Credit: 
a.  One (1) tree may be substituted for an existing tree to be preserved provided that: 
1.  It is four (4) Inches DBH or greater; 
2.  Possesses a healthy and full canopy; 
3.  Has an unmolested CRZ; 
4.  Has incurred no damage that would undermine its long-term vitality and quality. 
b.  Trees shall be naturalistically clustered in conjunction with adjacent street trees. 
5.  Specific to district T4. 
a.  A minimum of one (1) understory tree or ten (10) shrubs shall be planted within the first layer for every 500 square feet of first layer landscape area. (Table 13) 
b.  Parking spaces shall be broken with one (1) landscape islands for every twenty (20) spaces. 
c.  The landscape islands shall be distributed throughout the lot and may be combined as a component of a stormwater management plan to facilitate water harvesting. 
1.  Landscape islands may be omitted for solar panel installations or other shading structures of equal or greater coverage. 
d.  Parking areas that exceed one hundred and twenty (120) spaces shall include a minimum of eight (8) foot wide pedestrian walkway. The pavements of such walkways shall be differentiated from parking area pavement through a change in surface texture, material, style, and/or color. 
e.  Porous paving materials are encouraged in order to increase storm water infiltration on site. 
6.  Specific to districts T4O, T5. 
a.  Trees shall not be required in the first layer. 
b.  The first layer may be paved to match the pavement of the public frontage. 
c.  Landscape islands in interior parking lots shall only occur at the end of drive aisles. Islands should be the minimum size for healthy growth for the specific species of tree. 
d.  Porous paving materials should be used in order to increase storm water infiltration on site. 
18.411. - Signage Standards. 
1.  Except with respect to the additional provisions in Paragraphs 2.-12. below, Chapter VI (Sign Standards) of the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance shall be applicable and govern pursuant to the administration, processes and provisions for all signage within the City Limits of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. However, only the signage types permitted in this subsection and Table 15 hereof (Sign Types) shall be permitted in Transect Districts and FBC-NC. Special Districts may utilize Chapter VI (Sign Standards) instead of this subsection. Unless specifically defined in Section 18.106 hereof, all definitions used in this Section 18.411 shall be as defined in Article VI (Sign Standards) of the Land Development Ordinance of the City of Woodstock, Georgia. 
2.  Specific to Awning Signs. 
a.  The following variations of awnings, with or without sign bands, are permitted: 
1.  Fixed or retractable awnings. 
2.  Shed awnings. 
3.  Dome awnings. 
b.  Other awning types may be permitted by administrative waiver. 
c.  No portion of an awning shall be lower than eight (8) feet clearance. 
d.  Awnings shall be a minimum of 4 feet in depth. 
e.  Awnings shall not extend beyond the width of the building or tenant space, nor encroach above the roof line or the story above. 
f.  The height of the valance shall not exceed twelve (12) inches. 
g.  Letters, numbers, and graphics shall cover no more than seventy percent (70%) of the awning panel or valance area. 
h.  Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated or backlit. 
3.  Specific to Band Signs. 
a.  All owners or lessees are permitted one (1) band sign on each first story facade. 
b.  The following band sign construction types are permitted: 
1.  Cut-out letters. Letters shall be individually attached to the wall or on a separate background panel, and shall be externally illuminated. 
2.  Flat panel. Letters shall be printed or etched on same surface as the background, which is then affixed to the wall and externally illuminated. 
3.  Channel letters by administrative waiver. Each letter shall have its own internal lighting element, individually attached to the wall or onto a separate background panel. The letter shall be translucent, or solid to create a backlit halo effect. 
c.  Height and width shall be measured using smallest rectangle that fully encompasses the entire extent of letters, logo and background. 
d.  Band signs shall not be wider than 90% of the width of the building facade or tenant space. 
e.  Band signs shall not project vertically above the roof line. 
f.  Band signs may be illuminated from dusk to dawn or during hours permitted by the lighting ordinance. External lights shall be shielded from direct view to reduce glare. 
g.  Neon may be permitted on band signs. No other internal lighting shall be permitted. 
h.  Electrical raceways, conduits and wiring shall not be exposed. Internal lighting elements shall be contained completely within the sign assembly or inside the wall. 
i.  Band signs should be placed where the architectural features suggest the best placement for signage. They should be vertically aligned with the center of an architectural feature such as a storefront window, entry portal, or width of a bay or overall retail space. They shall not interrupt or obscure these features or cause visual disharmony. 
j.  Where multiple band signs are present on a single building, signage shall be coordinated in terms of scale, placement, colors and materials. 
4.  Specific to Blade Signs. 
a.  Blade signs may be double-sided. 
b.  Blade signs shall be permitted only for owners or lessees that have a principal entrance on the first story. 
c.  Owners or lessees shall be permitted one (1) blade sign where its principal frontage line is no more than five (5) feet from the facade. Owners or lessees that have a secondary frontage line that is no more than two (2) feet from the facade shall be permitted one (1) additional blade sign on that facade. 
d.  Blade signs may encroach into the public frontage up to four (4) feet and shall clear the sidewalk by at least eight (8) feet. 
e.  Blade signs shall not encroach above the roof line nor above the bottom of the second story window. 
f.  Mounting hardware, such as supports and brackets, may be simple and unobtrusive or highly decorative, but shall complement the design of the sign, the building, or both. 
g.  For buildings with multiple signs, mounting hardware or sign shapes, sizes and colors shall be coordinated. 
5.  Specific to Marquees. 
a.  Marquees shall be located only above the principal entrance of a building. 
b.  No marquee shall be wider than the entrance it serves, plus two (2) feet on each side thereof. 
c.  No portion of a marquee shall be lower than ten (10) feet clearance. 
d.  No marquee shall extend closer to the curb than three (3) feet. 
e.  All marquees, including anchors, bolts, supporting rods and braces, shall be constructed of non-combustible materials and shall be designed by a structural engineer and approved by the Building Inspector. 
f.  Marquee components and materials may vary. Anchors, bolts, and supporting rods should be limited to the interior of the marquee. 
g.  Message boards shall be permitted as part of marquees. 
h.  A band sign shall be permitted above a marquee. 
6.  Specific to Monument Signs. 
a.  Monument signs shall be located entirely on private property and a minimum of six (6) feet from the frontage. 
b.  Multi-tenant buildings and multi-family buildings shall be permitted one monument sign per frontage. 
c.  Monument signs may be double-sided. 
d.  No monument signs shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended. 
e.  No monument sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per face in area or five (5) feet in height. 
f.  All monument signs shall be constructed of durable materials and shall be approved by the Building Inspector. 
g.  Message boards shall be not be permitted as part of a monument sign. 
7.  Specific to Nameplates. 
a.  Nameplates shall consist of either a panel or individual letters applied to a building wall within ten (10) feet of an entrance to the building. 
b.  One nameplate shall be permitted per address. 
c.  Nameplates shall not exceed three (3) square feet. 
d.  Nameplates shall be constructed of durable materials. 
8.  Specific to Outdoor Display Cases. 
a.  Each outdoor display case shall not exceed six (6) square feet. 
b.  Outdoor display cases may be externally or internally illuminated. 
c.  Theaters may be permitted larger outdoor display cases by administrative waiver. Percent- age of area increase shall be limited to 100%. 
d.  Outdoor display cases shall not be attached to storefront windows. 
9.  Shingle Signs. 
a.  Shingle signs shall comport with the standards for blade signs except 4.d and 4.f. 
b.  A building may have both the prescribed number of blade signs and the same number of shingle signs. 
c.  Shingle signs may encroach into the public frontage up to two (2) feet and shall clear the sidewalk by at least seven (7) feet. 
10.  Specific to Sidewalk Signs. 
a.  Sidewalk signs shall be removed at the close of business each day. 
b.  One (1) sidewalk sign shall be permitted for each owner or lessee. 
c.  Sidewalk signs shall not exceed 42 inches in height or 26 inches in width. 
d.  Sidewalk signs shall be moved inside during high winds or other weather conditions that might pose a hazard to public safety. 
11.  Specific to Window Signs. 
a.  Only the following window sign types shall be permitted: 
1.  Vinyl applique letters applied to the window. Appliques shall consist of individual letters or graphics with no visible background. 
2.  Letters painted directly on the window. 
3.  Hanging signs that hang from the ceiling behind the window. 
4.  Neon signs. 
5.  Door signs applied to or hanging inside the glass portion of an entrance doorway. 
b.  Window signs shall not interfere with the primary use of windows, which is to enable passersby and public safety personnel to see through windows into premises and view product displays. 
c.  Window signs shall be no larger than 25% of the total area of the window onto which they are applied. Sign area shall be measured using smallest rectangle that fully encompasses the entire extent of letters, logo and background. 
d.  Letters on window signs shall be no taller than eight (8) inches. 
12.  Specific to Yard Signs. 
a.  One single- or double-post yard sign for each owner or lessee may be permitted by administrative waiver, provided it is set back at least six (6) feet from the frontage line, does not exceed six (6) square feet excluding posts, and does not exceed six (6) feet high including posts, measured from the yard at the post location. 
18.412. - Architectural Standards. 
1.  Architectural intent for non-civic building facades specific to Districts T4, T4O, and T5 facades: 
a.  Provide front entrance(s) that are distinct and visible from the street, but should not exaggerate or double the height of the entrance. 
b.  Simple massing is preferred and should be used with stoops, porches, galleries, arcades, roof eaves, and balconies to provide expressive character, over excessive use of building articulation. 
2.  Architectural intent for non-civic building facades specific to District T4O, and T5 facades: 
a.  Provide a discernable base, middle and cap that are clearly defined by horizontal elements along the bottom and top of the building. Expression of the elements should be handled through changes in material selection, color, or plane. Use of horizontal bands, cornices, and or varied window patterns can assist in expression. 
3.  General to Districts T3, T4, T4O, and T5 facades: 
a.  Building wall materials may be combined on each facade only horizontally, with the lighter above more substantial materials. 
b.  Glazing above the first story facade shall not exceed 30% of the total building facade wall area, with each facade being calculated independently, except by administrative waiver. 
c.  The storefront private frontage shall be no less than 50% glazing. 
d.  All glass shall be clear and free of color. 
e.  Pitched roofs, if provided, shall be simple and symmetrical, in the configuration of gables, hips, half-hips, gambrel and true mansards. 
f.  Pitched roofs shall be symmetrically sloped no less than 6:12, except that roofs for porches and attached sheds may be no less than 2:12. 
g.  Low pitch or flat roofs shall be enclosed by a parapet that is a minimum of 42? in height, or a greater height as necessary to conceal mechanical equipment. 
h.  The exterior finish material on all facades shall be limited to brick, wood siding, cementitious siding, stucco and/or stone. No more than two material shall be combined on any facade. 
i.  Hardwood used for rafters, fascia boards and all visible portions of roof decking shall be varnished, oiled, stained or painted. Pressure treated wood shall be painted. 
j.  Dormers shall be roofed with a symmetrical gable or a shed configuration. They shall be no more than 2 windows wide and placed no less than 2 feet from an end gable or party wall. 
k.  Street walls should be constructed of a material matching the adjacent building facade. Evergreen hedges may be used as street walls. 
l.  Hardwood fences at the first lot layer may be varnished, oiled, stained or painted. Pressure treated wood, iron and steel shall be painted. 
4.  Specific to Districts T3, T4 facades: 
a.  Balconies and porches shall be made of painted wood, stained wood or cementitious wood substitute boards the same size and thickness as commonly available wood boards, or wood plastic composite. 
5.  Specific to Districts T4O, T5 facades: 
a.  Balconies and porches shall be made of painted wood, stained wood, cementitious wood substitute boards the same size and thickness as commonly available wood boards, wood plastic composite, or wrought iron. 
b.  Doors and windows that operate as sliders are prohibited along frontages. 
18.413. - Fencing Standards. 
1.  General to Districts T3, T4, T4O, and T5. 
a.  Hedges in frontage line fencing shall be evergreen. 
b.  Wood frontage fences shall be painted or stained. 
c.  No single frontage fence horizontal panel shall exceed 42? in height along a frontage lot line. See Table 16. Fence Locations and Table 17. Fence Panels. 
d.  Private lot line fences shall be between 60? and 72? in height. See Table 16. Fence Locations 
e.  Frontage fences may occur at the lot line, or up to 18? behind the lot line to permit landscaping. 
f.  When erected on a lot line, all of the fence and any of its supporting structures shall be contained within the lot. 
g.  Fences along private lot lines, or alley lot lines may be chain link, but in no case shall exceed 72? in height. 
h.  The supporting members and posts shall be on the inside, and the smooth or flat faces on the outside. If two faces are used, each face shall be of the same type and finish. Board on board fences is considered equal treatment. 
i.  Barbed wire, razor wire and electrically charged fences are not permitted. 
2.  Specific to District T3. 
a.  Frontage fences in T3 shall be picket, post and hedge, ranch, or hedgerows. See Table 15. Fence Types. 
b.  Frontage fences shall be 36? to 42? in height. Secondary frontage fences may be 60? high beginning at the primary setback. 
3.  Specific to district T4. 
a.  Frontage fences shall be picket, post and hedge, iron, stone, brick, or hedgerows. See Table 15. Fence Types. 
b.  Frontage fences shall be 36? to 48? in height. Secondary frontage fences may be 60? high beginning at the primary setback. 
4.  Specific to Districts T4O, T5. 
a.  Frontage fences in T4O and T5 shall be iron, iron and stone, iron and brick, brick, stucco or stone. See Table 15. Fence Types. 
b.  Frontage fences shall be 48? to 60? in height. 
TABLE 4. BUILDING HEIGHT 

Expression lines shall occur on buildings taller than three stories as shown. 
TABLE 5. PRIVATE FRONTAGES 
FIRST LOT LAYER REGULATIONS COMMON LAWN Transect District T3, T4, SD1 Permitted Elements Encroachments Porch no less than 6 feet deep Surface Treatment Grass, groundcover Special Requirements FENCED LAWN Transect District T3, T4 Permitted Elements Fences, hedges and walls Encroachments 80% of setback @ no less than 8 feet Surface Treatment Grass, groundcover Special Requirements Fences, hedges and walls shall be along frontage lines or parallel with the facade of the principal building TERRACE Transect District T4, T4O, T5, SD1 Permitted Elements May be combined with stoop Encroachments Terraces may encroach 100% of setback, no less than 6 ft. Terraces shall be raised a minimum of 12? from average sidewalk grade. Surface Treatment Paved, terraces may be landscaped Special Requirements Ramps for wheelchair access may be located within first layer FORECOURT Transect District T4O, T5, SD1 Permitted Elements May be combined with terrace, stoop, storefront, or gallery. Encroachments May recess from the frontage line a maximum of 20 feet for pedestrian entries or a maximum of 30 feet for vehicular access. Surface Treatment Paved in coordination with the public frontage or with pervious materials Special Requirements Shall provide access to the main building entrance. Driveways within forecourts are limited to 20 feet in width. Portions of the driveway in the public frontage shall be limited to 12 feet in width and shall be paved in coordination with the adjacent public frontage STOOP Transect District T4, T4O, T5 Permitted Elements Hedges and metal fences. Encroachments 100% of the setback. Surface Treatment Paved in coordination with the public frontage. Special Requirements May be recessed into the building facade where a front setback is less than 6 feet COMMON ENTRY Transect District T4, T4O, T5, SD1 Permitted Elements Planter may line the facade. Encroachments Planter may encroach up to 100% Surface Treatment Any setback area not within the planter shall be paved at grade. Special Requirements Planter may extend no more than 3' from the facade at grade. The first story of the facade shall be no less than 15% glazed in clear glass STOREFRONT Transect District T4, T4O, T5, SD1 Permitted Elements Awnings Encroachments Awnings may encroach to within two feet of the curb and must project horizontally from the facade a minimum of 6 feet. Display windows may encroach up to 2 feet Surface Treatment Paved Special Requirements Shall be glazed with clear glass for no less than 50% of the ground floor at frontages, calculated as a percentage of each facade individually. GALLERY Transect District T4, T4O, T5, SD1 Permitted Elements May be combined with storefront. Encroachments May encroach to within 2 feet of the curb. Surface Treatment Paved in coordination with the public frontage Special Requirements Shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of 10 feet and project horizontally from the facade a minimum of 10 feet PRIVATE ARCADE Transect District T5, SD1 Permitted Elements May be combined with storefront. Encroachments 100% of the setback. Surface Treatment Paved in coordination with the public frontage Special Requirements Shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of 10 feet and project horizontally from the facade a minimum of 10 feet  
TABLE 6. BUILDING INTENSITY 
RESTRICTED LIMITED OPEN a. RESIDENTIAL The number of dwellings on each lot is restricted to one within a principal building and one within an accessory building. 
Both dwellings shall be under single ownership. 
The habitable area of the accessory unit shall not exceed 500 s.f., excluding the parking area. 
Residential uses may occupy any building story. Residential uses may occupy any building story. Residential uses may occupy any building story. b. LODGING The number of bedrooms available on each lot for lodging is restricted to five. 
The lodging must be owner occupied. 
Food service may be provided in the morning. 
The maximum length of stay shall not exceed ten days. 
Lodging may occupy any building story. The number of bedrooms available on each lot for lodging is limited to twelve. 
The lodging must be owner occupied. Food service may be provided in the morning. 
The maximum length of stay shall not exceed fourteen days. 
Lodging may occupy any building story. The number of bedrooms available on each Lot for lodging is not limited. 
Food service may be provided at all times. 
The area allocated for food service shall be calculated and provided with parking according to retail use. 
Lodging may occupy any building story. c. OFFICE The building area available for office use on each lot is restricted to 600 square feet within the first story of the principal or the accessory building or within basements. 
Parking requirements and maximum number of employees and occupants shall be determined by waiver. The building area available for office use on each lot is limited to the first story of the principal building and/or to the accessory building. Office uses may occupy any building story. d. RETAIL The building area available for retail use is restricted to the first story of buildings at corner locations. 
Food service is restricted to no more than 600 square feet of seating area. The building area available for retail use is limited to the first story of buildings at corner locations. 
Food service is limited to no more than 1,800 square feet of seating area. Retail uses may occupy any building story. 
Retail spaces under 1,500 square feet are exempt from parking requirements. e. INSTITUTIONAL By waiver Institutional uses may occupy any building story f. MANUFACTURING Manufacturing uses may occupy any building story g. INDUSTRIAL Limited to specific uses in Table 7  
TABLE 7. RESERVED 
Editor's note- An Ordinance adopted January 23, 2017, repealed Table 7, which pertained to Building Use and derived from Ord. of 10-28-2013(3), § 1(Exh. A). 
TABLE 8. PARKING CALCULATIONS 
    The gross minimum number of parking spaces listed below shall be multiplied by the "occupancy rate" as found in Table 9, for each use for the weekday night, daytime and evening periods respectively, and weekend night, daytime and evening periods respectively. The gross minimum numbers of parking spaces for each of the uses referred to for each time period shall be added to produce the aggregate gross minimum numbers of parking spaces for each time period. 
RESIDENTIAL* 2.0/dwelling 1.5/dwelling 1.0/dwelling LODGING 1.0/bedroom 1.0/bedroom 1.0/bedroom OFFICE 4.0/1,000 s.f. 3.0/1,000 s.f. 2.0/1,500 s.f. RETAIL 4.0/1,000 s.f. 3.0/1,000 s.f. 2.0/1,000 s.f. CIVIC 1/5 seats assembly use 
1 Bicycle Rack Space/20 vehicular spaces required. 
Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within 1,000 feet. 1/5 seats assembly use 
1/1,000 s.f. of exhibition or indoor recreation area. 
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Parking Occupancy Rate Table 20. 
1 Bicycle Rack Space/20 vehicular spaces required. 
Parking ratio may be reduced within 1/4 mile radius of a Transit Corridor by thirty percent (30%). 
Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within 1,000 feet. 1/5 seats assembly use 1/1,000 s.f. of exhibition or indoor recreation area. 
Parking requirement may be reduced according to the Parking Occupancy Rate Table 20. 
1 Bicycle Rack Space/20 vehicular spaces required. Parking ratio may be reduced within 1/4 mile radius of a Transit Corridor by thirty percent (30%). 
Parking may be provided by ownership or lease offsite within 1,000 feet. OTHER  
* Senior housing or co-housing requirements may be reduced by 50%. 
TABLE 9. PARKING OCCUPANCY RATE 
USES M-F M-F M-F SAT & SUN SAT & SUN SAT & SUN 8 AM- 
6 PM 6 PM- 
12 AM 12 AM- 
8 AM 8 AM- 
6 PM 6 PM- 
12 AM 12 AM- 
8 AM RESIDENTIAL 60% 100% 100% 80% 100% 100% LODGING 70% 100% 100% 70% 100% 100% OFFICE 100% 20% 5% 5% 5% 5% RETAIL 90% 80% 5% 100% 70% 5% RESTAURANT 70% 100% 100% 70% 100% 100% MOVIE THEATER 40% 80% 10% 80% 100% 10% ENTERTAINMENT 40% 100% 10% 80% 100% 50% CONVERENCE/CONVENTIONS 100% 100% 5% 100% 100% 5% CIVIC (NON-CHURCH) 100% 20% 5% 10% 10% 5% CIVIC (CHURCH) 20% 20% 5% 100% 50% 5%  
Planning Staff shall provide a spreadsheet that will perform calculations for specific applications based on the above occupancy rates. 
TABLE 10. T3 STANDARDS 
A. BUILDING PLACEMENT PRINCIPAL BUILDING i. Front Setback (Principal) 16 ft. min. 24 ft. max. ii. Front Setback (Secondary) 2 ft. min. 12 ft. max. iii. Side Setback 6 ft. min. iv. Rear Setback 12 ft. min. OUTBUILDING v. Front Setback (Principal) 20 ft. min. + bldg. setback vi. Side Setback 3 ft. or 6 ft. at corner vii. Rear Setback 3 ft. min. ENCROACHMENTS i. Setbacks Encroachments Open Porch 50% max. Balcony and/or Bay Window 25% max. Stoop, Lightwell or Terrace n/a ii. Sidewalk Encroachments Awning or Gallery n/a iii. Encroachment Depths Open Porch 10 ft. max. Balcony and/or Bay Window 6 ft. max. Stoop, Lightwell or Terrace n/a B. BUILDING FORM HEIGHT PRINCIPAL BUILDING Stories 2 OUTBUILDING BUILDING Stories 2 To Eave/Parapet 30 ft. max. MASS Lot Width 50 ft. min., 150 ft. max. Lot Coverage 50% max. Facade Buildout at Setback n/a PARKING AND STORAGE LOCATION PARKING 1st layer (see Table 13) not permitted 2nd layer (see Table 13) side or rear entry permitted 3rd layer (see Table 13) permitted TRASH & STORAGE* LOCATION 1st layer (see Table 13) not permitted 2nd layer (see Table 13) not permitted 3rd layer (see Table 13) permitted  
*Storage includes boats and recreational vehicles. 
TABLE 11. T4/T4O STANDARDS 
A. BUILDING PLACEMENT PRINCIPAL BUILDING i. Front Setback (Principal) 18 ft. max. ii. Front Setback (Secondary) 10 ft. max. iii. Side Setback 0 ft. or 6 ft. min. total iv. Rear Setback 3 ft. min. OUTBUILDING v. Front Setback (Principal) 40 ft. max. from rear property line vi. Side Setback 0 ft. or 3 ft. at corner vii. Rear Setback 3 ft. min. ENCROACHMENTS i. Setbacks Encroachments Open Porch 80% max. Balcony and/or Bay Window 80% max. Stoop, Lightwell or Terrace 80% max. ii. Sidewalk Encroachments Awning or Gallery 80% max. iii. Encroachment Depths Open Porch 10 ft. max. Balcony and/or Bay Window 6 ft. max. Stoop, Lightwell or Terrace 6 ft. max. Gallery within 2 ft. of curb Awning within 2 ft. of curb B. BUILDING FORM HEIGHT PRINCIPAL BUILDING Stories 3 OUTBUILDING BUILDING Stories 2 To Eave/Parapet 30 ft. max. MASS Lot Width 20 ft. min., 96 ft. max. Lot Coverage 70% max. Facade Buildout at Setback 60% min. PARKING AND STORAGE LOCATION PARKING 1st layer (see Table 13) not permitted 2nd layer (see Table 13) not permitted 3rd layer (see Table 13) permitted TRASH & STORAGE* LOCATION 1st layer (see Table 13) not permitted 2nd layer (see Table 13) not permitted 3rd layer (see Table 13) permitted  
*Storage includes boats and recreational vehicles. 
TABLE 12. T5 STANDARDS 
A. BUILDING PLACEMENT PRINCIPAL BUILDING i. Front Setback (Principal) 12 ft. max. ii. Front Setback (Secondary) 0 ft. max. iii. Side Setback 6 ft. max. iv. Rear Setback 3 ft. min. OUTBUILDING v. Front Setback (Principal) 40 ft. max. from rear property line vi. Side Setback 0 ft. or 3 ft. at corner vii. Rear Setback 3 ft. min. ENCROACHMENTS i. Setbacks Encroachments Open Porch 100% max. Balcony and/or Bay Window 100% max. Stoop, Lightwell or Terrace 100% max. ii. Sidewalk Encroachments Awning or Gallery 100% max. iii. Encroachment Depths Open Porch 10 ft. max. Balcony and/or Bay Window 6 ft. max. Stoop, Lightwell or Terrace 6 ft. max. Gallery within 2 ft. of curb Awning within 2 ft. of curb B. BUILDING FORM HEIGHT PRINCIPAL BUILDING Stories 4 max. OUTBUILDING BUILDING Stories 2 To Eave/Parapet 32 ft. max. MASS Lot Width 20 ft. min., 150 ft. max. Lot Coverage 90% max. Facade Buildout at Setback 60% min.-100% max. PARKING AND STORAGE LOCATION PARKING 1st layer (see Table 13) not permitted 2nd layer (see Table 13) not permitted 3rd layer (see Table 13) permitted TRASH & STORAGE* LOCATION 1st layer (see Table 13) not permitted 2nd layer (see Table 13) not permitted 3rd layer (see Table 13) permitted  
*Storage includes boats and recreational vehicles. 
TABLE 13. LOT STRUCTURE 

BUILDINGS   Principal Building The main building on a Lot. Outbuilding A secondary building usually located toward the rear of the same Lot as a Principal Building such as a garage, carport, or workshop and may include an Accessory Unit. SETBACKS   Primary Front Setback The area of a Lot measured from the Primary Frontage Line to the nearest permissible location of a Principal Building, excluding Encroachments. Secondary Front Setback Corner Lots have more than one Frontage Line. One Frontage Line is designated the Primary Frontage Line and all remaining Frontage Lines are designated as Secondary Frontage Lines. The Secondary Front Setback is the area of a Lot measured from the Secondary Frontage Line to the nearest permissible location of a Principal Building, excluding Encroachments. Side Setback The area of a Lot measured from any side Lot Line to the nearest permissible location of a Principal Building, excluding Encroachments. Rear Setback The area of a Lot measured from a rear Lot Line to the nearest permissible location of a Principal Building or Outbuilding, excluding Encroachments. LOT LAYERS First Layer The area of a Lot from the Frontage Line to the Facade of the Principal Building. Second Layer The area of a Lot set behind the 1st Layer to a depth of 20 feet. Third Layer The area of a Lot set behind the 2nd Layer and extending to the rear Lot Line. LOT SIZE Lot Width The length of the Principal Frontage Line of a Lot.  
TABLE 14. FRONTAGES & ELEVATIONS 

TABLE 15. SIGN TYPES 
T3 T4 T4O T5> SPECIFICATIONS   Awning and Sign a. Quantity (max) 1 per window b. Area n/a c. Width max equals width of Facade d. Height n/a e. Depth/Projection min. 4 ft. see Sec. 5.12.7e f. Clearance min. 8 ft., 7 ft. by Warrant g. Apex n/a h. Letter Height min. 5 in., max 10 in. i. Valance Height max. 12 in. j. Distance from Curb min. 2 ft. Band Sign a. Quantity (max) 1 (2 for corner buildings) b. Area (max) 3 s.f. per linear ft. Facade c. Width max 90% width of Facade d. Height max. 3 ft. e. Depth/Projection max. 7 in. f. Clearance min. 7 ft. g. Apex n/a h. Letter Height max. 18 in. Blade Sign a. Quantity 1 per Facade, 2 max. b. Area (max) 4 s.f. T3, T4, 6 s.f. T4O, T5 c. Width max. 4 ft. d. Height max. 4 ft. e. Depth/Projection max. 4 ft. f. Clearance min. 8 ft. g. Apex n/a h. Letter Height max. 8 in. Marquee ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per business b. Area n/a c. Width (max) entrance plus 2' each side d. Height max 50% Story height e. Depth/Projection min. 4 ft., max. 10 ft. f. Clearance min. 10 ft. g. Apex n/a h. Letter Height n/a i. Distance from curb min. 3 ft. Monument ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per parcel b. Area max. 32 s.f. c. Width (max) max. 8 ft. d. Height max. 5 ft. e. Depth/Projection max. 1 ft. f. Clearance n/a g. Apex max. 78 in. h. Letter Height n/a i. Distance from frontage line min. 6 ft. Nameplate Sign ? ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Area max. 6 s.f. c. Width (max) max. 3.5 ft. d. Height max. 3.5. ft. e. Depth/Projection max. 5 in. f. Clearance min. 4 ft. g. Apex n/a h. Letter Height n/a Outdoor Display Case ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Area max. 6 s.f. c. Width (max) max. 3.5. ft. d. Height max. 3.5. ft. e. Depth/Projection max. 5 in. f. Clearance min. 4 ft. g. Apex n/a h. Letter Height n/a Shingle Sign a. Quantity (max) 1 per facade, 2 max. b. Area 4 s.f. c. Width (max) max. 2 ft. d. Height max. 3 ft. e. Depth/Projection max. 2 ft. f. Clearance min. 7 ft. g. Apex n/a h. Letter Height max. 8 in. i. Distance from Curb Sidewalk Sign a. Quantity (max) 1 per business b. Area max. 8 s.f. c. Width (max) max. 26 in. d. Height max. 42 in. e. Depth/Projection n/a f. Clearance n/a g. Apex max. 42 in. h. Letter Height n/a Window Sign a. Quantity (max) 1 per window b. Area max. 25% of glass c. Width (max) varies d. Height varies e. Depth/Projection n/a f. Clearance 4 ft. g. Apex n/a h. Letter Height max. 8 in. Yard Sign a. Quantity (max.) 1 per parcel b. Area max. 6 s.f. c. Width (max.0 varies d. Height 6 ft. max. e. Depth/Projection n/a f. Clearance n/a g. Apex n/a h. Letter Height n/a i. Setback from frontage line 6 ft. min.  
TABLE 16. FENCE TYPES 
T3 T4 T4O T5> SPECIFICATIONS   Ranch ¦ a. Material wood b. Finish paint or stain c. Setback 0? or 18? for landscape Hedgerow ¦ ¦ a. Material hedge b. Plant type evergreen c. Setback 0? or 18? for landscape Post and Hedge ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Material hedge and wood b. Plant type evergreen c. Finish paint or stain d. Setback 0? or 18&Prime for landscape Picket ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Material wood b. Finish paint or stain c. Picket spacing ;lte; 2.5 times width of picket d. Setback 0? or 18&Prime for landscape Metal ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Material aluminum or wrought iron b. Finish powder coat or paint c. Picket spacing ;lte; 2.5 times width of picket d. Setback 0? or 18? for landscape Stone, Brick Stucco ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Material Stone, Brick or Stucco b. Finish paint or none c. Configuration d. Setback 0? or 18? for landscape Metal and Stone, Brick, Stucco ¦ ¦ a. Material Stone, Brick or Stucco with Metal panels b. Finish paint or none/powder coat or paint c. Configuration d. Setback 0&Prime or 18&Prime for landscape  
TABLE 17. FENCE LOCATIONS 

TABLE 18. FENCE PANELS 

ARTICLE 5. - SPECIAL DISTRICTS 

18.501. - Special District SD1. 
1.  Building Placement 
a.  Newly platted lots shall be dimensioned according to Table 19. 
b.  Buildings shall be placed in relation to the boundaries of their lots according to Table 19. 
c.  Lot coverage by building shall not exceed that recorded in Table 19. 
d.  Setbacks for buildings shall be as shown in Table 19. 
2.  Building Configuration 
a.  General to SD1 
1.  Buildings on corner lots shall have two private frontages as shown in Table 13. Prescriptions for the second and third layers pertain only to the principal frontage. Prescriptions for the first layer pertain to both frontages. 
2.  Encroachments shall be as follows: At the first layer, cantilevered awnings and entry canopies may encroach up to one hundred percent (100%) of the depth of the setback, except as may be further allowed by Chapter XI of the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance; cantilevered portions of balconies, bay windows, and roofs shall be a maximum three (3) feet deep and may encroach up to a three (3) feet depth of the setback. Other cantilevered portions of the building shall maintain the required setback. At the second layer no encroachments are permitted except that facade components promoting energy efficiency such as shading and screening devices that are non-accessible may encroach a maximum of three (3) feet. 
3.  Galleries shall be a minimum twelve (12) feet deep and may encroach up to one hundred percent (100%) of the depth of the setback. 
4.  In a parking structure or garage, each above-ground level counts as a single story regardless of its relationship to habitable stories. 
5.  Height limits do not apply to attics or raised basements, masts, belfries, clock towers, chimney flues, water tanks, or elevator bulkheads. 
6.  All storage, utility and infrastructure elements including service areas, loading space, transformers, telephone boxes, garbage cans, dumpsters, condensers, meters, backflow preventers, Siamese connections and the like shall be located within the second or third layer and concealed from view from any frontage or sidewalk by street walls, and opaque gates. Loading and service entries shall be accessed from alleys when available. 
7.  Building heights shall be measured in stories and shall conform to Table 4 and be allocated as required in Table 19. Industrial uses requiring additional Height in SD2 may be permitted by administrative waiver The Community Development Director or his designee must make the following written findings and the approval shall be ratified by the DPC: 
a.  The waiver is consistent with the provisions of Section 18.102 Intent. 
b.  The waiver is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  The waiver does not require a Special Exception Permit. 
d.  The additional height will not materially endanger the public health or safety or constitute a public nuisance if located where proposed and developed according to the plans and information submitted and approved. 
1.  The additional height will not substantially injure the value of adjoining property; or that the use is a public necessity. 
2.  The additional height, if developed according to the plans and information approved, will be in harmony with proximate land uses, and consistent with the purposes of the district. 
3.  The applicant has demonstrated that the use specifically requires the proposed Height. 
8.  A first floor commercial use, which shall be a minimum of 11 feet with a maximum of 25 feet. A single floor level exceeding 14 feet, or 25 feet at ground level, shall be counted as two (2) stories. Mezzanines extending beyond 33% of the floor area shall be counted as an additional story. 
9.  Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets of a minimum height required to conceal mechanical equipment. 
10.  Street walls shall be between three and a half (3.5) and eight (8) feet in Height. The Street wall may be replaced by a hedge or fence. Street walls shall have openings no larger than necessary to allow automobile and pedestrian access. 
b.  Specific to SD1 
1.  The private frontage of buildings shall conform to Table 5. 
2.  All facades shall be glazed with clear glass no less than 15% of the first story. 
c.  Specific to SD2 
1.  Vehicular entries, loading space and service areas shall be permitted on principal frontages. 
3.  Building Use 
a.  Buildings in Special Districts shall conform to the uses and intensities described in Table 6 and Table 7. 
4.  Parking Standards 
a.  Vehicular parking shall be required as shown in Chapter VII, Article VII. 
b.  All parking, including open parking areas, covered parking, garages, loading docks and service areas shall be masked from the frontage by a street wall. Underground parking may extend into the second layer only if it is fully underground and does not require raising the first-floor elevation of the second layer above that of the sidewalk. 
c.  Buildings mixing uses shall provide parking required for each use. 
5.  Landscape Standards 
a.  Buffers and screening elements shall be used to screen parking areas from public view, to screen service yards and other places that are unsightly, and to buffer between the special district and an adjacent Transect District. 
1.  A frontage landscape buffer, which may also include the sidewalk, shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in depth, measured from the frontage line and running its full width. 
a.  1. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted within the first layer for every 700 square feet of frontage landscape buffer. 
b.  2. Fifty (50) percent or more of the frontage landscape buffer must have shrubs and vegetative cover. 
2.  An interior landscape buffer located along common property lines shall be required between a SD and an adjacent Transect Districts. 
a.  1. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted within the side and rear setbacks for every 700 square feet of interior landscape buffer. 
b.  2. Fifty (50) percent of the interior landscape buffer shall be covered with vegetation. 
3.  Shrubs shall be five (5) gallon container and twenty-four (24) inches height minimum, and of a type that, at maturity, will provide a continuous opaque screen at least thirty-six (36) inches in height. 
4.  Trees shall be four (4) inches caliper minimum, or in the case of evergreen trees, twelve (12) feet minimum height 
TABLE 19. SD1 STANDARDS 
A. BUILDING PLACEMENT PRINCIPAL BUILDING i. Front Setback (Principal) 24 ft. max. ii. Front Setback (Secondary) 24 ft. max. iii. Side Setback 24 ft. max. iv. Rear Setback 12 ft. min. OUTBUILDING v. Front Setback (Principal) 40 ft. max. from rear property line vi. Side Setback 3 ft. min. vii. Rear Setback 3 ft. min. ENCROACHMENTS i. Setback Encroachments  Stoop, Lightwell or Terrace 100% max. ii. Sidewalk Encroachments Awning or Gallery 80% max. iii. Encroachment Depths  Stoop, Lightwell or Terrace 6 ft. max.  Gallery within 2 ft. of curb Awning within 2 ft. of curb B. BUILDING FORM HEIGHT PRINCIPAL BUILDING Stories 3 max., 5 by waiver To Eave/Parapet 58 ft. max., 90 ft. special exception OUTBUILDING BUILDING Stories 3 To Eave/Parapet 58 ft. max. MASS Lot width 60 ft. min., 300 ft. max. Lot Coverage 70% max. Facade Buildout at Setback 60% min.-100% max. PARKING AND STORAGE LOCATION PARKING 1st layer (see Table 13) not permitted 2nd layer (see Table 13) permitted 3rd layer (see Table 13) permitted TRASH & STORAGE* LOCATION 1st layer (see Table 13) not permitted 2nd layer (see Table 13) not permitted 3rd layer (see Table 13) permitted *Storage includes boats and recreational vehicles.  
ARTICLE 6. - PUBLIC REALM 

18.601. - Instructions. 
1.  This Chapter establishes design standards for public spaces and thoroughfares for land regulated by this Chapter. 
2.  The design standards set forth in this Chapter may be used as criteria for the planning approval process and are sanctioned through their respective City departments including Engineering, Planning, Public Works and Parks & Recreation. 
3.  Provisions of this Chapter, when in conflict, take precedence over those of other codes, ordinances, regulations and standards for Fire Department, Community Development, Public Works and Parks & Recreation, except the Local Health and Safety Codes and Local, State, and National Building Codes. 
4.  Additional licenses, agreements, and permits may be required as maintained and administered in the office of the respective City department. 
5.  Preliminary design drawings and final construction drawings for civic spaces, civic buildings, thoroughfares, and utilities require approval from the DPC. 
6.  Thoroughfare and utility plans submitted for approval must demonstrate compliance with: 
a.  Thoroughfare standards (Section 18.602) 
b.  Easement standards (Section 18.603) 
c.  Landscape standards (Section 18.605) 
7.  Civic space plans submitted for approval must demonstrate compliance with: 
a.  Civic space standards (Section 18.604) 
18.602. - Thoroughfare Standards. 
1.  The primary use of thoroughfares is to provide access to lots and open spaces. In accordance with the intent of this Chapter, thoroughfares must be designed to support several modes of transportation: public transportation, motor vehicles, and non-motor vehicles such as bicycles, and pedestrians. 
2.  All thoroughfares shall terminate at other thoroughfares in intersections, forming a network. Where topographical conditions exist that restrict the ability to form thoroughfare networks a pedestrian connection shall be made. Right-of-way shall be dedicated that will allow the continuation of thoroughfare networks to adjacent properties. 
3.  All thoroughfares must be configured as thoroughfare assemblies, as generally illustrated in Table 26. Thoroughfare assemblies must be designed in accordance with 18.602.4. 
4.  Thoroughfare Assemblies. Thoroughfare assemblies shall consist of a transportation way and public frontage assemblies, as generally illustrated in Table 20. 
a.  Thoroughfare assemblies must be configured by Transect District and thoroughfare assembly type according to Table 21 and must be mapped on a thoroughfare network plan. Table 26 includes pre-approved thoroughfare assemblies for use under this Chapter. 
b.  Thoroughfare assemblies must include public frontages configured according to 18.602.5. 
c.  The transportation way may include vehicular lanes, parking lanes, medians, access lanes, and transportation provisions. 
1.  Elements of the transportation way must be configured and sized according to Table 22. 
2.  Medians may include civic special districts and should be designed to generally meet the level of public planting of adjacent public frontages. 
3.  Parking lanes must be 8 feet or less in width for parallel parking or 18 feet or less for angled parking. Tick marks, where required, identifying parking lanes must be within the parking lane width. 
d.  Existing thoroughfares may be painted temporarily to comply with new configurations required by the thoroughfare network plan, including the addition of any transportation provisions. 
e.  Alley easements include one vehicular lane, within a total width no more than 30 ft. The entire right-of-way should be paved. Alley assemblies do not include transportation ways or public frontages. Alleys may be located in T5, T4O, and T4 districts. 
f.  Rear lane easements include one vehicular lane, within a total width no more than 24 ft. Only the vehicular lane and driveways should be paved. Rear lanes do not include transportation ways or public frontages. Rear lanes may be located in T4 and T3 districts. 
5.  Public Frontages. Public frontage assemblies consisting of planters, walkways, curbs, verges, public planting and public lighting, as generally illustrated in Table 20. Elements of the public frontage assembly that pass from one Transect district to another must be blended to the character of the Transect district of adjacent lots. 
a.  Public frontage assemblies shall be assigned according to Table 22. 
b.  Public frontage assemblies shall be configured according to Table 23. Assemblies including a walkway or planter shall specify a minimum width. 
c.  Public frontage assemblies shall assign a verge, providing allowable locations for public infrastructure and public furniture outside of pedestrian and vehicular access ways. 
d.  Any paving within the public frontage shall continue across any intervening driveway or access lane. 
e.  Public frontage assemblies shall include public planting and public lighting, configured according to Table 23. Spacing may be adjusted to accommodate specific site conditions. 
1.  Public lighting must be located within the verge. 
2.  Public planting must be designed in accordance with Section 18.605. 
3.  Street trees shall be planted a maximum of fifty (50) feet on center. 
4.  Public frontages in T4O and T5 within thoroughfare assemblies 44 feet wide and commercial streets 60 feet wide or less may exclude public planting. 
5.  At retail frontages, the spacing of trees may be irregular to avoid visually obscuring storefronts. 
6.  At gallery frontages and arcade frontages, public planting is not required and public lighting may be provided within the gallery or arcade. 
18.603. - Easement Standards. 
1.  Utility easements must be located as generally illustrated in Table 24. 
2.  Wet utilities may only be located on private lots or civic spaces when topographical conditions require placement in these locations. 
3.  Wet utility laterals shall be coordinated with the landscaping and street light placement. 
4.  For properties with existing overhead utilities 
a.  Dry utility services shall be placed underground from the pole to any new structure. 
b.  Where possible transformers and utility pedestals will be set behind the principal building frontage. 
c.  The reservation of an easement for the future underground placement of these utilities shall be required. 
d.  Utility poles must be relocated where they prohibit the construction of an unobstructed 5' pedestrian sidewalk. 
e.  Additional building setbacks within the private frontage for the overhead utilities may be required. 
5.  For properties without rear alleys. 
a.  All dry utilities shall be placed underground. 
b.  Dry utilities shall be placed under the sidewalk, or within the public frontage and adjacent to the property line where no sidewalk is required. 
c.  Where possible transformers and utility pedestals will be set behind the principal building frontage. 
6.  For properties with rear alleys or lanes. 
a.  Dry utilities will be located within the transportation way. 
b.  Transformers and utility pedestals shall be located on private property within utility easements. 
7.  Transformers and utility pedestals shall not be located at terminated vistas. 
8.  Alley and rear lane easement configurations are specified in Section 18.602. Pre-approved alley and rear lane assemblies are included in Table 26. 
9.  Pedestrian access easements in the form of pedestrian trails, paths, and passages must be configured as follows: 
a.  A minimum 5 foot walkway must be provided. 
b.  Public planting and public lighting must be configured according to public frontage standards in Section 18.605. 
c.  Pre-approved pedestrian access easements are included in Table 26. 
18.604. - Civic Areas. 
1.  Civic space must be generally designed as described in Table 27. 
2.  Planting and landscaping in civic spaces, are regulated by Section 18.605. 
3.  Stormwater management areas may be used as civic space, if designed as an amenity and accessible to the public. 
18.605. - Landscape Standards. 
1.  All planting in the public frontage and civic spaces must consist of species specified in City of Woodstock Approved Plant List. 
2.  Trees in public frontages must be a minimum height of ten (10) feet and three and one-half (3.5) inches in caliper, measured twelve (12) inches from the ground when planted, and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of seven (7) feet. 
a.  Five (5) foot high trees with one (1) inch caliper shall be permitted if a two-year warranty is provided. 
3.  Civic spaces of types a, b, or c in Table 27 shall be planted with a minimum of 18 trees per acre. Street trees abutting the civic spaces shall be counted towards the minimum plantings. Community gardens and multipurpose fields will be excluded from the total area when calculating required trees. 
4.  Parking lots shall be landscaped as follows: 
a.  Trees must be spaced such that no parking space is more than fifty (50) feet from one (1) of the parking bay trees. (Show a fifty-foot radius circle for each Parking Lot Tree on Landscape Plan to verify graphically. 
b.  Paving should consist of pervious materials where subsurface conditions will support infiltration. 
c.  Where possible the parking surfaces will drain into landscape areas that have been design to accept and detain water. 
d.  Parking lots consisting of less than 25 spaces are exempt from landscaping requirements. 
TABLE 20. THOROUGHFARES AND FRONTAGES 
A. TYPICAL SECTION IN T3 B. TYPICAL SECTION IN T5 WITH GALLERY FRONTAGE ENCROACHMENTS C. TYPICAL PUBLIC FRONTAGES (SEE TABLE 23)  
TABLE 21. THOROUGHFARE ASSEMBLY TYPES 
Thoroughfare TYPE T3 T4 T5 DESCRIPTION COMPACT URBAN FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION HIGHWAY (HW) A long-distance, high-speed, free-movement thoroughfare traversing open countryside. A highway should be relatively free of intersections, driveways, and adjacent buildings. Principal Arterial PARKWAY (PW) ¦ ¦ A highway designed in conjunction with naturalistic landscaping, including a variable-width median. A parkway should include a wide right-of-way landscaped on both sides of vehicular lanes. Principal Arterial ROAD (RD) ¦ A local, slow-movement thoroughfare suitable for low density environments. Roads tend to be rural in character without curbs or striping. Local STREET (ST) ¦ ¦ ¦ A local, slow-movement thoroughfare suitable for general urban areas. Streets are urban in character, and flexible in the types of public frontages they support. Collector, Local DRIVE (DR) ¦ ¦ ¦ A thoroughfare along the boundary between an urbanized and a natural condition, usually along a waterfront, a park, or a promontory. One side of a drive has the urban character of a street or boulevard, while the other has the qualities of a road or parkway. Collector, Local AVENUE (AV) ¦ ¦ ¦ A limited distance, free-movement thoroughfare connecting civic locations within an urbanized area. Unlike a boulevard, its length is finite and its axis is terminated. An avenue may be conceived as an elongated square. Collector, Local COMMERCIAL STREET (CS) ¦ A local, slow-movement thoroughfare suitable for high-intensity urban areas. Commercial streets are urban in character, supporting parallel or angled parking on both sides and narrow lanes appropriate for a commercial environment. Collector, Local BOULEVARD (BV) ¦ ¦ A long-distance, free-movement thoroughfare traversing an urbanized area. A boulevard often includes a wide median and a wide public frontage and therefor a wide right-of-way. Access lanes are often provided to separate public frontages from the higher speed lanes. Minor Arterial, Collector REAR LANE ¦ ¦ A vehicular access way located to the rear of a lot providing access to parking and outbuildings as well as easements for utilities. Rear lanes are paved as lightly as possible to driveway standards or with gravel. REAR ALLEY ¦ ¦ A narrow service access to the rear of more urban buildings providing service and parking areas and utility easements. Alleys, as they are used by trucks and must accommodate dumpsters, should be paved from building face to building face, with drainage by inverted crown at the center.  
TABLE 22. TRANSPORTATION WAY 
PUBLIC FRONTAGE (SEE TABLE 23) Target Speed (MPH) TRAVEL LANE WIDTH T3 T4 T5 L O   A, B, C 20 or less 8 ft. ¦ ? ? A, B, C, D 20-25 9 ft. ¦ ¦ ? A, B, C, D, E, F 25-30 10 ft. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ A, B, C, D, E, F 30-35 11-12 ft. ¦ ? ? ? A above 35 12 ft. PUBLIC FRONTAGE Target Speed (MPH) PARKING LANE WIDTH PARALLEL ANGLED C, D 20-25 7 ft. ¦ ¦ D, E, F 20-30 18 ft. ¦ ¦ C, D, E, F 25-35 8 ft. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ PUBLIC FRONTAGE Target Speed (MPH) EFFECTIVE CURB RADIUS * A, B, C 20 or less 5-10 ft. ¦ ¦ A, B, C, D 20-25 10-15 ft. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ A, B, C, D, E, F 25-30 15-20 ft. ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ A, B, C, D, E, F 30-35 20-30 ft.  
*Dimensions with parking on each leg of intersection. Both tangent sections adjacent to the curb return must be parked, or else curb radii must be evaluated using "design vehicle" and Auto Turn or turning templates. 
TABLE 23. PUBLIC FRONTAGE TYPES 
Public Frontage Type A B C D E F i. Assembly: The principal variables are the type and dimension of curbs, walkways, planters and landscape. Total Width 14-24 feet 12-24 feet 12-18 feet 12-18 feet 14-24 feet 14-24 feet ii. Curbing: The detailing of the edge of the vehicular way, incorporating drainage. Type 

Cuts Open Swale 
Radius @ 10-30 feet Open Swale 
Ramp at 1:12 slope Raised Curb 
Ramp at 1:12 slope Raised Curb 
Ramp at 1:12 slope Raised Curb 
Ramp at 1:12 slope Raised Curb 
Ramp at 1:12 slope iii. Walkway: The portion of the thoroughfare dedicated exclusively to pedestrian activity Type 

Width Path Optional 
n/a Path 
4-6 feet Sidewalk 
4-6 feet Sidewalk 
4-8 feet Sidewalk 
8-18 feet Sidewalk 
10-20 feet iv. Planter: The portion of the thoroughfare accommodating street trees and other landscape. Arrangement 

Type 

Species 

Spacing 

Planter Type 

 Planter Width 

Public Planting Type Clustered 
Dissimilar 
Alternating 
n/a 
Continuous Swale 
14-24 feet 
Columnar, Oval, Rounded, Conical, Spreading, Vase, Pole Cluster 
Dissimilar 
Alternating 
n/a 
Continuous Swale 
 8-20 feet 
Columnar, Oval, Rounded, Conical, Spreading, Vase, Pole Regular 
Dissimilar 
Alternating 
n/a 
Continuous Planter 
8-12 feet 
Rounded, Conical, Spreading, Vase, Pole Regular 
Similar 
Alternating 
Regular 
Continuous Planter 
 8-14 feet 
Columnar, Rounded, Vase, Pole Regular 
Similar 
Alternating 
Regular 
Continuous Planter 
 6-16 feet 
Columnar, Rounded, Pole Opportunistic 
Similar 
Single 
Regular/Irregular 
Tree Well 
 4-6 feet 
Columnar, Rounded, Pole v. Verge: Provides allowable locations for public infrastructure and public furniture outside of access ways Verge Width 

Verge Material 

  
Lighting Type (Table 7P) 3 feet* 
match planter 
  
Pipe, Cobra-head 3 feet* 
match planter 
  
Pipe, Cobra-head 4 feet* 
match planter 
  
Post, Pipe, Column 4 feet* 
match planter 
  
Pipe, Column 5 feet* 
match planter 
  
Pipe, Column, 
Bollard 5 feet* 
match sidewalk or pervious pavement 
Column, Double Column  
*Verge should begin within 2 feet of the curb or edge of pavement. 
TABLE 24. UTILITY EASEMENTS 
A. TYPICAL SECTION WITH ALLEY B. TYPICAL SECTION WITHOUT ALLEY C. TYPICAL ALLEY SECTION  
TABLE 25. EFFECTIVE TURNING RADIUS 

On-street parking creates wider turning radius, the "effective turning radius", than provided by the curb radius alone. 
TABLE 26. PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES 
Assembly Designation ST-46-24 ST-54-32 Thoroughfare Type Street Street Transect District T3, T4 T3, T4 Right-of-Way Width 46 ft. 54 ft. Pavement Width 24 ft. 32 ft. Transportation Way Vehicular Lane(s) Yield Lane: Two way @ 16 ft. Yield Lane: Two way @ 16 ft. Parking Lanes One lane parallel @ 8 ft. Two lanes parallel @ 8 ft. Striping Optional Optional Median Width n/a n/a Median Planting n/a n/a Median Surface n/a n/a Target Speed 20 mph 20 mph Bicycle Provision Share lane Shared lane Transit Provision n/a n/a Public Frontage D D Assembly Width 11 ft. 11 ft. 11 ft. 11 ft. Public Frontage Type D D D D Transect District T3 T4 T3 T4 Curbing Type Raised Raised Raised Raised Curb Cut Radius Radius Radius Radius Radius 15 ft. 15 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. Walkway Width 5 ft. 5-6 ft. 5 ft. 5-6 ft. Surface Concrete Concrete Concrete Concrete Planter Type Size Continuous 6 ft. Continuous 5-6 ft. Continuous 6 ft. Continuous 5-6 ft. Arrangement Regular Regular Regular Regular Species Alternating Alternating Alternating Alternating Spacing 40 ft. o.c. avg. 30 ft. o.c. 40 ft. o.c. avg. 30 ft. o.c. Surface Ground cover or grass Ground cover or grass Ground cover or grass Ground cover or grass Street Tree Size Medium Shade Medium Shade Medium Shade Medium Shade Verge Width 3 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft. 3 ft. Lighting Type Post Post Post Post Lighting Spacing At intersections At intersections At intersections At intersections NOTE: Structures on these thoroughfares must be within 150' of a 20' clear fire access road.  
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES CONT. 
Assembly Designation ST-58-36 CS-60-36 Thoroughfare Type Street Commercial Street Transect District T4, T4O, T5 T4O, T5 Right-of-Way Width 58 ft. 60 ft. Pavement Width 36 ft. 36 ft. Transportation Way     Vehicular Lane(s) Two Lanes: Two way, one lane each way @ 10 ft. Two Lanes: Two way, one lane each way @ 10 ft. Parking Lanes Two lanes parallel @ 8 ft. Two lanes parallel @ 8 ft. Striping Required Required Median Width n/a n/a Median Planting n/a n/a Median Surface n/a n/a Target Speed 25 mph 25 mph Bicycle Provision Sharrow Sharrow Transit Provision Bus route Bus route Public Frontage D, F F Assembly Width 11 ft. 11 ft. 12 ft. Public Frontage Type D F F Transect District T4, T4O T4O, T5 T4O, T5   Curbing Type Raised Curb Raised Curb Raised Curb Curb Cut Radius Radius Radius Radius 15 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. Walkway Width 5 ft. 5 ft. 12 ft. Surface Concrete Concrete Concrete Planter Type Size Continuous 6 ft. Tree well 6 ft. Tree well 6 ft. Arrangement Regular Regular Regular Species Alternating Alternating Alternating Spacing 40 ft. o.c. avg. 30 ft. o.c. avg. 30 ft. o.c. avg. Surface Ground cover or grass Pervious paving Pervious paving Street Tree Size Large Shade Large Shade Large Shade Verge Width 3 ft. 6 ft. 6 ft. Lighting Type Pipe, Column Column Column Lighting Spacing 50 ft. o.c. 50 ft. o.c. 50 ft. o.c.  
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES - CONT. 
Assembly Designation CS-82-60   Thoroughfare Type Commercial Street Transect District T4O, T5 Right-of-Way Width 82 ft. Pavement Width 60 ft. Transportation Way     Vehicular Lane(s) Two Lanes: Two way, one lane each way @ 12 ft. Parking Lanes Two reverse angle @ 18 ft. Striping Required Median Width n/a Median Planting n/a Median Surface n/a Target Speed 25 mph Bicycle Provision Sharrow Transit Provision n/a Public Frontage F   Assembly Width 21 ft. Public Frontage Type F Transect District T5 Curbing Type Raised Curb Curb Cut Radius Radius 15 ft. Walkway Width 11 ft. Surface Concrete Planter Type Size Tree well 4 ft. × 9 ft. Arrangement Regular Species Alternating Spacing 30 ft. o.c. avg. Surface Pervious paving Street Tree Size Medium Shade Verge Width 6 ft. Lighting Type Column Lighting Spacing 50 ft. o.c.  
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES - CONT. 
Assembly Designation ST-60-24* ST-60-28 Thoroughfare Type Street Street Transect District T3, T4 T3, T4 Right-of-Way Width 60 ft. 60 ft. Pavement Width 24 ft. 28 ft. Transportation Way     Vehicular Lane(s) Yield Lane: Two way @ 16 ft. Two Lanes; Two way, one lane each way @ 10 ft. Parking Lanes One lane parallel @ 8 ft. one lane parallel @ 8 ft. Striping Optional Optional Median Width n/a n/a Median Planting n/a n/a Median Surface n/a n/a Target Speed 20 mph 25 mph Bicycle Provision Shared lane Sharrow Transit Provision n/a n/a Public Frontage C, D C, D Assembly Width 20.5 ft. 15.5 ft. 20.5 ft. 15.5 ft. 18 ft. 14 ft. 18 ft. 14 ft. Public Frontage Type C D C D Transect District T3, T4 T3, T4 T3, T4 T4, T4   Curbing Type Raised Curb Raised Curb Raised Curb Raised Curb Curb Cut Radius Radius Radius Radius Radius 15 ft. 15 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. Walkway Width 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. Surface Concrete Concrete Concrete Concrete Planter Type Size Continuous 10.5 ft. Continuous 10.5 ft. Continuous 9 ft. Continuous 8 ft. Arrangement Regular Regular Regular Regular Species Alternating Alternating Alternating Alternating Spacing 30 ft. o.c. 30 ft. o.c. 30 ft. o.c. 30 ft. o.c. Surface Ground cover or grass Ground cover or grass Ground cover or grass Ground cover or grass Street Tree Size Medium Shade Medium Shade Medium Shade Medium Shade Verge Width 4 ft. 4 ft. 4 ft. 4 ft. Lighting Type Post Post Post Post Lighting Spacing At intersections At intersections At intersections At intersections     NOTE: Structures on this thoroughfare must be within 150' of a 20' clear fire access road.  
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES CONT. 
Assembly Designation ST-60-32* ST-60-36 Thoroughfare Type Street Street Transect District T3, T4 T3, T4 Right-of-Way Width 60 ft. 60 ft. Pavement Width 32 ft. 36 ft. Transportation Way     Vehicular Lane(s) Yield Lane: Two way @ 16 ft. Two Lanes: Two way, one lane each way @ 10 ft. Parking Lanes Two lanes parallel @ 8 ft. Two lanes parallel @ 8 ft. Striping Optional Optional Median Width n/a n/a Median Planting n/a n/a Median Surface n/a n/a Target Speed 20 mph 25 mph Bicycle Provision Shared lane Sharrow Transit Provision n/a n/a Public Frontage C, D C, D Assembly Width 16.5 ft. 11.5 ft. 16.5 ft. 11.5 ft. 14.5 ft. 9.5 ft. 14.5 ft. 9.5 ft. Public Frontage Type C D C D Transect District T3, T4 T3, T4 T3, T4 T3, T4 Curbing Type Raised Curb Raised Curb Raised Curb Raised Curb Curb Cut Radius Radius Radius Radius Radius 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. Walkway Width 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. Surface Concrete Concrete Concrete Concrete Planter Type Size Continuous 6.5 ft. Continuous 6.5 ft. Continuous 4.5 ft. Continuous 4.5 ft. Arrangement Regular Regular Regular Regular Species Alternating Alternating Alternating Alternating Spacing 30 ft. o.c. 30 ft. o.c. 30 ft. o.c. 30 ft. o.c. Surface Ground cover or grass Ground cover or grass Ground cover or grass Ground cover or grass Street Tree Size Large Shade Large Shade Large Shade Large Shade Verge Width 4 ft. 4 ft. 4 ft. 4 ft. Lighting Type Post Post Column Column Lighting Spacing At intersections At intersections 50 ft. o.c. 50 ft. o.c.     NOTE: Structures on this thoroughfare must be within 150' of a 20' clear fire access road.  
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES CONT. 
Assembly Designation DR-50-28 AV-100-40 Thoroughfare Type Drive Avenue Transect District T3, T4 T3, T4, T4O Right-of-Way Width 50 ft. 100 ft. Pavement Width 28 ft. 40 ft. Transportation Way Vehicular Lane(s) Two Lanes: Two way, one lane each way @ 10 ft. Two Lanes: Two way, one lane each way @ 10 ft. Parking Lanes One lane parallel @ 8 ft. Two lanes parallel @ 8 ft. Striping Optional Optional Median Width n/a 25 ft. Median Planting n/a 20 ft. o.c. avg. Median Surface n/a Grass, ground cover and mulch Target Speed 25 mph 25 mph Bicycle Provision Sharrow Sharrow Transit Provision n/a Bus route Public Frontage C, D C, D Assembly Width 15 ft. 7 ft. 16.5 ft. 11.5 ft. 17.5 ft. 17.5 ft. Public Frontage Type D D C D Transect District T3, T4 T3, T4 T3, T4, T4O T3, T4, T4O Curbing Type Raised Curb Open Swale Raised Curb Open Swale Raised Curb Raised Curb Curb Cut Radius Radius Radius Radius Radius 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. Walkway Width 5 ft. none 5 ft. none 5 ft. 5 ft. Surface Concrete n/a Concrete n/a Concrete Concrete Planter Type Size Continuous 10 ft. Continuous 10 ft. Continuous width varies Continuous width varies Arrangement Regular 
Clustered park side Regular Clustered park side Regular Regular Species Alternating Multiple park side Alternating 
Multiple park side Alternating Alternating Spacing 30 ft. o.c. n/a park side 30 ft. o.c. n/a park side 30 ft. o.c. 30 ft. o.c. Surface Ground cover or grass Ground cover or grass Ground cover or grass Ground cover or grass Street Tree Size Large Shade varied park side Large Shade varied park side Large Shade, ornamental under overhead utilities Large Shade, ornamental under overhead utilities Verge Width 4 ft. 4 ft. 4 ft. 4 ft. Lighting Type Post Post Post Post Lighting Spacing At intersections At intersections At intersections At intersections  
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES CONT. 
Assembly Designation CAV-100-58   Thoroughfare Type Commercial Avenue Transect District T4O, T5 Right-of-Way Width 100 ft. Pavement Width 58 ft. Transportation Way     Vehicular Lane(s) Two Lanes: Two way, one lane each way @ 11 ft. Parking Lanes Two reverse angle @ 18 ft. Striping Required Median Width 16 ft. Median Planting 20 ft. o.c. avg. Median Surface Grass, ground cover Target Speed 25 mph Bicycle Provision Sharrow Transit Provision Bus route Public Frontage E, F   Assembly Width 17.5 ft. Public Frontage Type F Transect District T4O, T5   Curbing Type Raised Curb Curb Cut Radius Radius 10 ft. Walkway Width 13 ft. Surface Concrete Planter Type Size Tree well 4 ft. × 6 ft. Arrangement Regular Species Alternating Spacing 30 ft. o.c. Surface Pervious paving Street Tree Size Large Shade Verge Width 4 ft. Lighting Type Column Lighting Spacing 50 ft. o.c.  
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES - VEHICULAR ACCESS 
Assembly Designation RL-20-10 RA-24-24 Thoroughfare Type T3, T4 T4, T4O, T5 Transect District Rear Lane Rear Alley Right-of-Way Width 20 feet 24 feet Pavement Width 10 feet 24 feet Transportation Way   n/a Vehicular Lane(s) Access way @ 10 feet Access way @ 24 feet Parking Lanes n/a n/a Striping n/a n/a Median Width n/a n/a Median Planting n/a n/a Median Surface n/a n/a Target Speed n/a n/a Bicycle Provision n/a n/a Transit Provision n/a n/a Public Frontage n/a n/a Assembly Width 20 ft. 20 ft. Transect District n/a n/a Curbing Type Open Swale Raised Curb Curb Cut Taper Taper Radius n/a n/a Walkway Width n/a n/a Surface n/a n/a Planter Type Size n/a n/a Arrangement n/a n/a Mix n/a n/a Spacing n/a n/a Surface n/a n/a Planting n/a n/a Verge Width n/a n/a Lighting Type n/a n/a Lighting Spacing n/a n/a  
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES - PEDESTRIAN ACCESS 
Assembly Designation PP-44-12 PP-11-11 Thoroughfare Type T4O, T5 T4O, T5 Transect District Pedestrian Passage Pedestrian Passage Right-of-Way Width 44 feet 11 feet Pavement Width 12 feet varies Transportation Way   n/a Vehicular Lane(s) One Lane, One way @ 12', emergency access only n/a Parking Lanes n/a n/a Striping n/a n/a Median Width n/a n/a Median Planting n/a n/a Median Surface n/a n/a Target Speed n/a n/a Bicycle Provision n/a n/a Transit Provision n/a n/a Public Frontage F n/a Assembly Width 16 ft. 11 ft. Transect District T4O, T5 T4O, T5 Curbing Type Raised curb n/a Curb Cut Taper n/a Radius n/a n/a Walkway Width 12 ft. n/a Surface Concrete, pavers, pervious pavers Concrete, pavers, pervious pavers Planter Type Size Tree well 4 ft. × 6 ft. n/a Arrangement Regular n/a Mix Alternating n/a Spacing 30 ft. o.c. n/a Surface Pervious paving n/a Planting Ornamental n/a Verge Width 4 ft. n/a Lighting Type Column n/a Lighting Spacing 25 ft. opportunistic n/a  
PRE-APPROVED ASSEMBLIES - PEDESTRIAN ACCESS CONT. 
Assembly Designation PP-34-10   Thoroughfare Type T3, T4, T4O, T5 Transect District Pedestrian Path Right-of-Way Width 34 ft. Pavement Width n/a Transportation Way     Vehicular Lane(s) n/a Parking Lanes n/a Striping n/a Median Width n/a Median Planting n/a Median Surface n/a Target Speed n/a Bicycle Provision n/a Transit Provision n/a Public Frontage     Assembly Width 34 ft. 34 ft. Transect District T3, T4 T4O, T5 Curbing Type n/a n/a Curb Cut n/a n/a Radius n/a n/a Walkway Width 5 ft. min. 6 ft.-10 ft. Surface Asphalt, pervious Asphalt, pervious Planter Type Size Continuous Variable Continuous Variable Arrangement Clustered Regular Mix Varies Alternating Spacing Irregular 50 ft. o.c. Surface Grass, ground cover Grass, ground cover Planting Various Medium Shade Verge Width n/a n/a Lighting Type n/a n/a Lighting Spacing n/a n/a  
TABLE 27. Civic Space 
a. Park: A park may be independent of surrounding building frontages. Its landscape shall consist of paths and trails, meadows, waterbodies, woodland and open shelters, all naturalistically disposed. Parks may be lineal, following the trajectories of natural corridors. The minimum size shall be 8 acres. Larger parks may be approved by exception as special districts in all districts. b. Green: A green may be spatially defined by landscaping rather than building frontages. Its landscape shall consist of lawn and trees, naturalistically disposed. The minimum size shall be &half acre and the maximum shall be 8 acres. c. Square: A square is spatially defined by building frontages. Its landscape shall consist of paths, lawns and trees, formally disposed. Squares shall be located at the intersection of important thoroughfares. The minimum size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 5 acres. d. Plaza: A plaza shall be spatially defined by building frontages. Its landscape shall consist primarily of pavement. Trees are optional. Plazas should be located at the intersection of important streets. The minimum size shall be 1/4 acre and the maximum shall be 2 acres. e. Playground: A playground shall be fenced and may include an open shelter. Playgrounds shall be interspersed within residential areas and may be placed within a block. Playgrounds may be included within parks and greens. There shall be no minimum or maximum size. f. Community Garden: A community garden may be fenced and may include a tool shed. Running water is required. Community gardens shall be interspersed within residential areas and may be placed within a block or included within parks and greens. There shall be no minimum or maximum size. g. Neighborhood Multipurpose Field: A neighborhood multipurpose field may be spatially defined by landscaping rather than building frontages. There shall be a 20 foot clear zone at the perimeter for viewing and shall be landscaped with canopy trees. If this area is adjacent to a thoroughfare, the street trees may provide the necessary shade. This field may serve a secondary purpose of stormwater management. The minimum size shall be 3 acres and the maximum shall be 5 acres. h. Ramble: A ramble is spatially defined by real lanes or alleys and the rear yard of the perimeter buildings. The minimum size is 1/4 acre and the maximum size is 5 acres.  
Chapter XIX - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 

19.100. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this ordinance is to provide a regulatory strategy for outdoor lighting that will permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for nighttime safety, utility, security, productivity, enjoyment and commerce; curtail and reverse the degradation of the nighttime visual environment and the night sky; preserve the dark night sky for astronomy; minimize glare, obtrusive light and artificial sky glow by limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected, excessive or unnecessary; conserve energy and resources to the greatest extent possible; and help to protect the natural environment from the damaging effects of night lighting from man-made sources. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.200. - Conformance with applicable Codes. 
    All outdoor illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, the Building Code and the Electrical Code as applicable and under appropriate permit and inspection. Where there is conflict between the provisions of this ordinance and other regulations, the most restrictive provision shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.300. - Applicability. 
    For all land uses, developments and buildings that require a permit, all outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the requirements of this ordinance. All building additions or modifications of twenty-five (25) percent or more in terms of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, or parking spaces, either with a single addition or with cumulative additions subsequent to the effective date of this provision, shall invoke the requirements of this ordinance for the entire property, including previously installed and any new outdoor lighting. Cumulative modification or replacement of outdoor lighting constituting sixty (60) percent or more of the permitted lumens for the parcel, no matter the actual amount of lighting already on a non-conforming site, shall constitute a major addition for purposes of this section. 
A.  Minor Additions. Additions or modifications of less than twenty-five (25) percent to existing uses, as defined in Section 19.300 above, and that require a permit, shall require the submission of a complete inventory and site plan detailing all existing and any proposed new outdoor lighting. Any new lighting on the site shall meet the requirements of this ordinance with regard to shielding and lamp type. 
B.  Exempt Lighting. The following luminaries and lighting systems are exempt from these requirements: 
1.  Lighting for pools used at night. 
2.  Underwater lighting used for the illumination of swimming pools and fountains; 
3.  Temporary holiday lighting; 
4.  Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration, or other federal, state or local agency; 
5.  Emergency lighting used by police, fire, or medical personnel, or at their direction; 
6.  All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly from the combustion of fossil fuels, such as kerosene and gasoline; 
7.  Security lighting controlled and activated by a motion sensor device for a duration of 10 minutes or less. 
8.  Lighting approved for City Sanctioned Events or under a City of Woodstock permit process including but not limited to; Tent Permit, Special Event Permit, Film Permit. 
C.  Prohibited Lighting. The following lighting systems are prohibited: 
1.  Aerial lasers; 
2.  Searchlight style lights; 
3.  Other very intense lighting, defined as having a light source exceeding 200,000 lumens or intensity in any direction of 2 million candelas or more; 
4.  Mercury vapor lamps; 
5.  Neon lighting, except as permitted in Chapter 6 Signage. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.400. - Outdoor Lighting Standards. 
    All nonexempt outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the following criteria: 
A.  Shall be FULL CUTOFF placed so as to allow no light above the horizontal as measured at the luminaire, except as herein noted in this ordinance (as in the case of period fixtures, cutoff fixtures may be used). 
B.  Shall be located, aimed or shielded so as to minimize glare and stray light trespassing across property boundaries and into the public right of way in accordance with the following standards: 
At Property Lines Including Rights-of-Way Maximum Foot-candles At property line abutting a residential or an agricultural use 0.1 At property line abutting an office or institutional use 0.1 At property line abutting a commercial or industrial use 0.1  
Off-Street Parking Lots Minimum Foot-candles Average Foot-candles Maximum Foot-candles Residential areas 0.1 2.0 4.0 Office-professional areas 1.0 3.0 6.0 Commercial areas 2.0 6.0 12.0 Light industrial areas 1.0 4.0 8.0  
C.  Flood or spot lamps must be positioned no higher than 45 degrees above straight down (half-way between the vertical and the horizontal) when the source is visible from any off-site residential property or public roadway. 
D.  All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding is effective as described herein for fully shielded fixtures. 
E.  Multi use development lighting must conform to the standards of its respective use. 
F.  Illumination levels are measured from any height and orientation of the measuring device at any location along the property line, except the lighting of parking lots shall be measured at grade with the meter sensor held horizontally on the surface. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.500. - Special Uses. 
    All lighting not directly associated with the special use areas designated below shall conform to the lighting standards described in this ordinance. 
A.  Service Station Canopies and Parking Structures. 
1.  All luminaries mounted on or recessed into the lower surface of service station canopies and parking structures shall be fully shielded and utilize flat lenses. 
2.  The total light output of luminaries mounted on the lower surface, or recessed into the lower surface of the canopy, and any lighting within signage or illuminated panels over the pumps, shall not exceed 50 foot-candles. 
3.  The total light output of illuminated areas of a service station other than as detailed in subsection 2. above shall not exceed fifteen (15) foot-candles. 
4.  Illuminance levels for the interior of parking structures, where interior lighting is visible from outside the structure, shall conform to the IESNA recommendation (RP-20). 
5.  Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of a canopy and the sides of a canopy shall not be illuminated. 
B.  Security Lighting. 
1.  Security lighting shall be directed toward the targeted area. 
2.  Sensor activated lighting must be located in such a manner as to prevent direct glare and lighting into properties of others or into a public right-of-way, and the light shall not be triggered by activity off the property. 
C.  Pedestrian Path Lighting. 
1.  Lighting post shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet from the finished grade. 
D.  Architectural Accent Lighting. 
1.  Fixtures used to accent architectural features, materials, colors, style of buildings, landscaping, or art shall be located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only on those features. Such fixtures shall be aimed or shielded to minimize light spill into the dark night sky in conformance with the luminaire standards. 
2.  Lighting fixtures shall not generate glare, or direct light beyond the facade onto a neighboring property, streets or into the night sky. 
E.  Temporary Lighting Permits. 
1.  Permits for temporary lighting will be granted by the City of Woodstock GA Community Development Department if the total output from the luminaries does not exceed 50 foot-candles and the following conditions apply: 
a.  The purpose for which the lighting is proposed can be completed within thirty (30) days, except that the permit for a major construction project may extend to completion. 
b.  The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize LIGHT TRESSPASS and GLARE. 
c.  Permits issued for temporary recreational lighting shall be extinguished by 10:30 p.m. unless otherwise stipulated in the permit. 
2.  The application for the Temporary Lighting Permit shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
a.  Name and address of applicant and property owner; 
b.  Location of proposed luminaire(s); 
c.  Date and times for the lighting; 
d.  Type, wattage and lumen output of lamp(s); 
e.  Type and shielding of proposed luminairie(s); 
f.  Intended use of the lighting; 
g.  Duration of time for requested exemption; 
h.  The nature of the exemption; and 
i.  The means to minimize LIGHT TRESSPASS and GLARE. 
F.  Commercial Parking Areas. 
1.  All lighting fixtures servicing parking lots, except floodlights, shall be CUTOFF fixtures, directed downward and not toward buildings or other areas. 
2.  The minimum illumination level for a parking lot shall be 0.4 FOOT-CANDLES at grade level and the ratio of the average illumination to the minimum illumination shall not exceed 4:1. (see UNIFORMITY RATIO) 
3.  Floodlights should be aimed or shielded to minimize uplight. 
4.  Light poles used in parking lots shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
G.  Street lights. 
1.  Illumination levels shall comply with the City of Woodstock Chapter 15 Street Lighting Standards. 
2.  All luminaires except those within residential areas shall be the full cutoff type. 
3.  For period or historical type luminaires, only the cutoff and semi-cutoff types are allowed. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.600. - Variances. 
A.  Any person may submit an application for a variance from the provisions of this ordinance in accordance with the procedures set forth in Land Development Code Section 10.160. The application should include, but not be limited to, evidence about the following: 
1.  How the proposed design and appearance of the LUMINAIRE are superior; 
2.  How LIGHT TRESSPASS and GLARE will be limited; 
3.  How the proposed solution will provide a benefit without negative impact on the health, safety, or welfare of the community. 
B.  The application may include the recommended practices of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a professional engineer, or other authority on outdoor lighting. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.700. - Submission of Plans and Evidence of Compliance. 
    The applicant for any permit required by any provision of the laws of The City of Woodstock, Georgia in connection with proposed work involving outdoor lighting fixtures shall submit, as part of the application for permit, evidence that the proposed work will comply with this ordinance. Even should no other such permit be required, the installation or modification, except for routine servicing and same-type lamp replacement of any exterior lighting, shall require submission of the information described below. The submission shall contain but shall not necessarily be limited to the following, all or part of which may be part or in addition to the information required elsewhere in the laws of Woodstock, GA upon application for the required permit: 
A.  Plans indicating the location on the premises of each illuminating device, both proposed and any already existing on the site. 
B.  Description of all illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, both proposed and existing. The description may include, but is not limited to catalog cuts and illustrations by manufacturers. 
C.  Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers or similar, showing the angle of cut off of light emissions. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.701. - Additional Submission. 
    The above required plans, descriptions and data shall be sufficiently complete to enable the Community Development Department to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this ordinance will be secured. If such plans, descriptions and data cannot enable this ready determination, the applicant shall additionally submit as evidence of compliance to enable such determination such certified reports of tests as will do so provided that these tests shall have been performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.702. - Subdivision Plats. 
    All new subdivided properties shall submit information as described herein for installed street lights in accordance with Chapter 15 and other common or public area outdoor lighting. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
19.703. - Certification. 
    For all projects, certification that the lighting as installed, conforms to the approved plans shall be provided by an illumination engineer/professional before the Certificate of Occupancy is issued. Until this certification is submitted, approval for use by the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2015(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter XX - TEMPORARY SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

20.101. - Findings, Purpose and Intent. 
(a)  The City of Woodstock finds that Temporary Signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, Temporary Signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of Temporary Signs tends to proliferate, with property owners desiring ever increasing numbers and sizes of Temporary Signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. 
(b)  Regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of Temporary Signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of Temporary Signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the City, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the City's citizens. 
(c)  The purposes of this Chapter are to encourage the effective use of Temporary Signs as a means of communication within the City; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of Temporary Signs on nearby public and private property; to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this Chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.102. - Interpretation Generally. 
    Words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the meaning set forth in this Chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this Chapter, but defined in other City ordinances, shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinances. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Chapter, article and section headings or captions are for reference only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this Chapter. 
    This ordinance is intended to be content neutral, therefore, any Temporary Sign permitted under this Chapter to contain commercial expression may also include noncommercial expression. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.103. - Authority for Provisions. 
    This Chapter is enacted pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the Georgia Constitution of 1983, the Charter of the City of Woodstock, the general police powers of Woodstock and other authority provided by federal, state or local laws applicable hereto. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.104. - Applicability. 
    Temporary Signs shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created and maintained in accordance with the physical standards outlined in this Article and other applicable provisions of the Land Development Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE II. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS 

20.201. - Computation of Sign Area. 
    The area of a Temporary Sign shall consist of the entire single side surface of a Sign measured in square feet, length by width. Signs under this section may be double-sided, with only one side of the Sign being calculated in the area of the Sign. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.202. - Mixed Use Districts. 
    Those properties zoned as mixed use under the City zoning regulations shall follow residential district standards for residentially used portions of the development and commercial standards for commercial portions of the development. Where a mix of uses occurs within a single building, such as residential over office or storefront use, the commercial standards shall apply. 
20.203. - Temporary Signs Erected on Public Property. 
(a)  No person shall erect a Temporary Sign on public property other than the governmental entity responsible for such property or public utility companies or contractors occupying or working on public property pursuant to governmental contract or franchise. Such public utility companies and contractors occupying or working on public property shall be limited to temporary traffic control signage meeting state specifications for on-going work in street rights-of-way and necessary signage to identify fixtures for public safety response in the event of emergency. 
(b)  Any Temporary Sign erected or installed on public property in violation of this section shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation and removal by the City without notice. In addition to other remedies provided by this Chapter, the City shall have the right to recover from the owner or person posting such a Temporary Sign the full cost of removal and disposal of the Temporary Sign. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.204. - Prohibited Temporary Signs. 
(a)  Animated Sign. 
(b)  No Temporary Sign shall be erected or continued to be displayed at the intersection of any street or any public right-of-way in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal or device; or which makes use of the words, "STOP," "LOOK," "DANGER" or other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. 
(c)  No Temporary Sign shall be placed or painted on any tree or rock. 
(d)  No Temporary Sign shall be placed on any utility pole, light pole, telephone pole, street sign or similar utility fixtures except as permitted within this chapter. 
(e)  No person shall erect, operate or use any attraction device or Temporary Sign that contains a beacon of any type and/or contains a spotlight providing direct illumination to the public. 
(f)  Temporary Signs emitting or utilizing in any manner any sound capable of being detected on a public road or adjoining property by a person of normal hearing. 
(g)  Temporary Signs displaying any obscene message as obscenity is defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(h)  Temporary Signs which obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation, or prevent free passage from one (1) part of a roof to any other part thereto; Temporary Signs attached in any manner to any fire escape. 
(i)  Bandit Signs or any other Temporary Signs with the exception of those permitted under the City of Woodstock Land Development Ordinance. 
(j)  No person shall erect, operate or use any pennants, streamers, inflatable devices as a Temporary Sign, except as provided within this article. For the purpose of this Chapter, a balloon twelve (12) inches in diameter or less shall not be considered an inflatable device. 
(k)  No person shall erect attraction devices or continue the operation of any such Temporary Signs that revolve, rotate, move or simulate movement or action. 
(l)  Human Billboards. 
(m)  LED Sign. 
(n)  All Temporary Signs not in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.205. - Owner's Permission Required for Erection of Temporary Signs. 
    No Temporary Sign shall be placed on any property without first obtaining the written consent of the owner or owner's agent of the property. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.206. - Compliance with Technical Codes and Zoning. 
    All Temporary Signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, repaired, altered or relocated within the City shall conform to the zoning ordinance of the City. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and the zoning ordinance, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE III. - TEMPORARY SIGNS ALLOWED WITHOUT PERMIT 
    The following Temporary Signs are allowed without permit: 

20.301. - Inflatable Device. 
    Allowed without permit in accordance with the following provisions: 
(a)  Location. Inflatable Devices are only allowed on all properties zoned DT-CI, DT-CBD, DT-GC, DT-CMU, DT-OS, DT-RO, NC, GC, LI, HI, OSI, and NC-TCT. 
(b)  Time Period. Shall only be allowed beginning November 1 and ending January 1. 
(c)  Dimensions. Top of Inflatable Devices shall not be any higher than twenty (20) feet from the roofline and thirty-five (35) feet from ground level. 
(d)  Placement. Shall be restrained, attached, or held in place by a cord, rope, cable or similar method, anchored to the ground or to a building and not floating. 
(e)  Operation. All Inflatable Devices shall be stationary and shall not revolve, rotate, move or simulate movement or action. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.302. - Miscellaneous Sign. 
    One (1) sign per tax parcel not exceeding six (6) square feet and four (4) feet in height. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.303. - Public Interest Signs. 
    All signs placed by the federal, state, or local government including the City of Woodstock or affiliate thereof, on public property, inclusive of structures and rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.304. - Sandwich Sign or Portable Swinger Sign. 
    A Sandwich Sign or Portable Swinger Sign shall be permitted within the Downtown District. Sandwich Signs or Portable Swinger Signs may be no larger than thirty (30) inches by forty-eight (48) inches (30" × 48") on each side and must be placed on the property where the business is located in the sidewalk landscape zone or the sidewalk supplemental zone as long as it does not impede pedestrian traffic and is located a minimum of thirty (30) inches from the face of the curb and fifteen (15) feet from point of intersection of street curb lines. Each business shall be permitted one (1) Sandwich Sign which shall be removed at the end of each business day. Where a sidewalk landscape zone does not exist per the requirements established in the downtown district standards, a Sandwich Sign may be placed within three (3) feet of the facade of the building but must meet all other requirements contained in this subsection. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.305. - Temporary Signs on Single Family Residential Property. 
    The provisions of this Section apply to all properties zoned single-family residential, properties used for single-family residential occupancy, and townhomes, as well as properties in mixed use or overlay districts designed for single-family residential occupancy. Institutional uses located in single-family residential zones and multi-family residential uses are governed by Article IV. 
(a)  Aggregate Sign Allowance. Parcels zoned, designed and intended for single-family residential occupancy are limited to an aggregate sign area of eighteen (18) square feet. 
(b)  Size and Height Limitations. No Sign shall be erected on a single-family parcel to a height greater than five (5) feet. No single Sign shall be erected on such a parcel having a Sign area greater than six (6) square feet. 
(c)  Sign Supports. All Signs erected on single-family parcels shall be supported by independent means by use of a wooden stake or metal frame inserted directly into the ground. No Sign may be attached to utility poles, street signs or mailboxes, nor shall any such Sign be attached to trees, shrubs, plants, or rocks. 
(d)  Window Signs. Window Signs are allowed on single-family residential zone lots subject to the limitation of one (1) per premises, covering no more than fifty (50) percent of the window. Window Signs shall be included in the aggregate sign area for any property designed for single-family occupancy. 
(e)  Banners. One (1) banner up to twelve (12) square feet is permitted as long as it is mounted by bracket and pole to the principal structure. Banners shall not be erected concurrently with other Signs. Banner may be allowed when attached to a common entrance sign in accordance with these regulations. 
(f)  Inflatable Devices. Shall only be allowed beginning November 1 and ending January 1. Exempt from this requirement are devices commonly known as "bounce houses," "jump houses" and similar equipment intended for the entertainment of children. 
(g)  In addition to those Signs prohibited throughout the City, no person on a parcel zoned or used for single-family residential use shall erect any of the following: 
(1)  Illuminated Signs. 
(2)  Changeable Copy Signs. 
(3)  Billboards. 
(4)  Wall Signs. 
(5)  Banners greater than twelve (12) square feet or attached by any means other than those prescribed herein. 
(h)  No provision herein is intended to supersede recorded restrictive covenants. In the event of a conflict, the stricter requirement shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.306. - Temporary Window Signs. 
    On Parcels zoned for commercial, institutional, industrial, multi-family or mixed use, Window Signs shall be permitted as Temporary Signs without first securing a permit, provided such Window Signs leave at least fifty (50) percent of the window glass obscured. Any such Temporary Window Sign shall be maintained in good condition, free from tears, tatters or discoloration. Torn, soiled or out of date Temporary Signs in windows shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE IV. - TEMPORARY SIGNS REQUIRING PERMIT 
    Permit Required. Unless included under Article III, all Temporary Signs in the City of Woodstock shall be required to apply for and receive a permit prior to installation in accordance with the following provisions: 

20.401. - Fifteen (15) Day Permit. 
    A permit shall be required prior to the display of any Temporary Sign, as follows: 
(a)  Applicability. Temporary Signs are only allowed on all properties zoned DT-CI, DT-CBD, DT-GC, DT-CMU, DT-OS, DT-RO, NC, GC, LI, HI, OSI, and NC-TCT. 
(b)  Eligibility. Each property tax parcel and suite within a shopping center or multi-tenant building shall be eligible to apply for and receive one permit at a time. 
(c)  Permit Term. The permit is valid for a term of no more than fifteen (15) consecutive days and no more than four (4) times in a 12-month period. The permit shall specify the first and last day of the permit term, beginning at 12:01 a.m. on the first day and expiring at 11:59 p.m. on the last day specified on the permit. Permit terms may run consecutively. 
(d)  Temporary Signs. With the issuance of the permit, any of one (1) of the following may be selected: 
(1)  Banners - one (1) banner or two (2) banners not to exceed an aggregate of twenty-four (24) square feet in size. 
(2)  Temporary Sign - one (1) non-illuminated sign no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet, not exceeding a height of eight (8) feet. 
(e)  Special Events. Special events permitted under Chapter 11 of The Code of Woodstock, Georgia, are eligible for the Fifteen (15) Day Permit, issued concurrently with the special event permit. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.402. - Thirty-Two (32) Square Feet Sign Permit. 
    A permit shall only be issued subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Applicability. The provisions of this section apply to all zoning districts. 
(b)  Dimensions. All Signs permitted under this section shall be non-illuminated signs no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet and not to exceed a height of eight (8) feet. 
(c)  LDP and Building Permits. With the issuance of a Land Disturbance Permit (LDP) or building permit by the City of Woodstock, the site or collection of tax parcels subject to the LDP or building permit shall be eligible for one (1) sign per three (3) acres up to a maximum of four (4) Signs. With the expiration of the LDP or building permit, or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy this Sign permit shall also expire. 
(d)  Occupancy. Property tax parcel or multiple property tax parcels adjacent to each other under common ownership exceeding two (2) acres, or with at least three thousand (3,000) square feet commercial space, are eligible for one (1) Sign subject to the following conditions: 
i.  Tax parcel(s) are current with property tax payments to the City of Woodstock. Delinquent property tax shall immediately invalidate the permit; 
ii.  Structures or suites on the property are not occupied, or the property is vacant; 
iii.  Structures, suites, or tax parcels anticipated to be vacant or unoccupied within the subsequent ninety (90) days may apply for and receive the permit with the completion of a sworn affidavit attesting to the imminent vacancy. Should the premises remain occupied after ninety (90) days, the permit will expire immediately; 
iv.  With the issuance of certificate of occupancy or occupation tax license and/or with the occupancy of all vacant structures or suites on the tax parcel(s), the permit will expire immediately; 
v.  Shall require annual renewal concurrent with the due date set on the property tax bill issued by the City of Woodstock. Failure to renew the permit shall immediately invalidate the permit. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.403. - Concurrent Permits. 
    Permits shall not be combined or issued concurrently. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.404. - Other Temporary Signs. 
    No other Temporary Signs not requiring permit shall be displayed simultaneously with the issuance of a permit under this article. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.405. - Expiration. 
    Upon expiration or invalidation of the permit, the permittee shall remove the sign in its entirety, including any temporary supporting structure. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.406. - Fees. 
    The cost of permits within this section are set per the fee schedule adopted by the Mayor and Council. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
    These provisions govern all zoning districts in the City of Woodstock, as follows: 

20.501. - Permits; Procedures. 
(a)  Unless specifically exempted from obtaining a permit under provisions of this Chapter, no person shall erect, construct, replace, relocate or structurally alter any Temporary Sign within the City without first obtaining a Sign Permit from the Department of Community Development. 
(b)  Applications for Permits shall be made upon forms provided by the City and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  Tax Parcel ID and address of building, structure, or parcel to which or upon which the Sign is to be attached or erected. In the absence of a street address, a method of location that is acceptable to the Community Development Director shall be used. 
(3)  One (1) accurate drawings showing the position of the Temporary Sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, including other Signs, driveways, parking areas, and any other limiting site features (survey not required). 
(4)  Name, address, telephone number and business license number (if applicable) of the person erecting the Temporary Sign. 
(5)  Written consent of the owner or lessor of the building or land to which or upon which the Temporary Sign is to be erected. 
(6)  Such other information as the city shall require to show full compliance with this and other ordinances of the city. 
(c)  No review of the specific content of any proposed Temporary Sign shall be made or required. 
(d)  Each application for permit shall be accompanied by the applicable permit fees. Fees for permits shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Council. 
(e)  The City shall deny permits to applicants who submit applications for Signs that do not comply with the provisions of this Chapter, are incomplete, or contain any material false statements. Violation of any provision of this Chapter will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the City for the erection of a Sign. Should it be determined that a Sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this Chapter, the Community Development Director shall revoke the permit. Should the Community Development Director deny a permit, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before thirty (30) business days after the City received the completed application. Alternatively, the City may personally serve the Sign applicant with a copy of the written notice of denial within thirty (30) business days after the City's receipt of the application. The failure of the City to act on any completed Sign application within thirty (30) days after the City's receipt of the application shall be deemed a denial of said application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. 
(f)  No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for Due Cause as hereinafter defined, and after the applicant is given ten (10) days written notice containing a statement of the reasons for the denial of the permit application or the revocation of a permit. "Due Cause" is the violation of any provision of this Chapter, or other applicable ordinances, state or federal law regulating Signs, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(g)  An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision in accordance with Section 20.505. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.502. - Inspections. 
    The Community Development Director or his designee shall periodically inspect each permanent and temporary conforming and Non-Conforming Sign in an attempt to ascertain whether the same is secure or insecure, and whether it is in compliance with the requirements of this Chapter or in need of repair. Responsibility for the safety of Signs and security of their attachment or erection remains at all times with the Sign Owner. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.503. - Maintenance and Signs Requiring Removal. 
(a)  All Signs erected or posted in the City shall be maintained in good structural condition, and in conformance with this Chapter, at all times. Signs that are damaged, ripped, tattered or faded must be promptly removed and/or replaced and damaged hardware shall be promptly repaired and/or replaced with new hardware. 
(b)  All Signs and the premises surrounding them shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish, weeds and overgrown grass. 
(c)  Traffic hazards. Any Sign constituting a traffic hazard or a menace to the motoring public or pedestrians, as determined by the Community Development Director in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall be removed as provided in this Chapter. 
(d)  Abandoned Signs. Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, any Sign that is located on property that becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of three (3) months or longer shall be deemed to have been abandoned and may be removed as provided in this Chapter. 
(e)  Dangerous, Dilapidated or Defective Signs. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any Sign that is in a dangerous, dilapidated or defective condition. Any such Sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or owner of the Sign. Upon failure of the owner to remove or repair a dangerous or defective Sign, the Community Development Director shall remove as described in this Chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.504. - Removal Procedure. 
(a)  The Community Development Director shall cause to be removed any Sign that is determined to endanger the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or structurally defective Sign or a Sign for which no permit has been issued or which is otherwise in violation of this Chapter. 
(b)  Any Sign removed by the Community Development Director pursuant to the provisions of this Section shall become the property of the City and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the City. The cost of removal of the Sign by the City shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as City property taxes. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the City in connection with the Sign removal. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
20.505. - Appeals. 
    Any party aggrieved by a decision rendered under the authority of this Chapter may file an appeal in accordance with Section 10.162 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2016(1)) 
Chapter XXI - BILLBOARD SIGNS STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

21.1.1. - Findings, Purpose and Intent. 
1.  The City finds that billboard signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, billboard signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of billboard signs tends to proliferate, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares and highways. In addition, the competition among competing Sign owners for visibility of their billboard signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the billboard sign owners' original purpose of presenting a clear message of its idea or identification of its premises. 
2.  Regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of billboard signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of billboard signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the City, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the City's citizens. 
3.  The City further finds that there is a substantial difference between signage erected by public authority and billboard signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type signage as street signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, with the exception of signage identifying government buildings, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. 
4.  The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the effective use of billboard signs as a means of communication within the City; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of billboard signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this article. 
5.  In considering the appropriate level of billboard sign regulation for the City, the Mayor and Council have considered planning studies, reports, news articles and related information from a variety of sources. The Mayor and Council have determined that billboard signs with electronic and LED display technology pose unique and substantial hazards to traffic caused by a higher level of distractibility than non-LED billboard signs. In addition, billboard signs with electronic and LED display technology are inconsistent with the aesthetic standards established for major thoroughfares running through the City. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.2. - Interpretation Generally. 
    Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning set forth in this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter, but defined in other City ordinances, shall be given the meanings set forth in such ordinances. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Chapter, article and section headings or captions are for reference only and shall not be used in the interpretation of this chapter. Any sign permitted under this chapter to contain commercial expression may also include noncommercial expression. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.3. - Authority for Provisions. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the Georgia Constitution of 1983, the Charter of the City of Woodstock, the general police powers of Woodstock and other authority provided by federal, state or local laws applicable hereto. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.4. - Applicability. 
    Billboard signs shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created and maintained in accordance with the physical standards outlined in this article and other applicable provisions of this Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.5. - Owner's Permission Required for Erection of Billboard Signs. 
    No billboard sign shall be placed on any private property without first obtaining the consent of the owner or owner's agent of the private property. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.6. - Compliance with Technical Codes and Zoning. 
1.  All billboard signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, altered, relocated or modified within the City shall conform with the requirements of the building and electric codes adopted by the City. Where the provisions of the building or electrical code and this chapter conflict or overlap, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. 
2.  All billboard signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, repaired, altered or relocated within the City shall conform to the zoning ordinance of the City. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the zoning ordinance, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.7. - Maintenance. 
1.  All billboard signs erected or posted in the City shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes and in conformance with this article, at all times. All billboard signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or other structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure. 
2.  All billboard signs and the premises surrounding them shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all obnoxious substances, rubbish, weeds and overgrown grass. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.1.8. - Billboard Sign Requirements. 
1.  No billboard sign face shall exceed fourteen (14) feet in height or forty-eight (48) feet in length. Billboards are limited to two (2) back-to-back faces. Two (2) or more sign faces installed so as to be read from different directions of travel shall only be placed back to back in a parallel manner. No triangular or other multi-sided configuration of billboard signs is allowed. 
2.  Billboard signs are restricted to commercial and industrially zoned parcels and are further limited to parcels sharing a common property line with the right-of-way of Interstate 575. 
3.  All billboard signs shall be oriented only toward 1-575 and shall be erected no further than one hundred (100) feet from the right-of-way line of 1-575. 
4.  Billboard signs shall be allowed to utilize Trivision Technology. Any existing billboard sign meeting the standards of this article that is eligible for conversion to Trivision Technology shall require a permit for such conversion by the City. 
5.  No billboard sign shall utilize LED or electronic display technology. 
6.  No billboard sign shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another existing billboard sign. 
7.  No billboard sign shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of single-family residentially-zoned parcels and/or parcels designated for single-family residential use. 
8.  No billboard sign shall be located with five hundred (500) feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreational area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however, that such billboard sign may be located within five hundred (500) feet of such a use where the billboard sign is separated by buildings or other permanent physical obstructions so as to not be visible from the public park, public playground, public recreational area, public forest, scenic area or cemetery. 
9.  Billboard signs are limited to a height of fifty (50) feet above grade, measured from the ground at the point of installation of the supporting structure, and provided that such grade shall not be altered in any manner as to increase the allowable height of the billboard sign. Where the supporting structure of the billboard sign is located below the grade of I-575, the fifty (50) foot height limitation shall be measured from the crown of the nearest adjacent travel lane of 1-575. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

21.2.1. - Permits; Procedures. 
1.  Unless specifically exempted from obtaining a permit under provisions of this chapter, no person shall erect, construct, replace, relocate or structurally alter any billboard sign within the City without first obtaining a billboard sign permit from the Department of Community Development. No permit shall be required to repaint or change the lettering of an existing conforming billboard sign, provided that no change of ownership of the entity displaying the message thereon has been made. 
2.  Applications for permits shall be made upon forms provided by the City and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
b.  Tax parcel ID and address of building, structure, or parcel to which or upon which the billboard sign is to be attached or erected. In the absence of a street address, a method of location that is acceptable to the Community Development Director shall be used. 
c.  Two (2) accurate drawings showing the position of the billboard sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, including other billboard signs, driveways, parking areas, and any other limiting site features (survey not required). 
d.  One (1) accurate drawing to scale of the plans, specifications and method of construction and attachment of the billboard sign to the building or ground. The drawing shall be an engineered structural drawing designed to the International Building Code and shall specifically include the size of the sign area, overall height of the billboard sign, location of the billboard sign installation and its relation to existing rights-of-way and all driveways, a site distance diagram. 
e.  Name, address, telephone number and business license number of the person erecting the billboard sign. 
f.  Written consent of the owner or lessor of the building or land to which or upon which the billboard sign is to be erected. 
g.  The location and size of all other billboard signs on the parcel upon which the billboard sign is to be erected. 
h.  The size of the parcel on which the billboard sign is to be erected. 
i.  If the billboard sign is to be lighted, an application for electrical permit meeting all standards of the City's electrical code. 
j.  The value of the billboard sign. 
k.  Such other information as the City shall require to show full compliance with this and other ordinances of the City. 
3.  No review of the specific content of any proposed billboard sign shall be made or required. 
4.  Each application for permit shall be accompanied by the applicable permit fees. Fees for permits shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Council. 
5.  Upon the filing of an application for a permit, the Community Development Director or his designee shall examine all plans and specifications submitted, including electrical wiring and connections, and the premises upon which the billboard sign is proposed to be erected. The plans shall be reviewed for zoning compliance by the Department of Community Development and review by other officers and employees of the City may be obtained on an as-needed basis. Such review shall be completed within thirty (30) business days of submission of a completed billboard sign application. If it appears from review of the permit application and inspection of the site that the proposed billboard sign is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other ordinances and laws of the City, the Community Development Director or his designee shall issue a permit upon payment of permit fees no later than thirty (30) business days from receipt of the completed application. 
6.  The City shall deny permits to applicants who submit applications for billboard signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, are incomplete, or contain any material false statements. Violation of any provision of this chapter will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the City for the erection of a billboard sign. Should it be determined that a billboard sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the Community Development Director or his designee shall revoke the permit. Should the Community Development Director or his designee deny a permit, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before thirty (30) business days after the City received the application. Alternatively, the City may personally serve the billboard sign applicant with a copy of the written notice of denial within thirty (30) business days after the City's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. 
7.  No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after the applicant is given ten (10) days' written notice containing a statement of the reasons for the denial of the permit application or the revocation of a permit. "Due cause" is the violation of any provision of this chapter, or other applicable ordinances, state or federal law regulating signs, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
8.  An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision to the Mayor and City Council, provided such appellant files a written notice of appeal with the City Manager within ten (10) business days of the Community Development Director's notice. Such appeal shall be considered by the Mayor and City Council for the City at the next meeting held after the City's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that such notice of appeal is received a minimum of seven (7) business days before the next meeting. Appeal notices received within seven (7) days of a scheduled City Council meeting shall be heard at the next available meeting more than seven (7) days following receipt of appeal. The Mayor and City Council shall issue a written decision to the applicant no later than thirty (30) days following the close of the appeal hearing. Decisions of the Mayor and City Council to affirm the decision of the Community Development Director or to overrule the decision of the Community Development Director and grant or continue the permit for which appeal is taken shall be reduced to writing and served upon the applicant in the same manner as the original notice to deny or notice of revocation. Such decision shall constitute a final determination by the City. 
9.  In the event an applicant whose permit has been denied or a permit holder whose permit has been revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the Mayor and Council, such applicant or permit holder may appeal same within the courts of the state of Georgia as provided by law. 
10.  Any person commencing work on a billboard sign before securing the necessary permit from the Community Development Department shall be subject to double permit fees under the permit fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.2.2. - Permit Expiration. 
    A billboard sign permit shall become null and void if the billboard sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed within six (6) months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made of permit fees for permits that expire due to failure to erect a permitted billboard sign; provided that where an applicant can demonstrate that a commercial entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted billboard sign but the fabrication has not yet been completed, one (1) six (6) month extension may be granted by the Community Development Director on the duration of the permit. Where a permit has expired for failure to erect the billboard sign, if an individual later desires to erect a billboard sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule in effect at the time of resubmission. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.2.3. - Display of Permit. 
    The owner of the billboard sign shall be responsible for maintaining the permit for every billboard sign constructed, erected or maintained for which a permit is required by this Ordinance. Such permit shall be kept on the premises served by the billboard sign and shall be exhibited promptly upon request of city officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.2.4. - Non-Conforming Signs. 
1.  Billboard signs that, on the effective date of this Ordinance, were approved and legally erected under previous billboard sign restrictions, and that became or have become non-conforming with respect to the requirements of this Ordinance, may continue in existence subject to the remaining provisions of this section. 
a.  No increase in size of the non-conforming sign shall be permitted. 
b.  Existing billboard signs which were legally erected and which have become non-conforming and do not meet the setback requirements of this Ordinance due to road widening may be moved to meet the setback requirement of this Ordinance but shall not be increased in size, shape or changed in any manner except as to become conforming. 
2.  Upon failure to comply with any requirement of this section, the building official or his authorized agent may cause the removal of such Billboard Sign at the expense of the owner. 
3.  A non-conforming sign shall not be replaced by another non-conforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or demountable material on non-conforming signs shall be permitted. 
4.  Minor repairs and maintenance of non-conforming signs such as electrical repairs or lettering repair shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the billboard sign shall be permitted except to make the billboard sign comply with the requirements of this Ordinance; provided that billboard signs damaged by fire or act of God may be restored by their original condition. 
5.  Each non-conforming sign shall be registered within ninety (90) days of the enactment of this Ordinance by the billboard sign owner, and if it is determined that such non-conforming sign was legally erected under the prior ordinance, then a billboard sign permit shall be issued to the billboard sign owner without charge and the billboard sign shall be marked with a permit decal. Should the owner of a non-conforming sign fail to register such billboard sign with ninety (90) days from the enactment of this Ordinance, such failure to register shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance, and such person shall be subject to citation in municipal court. 
6.  Existing billboard signs on the property of newly annexed territory that were legally erected under the county ordinance which would become a non-conforming sign under this Ordinance upon annexation by the City shall be allowed to remain, provided such billboard sign shall be registered with the City within ninety (90) days of annexation. 
7.  The Community Development Director or his designee shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this section. Notices of violation shall be provided to the billboard sign owner in accordance with the requirements herein. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.2.5. - Inspections. 
    The Community Development Director or his designee shall periodically inspect each permanent and temporary conforming and non-conforming billboard sign in an attempt to ascertain whether the same is secure or insecure, and whether it is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or in need of repair. Responsibility for the safety of billboard signs and security of their attachment or erection remains at all times with the billboard sign owner. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.2.6. - Signs Requiring Removal. 
1.  Traffic Hazards. Any billboard sign constituting a traffic hazard or a menace to the motoring public or pedestrians, as determined by the Community Development Director or his designee in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall be removed as provided herein. 
2.  Dangerous, Dilapidated or Defective Billboard Signs. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any billboard sign that is in a dangerous, dilapidated or defective condition. Any such billboard sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or owner of the billboard sign. Upon failure of the owner to remove or repair a dangerous or defective billboard sign, the Community Development Director or his designee shall proceed as described herein. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
21.2.7. - Removal Procedure. 
1.  The Community Development Director shall cause to be removed any billboard sign that he determines endangers the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or electrically or structurally defective billboard sign or a billboard sign for which no permit has been issued or which is otherwise in violation of this chapter. The Community Development Director shall prepare a written notice that shall describe the billboard sign and specify the violation involved. The notice shall state that if the billboard sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within twenty (20) business days, the billboard sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
2.  All notices by the Community Development Director shall be personally served or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date received if hand delivered or otherwise on the date delivered as shown upon the return receipt of the U.S. Postal Service. 
3.  The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the billboard sign is located, the owner of the billboard sign, and the occupant of the property. If any such person is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such person's last known address, if any, and posted on the billboard sign or on the premises. 
4.  Any person having an interest in the billboard sign or the property may appeal the determination of the Community Development Director ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Manager within ten (10) business days after receipt of the notice. Appeals will be handled as provided in this Ordinance. 
5.  If the person to whom notice is directed fails to take corrective action within the time period prescribed, or if on appeal the City affirms the decision of the Community Development Director and the person fails to take corrective action or remove the offending billboard sign within the time period prescribed, then the Community Development Director shall proceed to have the billboard sign removed or corrected to bring such billboard sign into compliance with this chapter or to remove any unsafe condition. 
6.  When it is determined by the Community Development Director that the billboard sign would cause imminent danger to the public safety and contact cannot be made with the billboard sign owner or building owner, no written notice shall have to be served prior to removal. In such emergency situation, the Community Development Director shall document the unsafe condition and may correct the danger, with all costs being charged to the billboard sign owner or the property owner. 
7.  If it shall be necessary for the Community Development Director to remove the billboard sign pursuant to the provisions of this section, and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any material derived in the removal, the Community Development Director may sell or salvage any material derived in the removal. He may sell the same at public or private sale at the best price obtainable and keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be used to offset the cost of removal to be charged to the billboard sign owner or property owner. Any proceeds in excess of the cost of removal shall be returned to the sign owner, if known, or if unknown, shall be deposited in the City Treasury and maintained for benefit of the owner for a period of three (3) years. At the end of three (3) years, all unclaimed proceeds shall become the property the City. Where the proceeds derived from such sale are less than the costs of removal, such deficiency shall constitute a lien against the property on which the billboard sign is located. Such lien shall be collectable in the same manner as City property taxes. 
8.  Any billboard sign removed by the Community Development Director pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become the property of the City and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the City. The cost of removal of the billboard sign by the City shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as City property taxes. The cost of removable shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the City in connection with the billboard sign removal. 
(Ord. No. 3927, § 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2016) 
APPENDIX A - SOIL SERIES 
a.  Soil series. 
SOIL SERIES/SOIL TYPE SOIL ABSORPTION RATES MIN./INCH(APPROX. RATE FOR 30" DEPTH) FOOT NOTE SOIL GROUP Ailey 10 1 1 Alapaha 10 6(D) 5 Albany (Klej Sand) 5 6(D) 3 Albertville 120 6 Allen 30 2 Altavista 30 4 6 Americus 10 1 Angelina 120 4 6 Angie 120 4 6 Apison 45 3 6 Appling ( Thurmont, Halewood) 120 2(40) 3 Ardilla 30 6 (D) 3 Aragon (Christian) 120 2(40) 3 Ashe 15 3 6 Ashler (Edgemont) 15 3 6 Augusta 15 3 6 Barth 5 6(D) 3 Bayboro 120 4 6 Beason 75 6 6 Bibb 15 4 6 Binnsville 120 6 Bladen (Weston) 120 4 6 Blaney 10 1 1 Blanton 5 6(D) 3 Bodine 30 6 6 Bochicket 120 4 6 Boswell (Oktibbeha, Sumter) 120 6 Braddock 45 1 3 Bradson 45 1 3 Brevard 30 2 Brookman 120 4 6 Buncombe 5 5 6 Cahaba 30 2 Cainhoy (Galestown, Palmbeach) 5 1 Capers 120 4 6 Capshaw 120 7(40) 3 Cape Fear 120 4 6 Carnegie (Tifton, thin solum) 45-75 7,11 3 Cataska 75 3 6 Carterclay 20 4 3 Cecil 120 2(40) 3 Chandler 20 1 2 Chastain 120 4 6 Chestatee 60 1 4 Chatuge 45 4 6 Chewacla (Philo, Stendal) 30 4 6 Chipley 5 6(D) 3 Citico 30 2 Colbert 75 4 Colfax 45 6 6 Conasauga 120 6 Congaree 30 5 6 Cowarts 120 11,7(30) 4 Coxville 120 4 6 Craven 120 7(30) 2 Cunningham 60 4 Cuthbert 120 1,11 4 Davidson 75-120 11 4 Dasher 10 4 6 Dectur (Cumberland) 45 1 3 DeKalb 30 1 2 Dewey (Muse) 60 1 4 Dillard 45 8 3 Dothan 35 1 3 Dowelton (Purdy) 120 4 6 Duckson 5 5 6 Dunbar (Eulonia, Fairhope, Flint) 120 7(30) 2 Duplin 75-120 8,11 4 Dyke 75 9 4 Edneyville 30 1 2 Egam 120 4 6 Ellabelle 30 4 6 Emory 30 5 6 Enders 75 4 Ennis 20 5 6 Enon 75 4 Esto 120 6 Etoway (Nolichuncky) 30 1 2 Euharlee 30 2 Eustis 5 1 Eutaw 120 6 Evard 30 1 2 Faceville 30 1 2 Fannin 45 1 3 Farragut 75 1,11 4 Fletcher 75 3 6 Fullerton 30 1 2 Fripp 5 10 1 Fuguay (Tifton, Thick Surface-Norfolk, Thick Surface- Lakeland Shallow) 10 1 Georgetown 75 9 4 Gilead 75-120 11,2(40) 4 Goldsboro 30 6(5), 7(10) 2 Goldston 75 3 6 Grady 75 3 6 Greenville (Magnolia) 40 1 3 Grover 75 2(45) 3 Guthrie 45 4 6 Gwinnett (Lloyd) 120 2(40) . Hartsells (Lehew) 30 3 6 Hayesville 75 9(30) 4 Haywood 20 2 Hazelhurst 45 6 6 Hector 20 3 6 Helena 120 6 6 Henderson 120 6 Herndon 75 2(40) 4 Herod 30 6 6 Hiawassee 120 2(40) 3 Hoffman 120 6 Holston 40 1 3 Hulett 75 1 4 Iredell 120 4 6 Irvington 30 7(15) 2 Iuka 20 4 6 Izagora 30 6,(5),7(10) 2 Johns 30 6(D) 2 Johnston 15 4 6 Kalmia 30 1 2 Kanapaha 5 6(D) 3 Kershaw (Lakewood) 5 10 1 Kingsland 10 4 6 Kinston 30 4 6 Kureb 5 10 1 Lakeland(Huckabee) 5 10 1 Leadvale 120 8(30) 3 Leaf 120 4 6 Leefield (Klej shallow Lunchburg thick surface) 10 6(D) 3 Leon 10 6(S) 4 Lily 45 3 1 Linker 30 1 2 Litz 75 4 Lockhart 20 2 Locust 40 8 3 Louisa 30 2 Louisburg 10 1 1 Kiwbdes 15 1 2 Lucy 10 1 1 Lumbee 120 4 6 Lyerly 120 3 6 Lynchburg 20 6(D) 3 Lynn Haven 10 6(D) 4 Madison (Watauga) 30-120 11 3 or 6 Mandarin 10 6(S) 4 Marlboro 75 11 4 Masad 30 1 2 Mascotte 20 6(S) 4 Maxton 30 2 Meckenburg 120 9(30) 3 Meggett 120 4 6 Minvale 45 1 3 Molena 5 1 Motevalle (Klinesville) 75 3,11 6 Mountainburg 30 3 6 Muckalee 20 4 6 Mountview 40 1 3 Musella (Clifton 40 3 6 Myatt 30 4 6 Nankin 120 2(40) 4 Norfolk 30 1 2 Ocelockonce 20 5 6 Ocilla 10 (D)1 3 Ogeechee 75 4 6 Olustee (Ona) 5 6(D) 3 Orange 120 6 6 Orangeburg (Ruston) 30 1 2 Osier 5 4 6 Ousley 5 5 6 Pacolet (Habersham) 120 9(30),11 3 Paola 5 10 1 Pelham (Weston thick surface Rains thick surface) 10 6(D) 5 Plummer 5 6(D) 5 Pooler 120 4 6 Porters 30 1 2 Portsmouth 40 4 6 Pottsburg 5 6(D),8 3 Rabun 75 9(40) 4 Rains 30 6 6 Rambert 45 4 6 Ramsey 75 3 6 Red Bay 30 1 2 Riverview 30 5 6 Roanoke (Robertville) 120 4 6 Robertsdale 45 6 6 Roellen 120 4 6 Rome 45 2(30) 3 Rutlege 5 4 6 St. Johns 10 6(S) 4 Saluda 30 3 6 Sapelo 10 6(S) 4 Sawyer 75 1 4 Satilla 30 4 6 Seneca 15 6(S) 4 Sequatchie 30 2 Shack (Clarksville) 40 1 3 Shouns 40 1 3 Shubuta 75 11 4 Starr 45 5 6 State 30 5 6 Steekee 75 4 Stilson (Goldboro, thick surface) 11 7 2 Sublingna 30 5 6 Sunsweet 120 6 Surrency 5 4 6 Susquehanna 120 6 Sylco 75 3 6 Taft 75 6 6 Talbott 120 6 Talladega 75 3 6 Tallapoosa 45 3 6 Tate 45 3 Tellico 45 1 3 Tidings 45 1 3 Tifton 30 1 3 Tocca (Pope) 20 5 6 Townley (Rarden) 120 6 Toxaway 30 5 6 Transylvania 20 5 6 Troup 5 1 Tupelo 120 6 Tusquitee 30 1 2 Tyler 120 + Valdosta 5 1 Vance 120 9(45) 3 Varina 45 1 3 Vaucluse 120 8(30) 3 Wagram 10 1 1 Wahee 120 4 6 Waynesboro 75 1,11 4 Was (Captina, Monogahela Landisburg) 75 4,11 6 Wedowee 30 9 2 Wehadkeo (Atkins, Melvin) 30 4 6 Whitwell 45 4 6 Wickham 30 2 Wicksburg 10 1 1 Wilkes 75 3 6 Wolfever 75 6 6 Worsham 75 6 6  
b.  Footnotes. 
1.  Absorption field should be installed at depths of twenty-four (24) to thirty (30) inches from the original ground surface. Absorption rates are unfavorable below these depths. 
2.  Absorption fields should be installed at depths between forty-five (45) and sixty (60) inches from the original ground surface. At these depths the absorption is favorable and is expressed as part of the footnote. 
3.  Depth to bedrock is generally not sufficient to accommodate an absorption field. There are some small areas of these soils that have adequate depths, and test borings are needed to identify these. 
4.  Flooding and/or a seasonally high water table makes these soils unsuitable sites for absorption fields. 
5.  Flooding or standing water during brief periods of high rainfall makes many areas of these soils unsuitable even though the absorption rate is favorable. Areas protected from flooding, or otherwise not subject to flooding, may be suitable. 
6.  A seasonally high water table, due to position in landscape, makes most areas of these soils unsuitable. However, the physical make-up of many of these soils contain enough sandy material at sufficient depths (3 to 4 feet) that the seasonal water table can be lowered by this potential. The letter (S) indicates special study is needed to determine if these soils are drainable. Where drainage is not possible, mound systems may be feasible. 
7.  Install on-site sewage management systems 12" into the original soil and place sandy or loamy fill over the ground surface. Harrowing, subsoiling, ripping or other means are necessary to disturb the original soil surface to ensure compatibility between the natural soil and the fill material. The purpose of this is either to take advantage of the surface thickness of a favorable natural soil or to increase the thickness between the bottom of the trench and the water table or other restrictive layers. If the absorption rate changes, it is expressed as part of the footnote. 
8.  Install on-site sewage management systems 18" into the original soil and place sandy or loamy fill over the ground surface. The reason for this is to take advantage of the thickness of the natural soil or to increase the distance from the bottom of the trench and the water table or other restrictive layer. Where the absorption rate is changed at this depth, it is expressed as part of the footnote. 
9.  Install on-site sewage management systems at depths between 30 to 40 inches from the original surface. The purpose of this is to improve the absorption rate and this improved rate is expressed as part of the footnote. 
10.  Due to poor filtering action, nearby water supply may be contaminated. Grouting of wells or increasing the distance to 200 feet between wells and on-site sewage management systems is advised. Also, the distance between water impoundments or tributary streams and the on-site sewage management system should be increased to 100 feet. 
11.  Recommend percolation tests be performed. Percolation rates vary from 50 to 120 min./ inch, depending on the amount of mica in the soil. 
APPENDIX B - SOIL GROUPING FOR ESTABLISHING LOT SIZE IN SUBDIVISIONS 
GROUP 1 
Well-Drained to Excessively Drained Soils with Percolation Rates from 5 to 10 Minutes / Inch. 
•  Ailey* 
•  Americus* 
•  Blaney* 
•  Cainhoy (Galeston, Palmbeach) 
•  Eustis 
•  Fripp* 
•  Fuguay (Norfolk & Tifton thick surface (Lakeland Shallow) 
•  Haywood 
•  Kershaw (Lakewood)* 
•  Kureb* 
•  Lakeland (Huckabee) 
•  Louisburg* 
•  Lucy 
•  Molena 
•  Paola* 
•  Troup 
•  Valdosta 
•  Wagram 
•  Wicksburg* 
•  * Refer to Appendix A 
GROUP 2 
Well-Drained to Moderately Well-Drained Soils with Percolation Rates from 10 to 30 Minutes/ Inch. 
•  Allen 
•  Brevard 
•  Cahaba 
•  Chandler* 
•  Citico 
•  Clarendon* 
•  DeKalb* 
•  Edneyville* 
•  Eotwah nolichuncky)* 
•  Euharlee 
•  Evard* 
•  Faceville* 
•  Fullerton* 
•  Goldsboro* 
•  Haywood 
•  Irvington* 
•  Izagora* 
•  Johns* 
•  Kalmia* 
•  Linker* 
•  Lockhart* 
•  Louisa* 
•  Lowndes* 
•  Masada* 
•  Maxton 
•  Norfolk* 
•  Orangeburg* 
•  Porters* 
•  Red Bay* 
•  Sequatchie 
•  Stilson* 
•  Tifton* 
•  Tusquitee* 
•  Wedowee* 
•  Wickham 
•  * Refer to Appendix A under Soil Type and to Footnotes. 
GROUP 3 
Well-Drained to Moderately Well-Drained Soils with Percolation Rates from 30 to 60 Minutes/ Inch. Also includes somewhat Poorly-Drained Soils with Percolation Rates from 5 to 30 Minutes/Inch. 
Well-Drained: 
•  Braddock 
•  Bradson 
•  Capshaw* 
•  Carnegie 
•  Decatur 
•  Dillard* 
•  Dothan 
•  Fannin 
•  Greenville (Magnolia) 
•  Grove 
•  Holston 
•  Locust* 
•  Mainvale 
•  Mountview 
•  Rome 
•  Seneca* 
•  Shack (Clarksville) 
•  Shouns 
•  Tate 
•  Tellico 
•  Tidings 
•  Varina 
•  * Refer to Appendix A under Soil Type and to Footnotes. 
Poorly-Drained: 
•  Albany* 
•  Ardilla* 
•  Bartha* 
•  Centenary* 
•  Chipley* 
•  Lee Field (Klej shallow, Lynchburg thick surface)* 
•  Lynchburg Ocilla* 
•  Olustee (ona)* 
•  Pottsburg* 
•  Rigdon* 
•  Kanapaha* 
GROUP 4 
Well-Drained Soils to Moderately Well-Drained Soils with Percolation Rates from 60 to 90 Minutes/ Inch. Also Poorly-Drained Soils with a Hardpan. 
•  Chestatee* 
•  Colbert 
•  Dowarts* 
•  Cunningham 
•  Cuthbert 
•  Davidson 
•  Dewey (Muse)* 
•  Duplin* 
•  Dyke* 
•  Enders 
•  Enon 
•  Faragut* 
•  Georgeville* 
•  Gilead 
•  Hayesville* 
•  Herndon* 
•  Hulett* 
•  Leon I* 
•  Litz 
•  Lynn Haven I* 
•  Mandarin I* 
•  Marlboro 
•  Mascotte I* 
•  Nankin* 
•  Rabun* 
•  Sapelo* 
•  Sawyer* 
•  Shubuta 
•  St. Johns* 
•  Steekee 
•  Waynesboro* 
•  * Refer to Table Appendix A 1 Soils with a hardpan. 
GROUP 5 
Poorly-Drained Soils that have a Water Table Very Near the Surface with Percolation Rates from 5 to 10 Minutes/ Inch. 
•  Alapaha* 
•  Pelham* 
•  Plummer* 
•  * Refer to Table Appendix A 
GROUP 6 
Soils Unsuitable Due to the Following Reasons: 
Excess Wetness: (Frequent Flooding or Ponding) 
•  Altavista 
•  Angie 
•  Augusta 
•  Bayboro 
•  Bibb 
•  Boehicket 
•  Brookman 
•  Capers 
•  Cartercay 
•  Chastain 
•  Chatuge 
•  Chewacla (Philo, Stendal) 
•  Coxville 
•  Dasher 
•  Dowellton (Purdy) 
•  Egam 
•  Ellabelle 
•  Grady 
•  Guthrie 
•  Iredell 
•  Iuka 
•  Johnston 
•  Kingsland 
•  Kinston 
•  Leaf 
•  Meggett 
•  Muckalee 
•  Myatt 
•  Ogeechee 
•  Pooler 
•  Portsmouth 
•  Rambert 
•  Roanoke (Robertville) 
•  Rollen 
•  Rutledge 
•  Satilla 
•  Surrency 
•  Wahaee 
•  Wax (Captina, Monoga hela, Landisburg) 
•  Wehadkee (Atkins, Melvin) 
•  Whitwell 
Percolation Rate More than 90: 
•  Albertville 
•  Angelina 
•  Angie Bayboro 
•  Binsnville 
•  Bladen 
•  Boehicket 
•  Boswell( Oktibbeha, Sumter) 
•  Brookman 
•  Capers 
•  Cape Fear 
•  Chastain 
•  Conasauga 
•  Coxville 
•  Dowellton (Purdy) 
•  Egam 
•  Esto 
•  Eutaw 
•  Grady 
•  Helena 
•  Henderson 
•  Hoffman 
•  Iredell 
•  Leaf 
•  Lumbee 
•  Lyerly 
•  Madison 
•  Meggett 
•  Orange 
•  Pooler 
•  Roanoke (Robertsville) 
•  Roellen 
•  Sunsweet 
•  Susquehanna 
•  Talbott 
•  Townley (Rarden) 
•  Tupelo 
•  Tyler 
•  Wahee 
Shallow Bedrock: (There are some small areas of these soils that have adequate depths) 
•  Apison 
•  Ashe 
•  Ashler (Edgemont) 
•  Cataska 
•  Fletcher 
•  Goldston 
•  Harsells (Lehew) 
•  Hector 
•  Lily 
•  Lyerly 
•  Montevallo (Klinesville) 
•  Mountainburg 
•  Musella (Clifton) 
•  Ramsey 
•  Saluda 
•  Sylco 
•  Talladega 
•  Tallapoosa 
•  Wilkes 
WATER TABLE: (Soils not considered drainable to a satisfactory level) 
•  Beason 
•  Bladen 
•  Bodine 
•  Colfax 
•  Hazlehurst 
•  Helena 
•  Herod 
•  Orange 
•  Rains 
•  Robertsdale 
•  Taft 
•  Wolfever 
•  Worsham 
FLOODING: (Flooding is infrequent and if protected from flooding they may be suitable) 
•  Buncombe 
•  Congaree 
•  Duckston 
•  Emory 
•  Ennis 
•  Ocelockonee 
•  Ousley 
•  Riverview 
•  Starr 
•  Stato 
•  Subligna 
•  Tocca 
•  Toxaway 
•  Transylvania 
Appendix C - GLOSSARY OF SOIL TERMS 
AERATION, SOIL: The Exchange of air in soil with air from the atmosphere. The air in a well aerated soil is similar to that in the atmosphere; the air in poorly aerated oil is considerably higher in carbon dioxide and lower in oxygen. 
AGGREGATE, SOIL: Many fine particles held in a single mass or cluster. Natural soil aggregates, such as granules, blocks, or prisms are called peds. Clods are aggregates produced by tillage or logging. 
AULLUVIUM: Material, such as sand, silt, or clay, deposited on land by streams. 
BOTTOM LAND: The normal flood plain of a stream, subject to flooding. 
CLAY: As a soil separate, mineral soil particles less than 0.002 millimeter in diameter. As a soil textural class, soil material that is 40 percent or more clay, less than 45 percent sand, and less than 40 percent silt. 
COLLUVIUM: Soil material, rock fragments, or both moved by creep, slide, or local wash and deposited at the base of steep slopes. 
DEPTH OF ROCK: Bedrock is too near the surface for the specified use. 
DRAINAGE CLASS (NATURAL): Refers to the frequency and duration of periods of saturation or partial saturation during soil formation, as opposed to altered drainage, which is commonly the result of artificial drainage or irrigation but may be caused by the sudden deepening of channels or the blocking of drainage outlets. Seven classes of natural soil drainage are recognized: 
EXCESSIVELY DRAINED: Water is removed from the soil very rapidly. Excessively drained soils are commonly very coarse textured, rocky, or shallow. Some are steep. All are free of the mottling related to wetness. 
SOMEWHAT EXCESSIVELY DRAINED: Water is removed from the soil rapidly. Many somewhat excessively drained soils are sandy and readily pervious. Some are shallow. Some are so steep that much of the water they receive is lost as runoff. All are free of the mottling related to wetness. 
WELL DRAINED: Water is removed from the soil rapidly, but not rapidly. It is available to plants throughout most of the growing season, and wetness does not inhibit growth of roots for significant periods during most growing seasons. Well drained soils are commonly medium textured. They are mainly free of mottling. 
MODERATELY WELL DRAINED: Water is removed from the soil somewhat slowly during some period. Moderately well drained soils are wet for only a short time during the growing season, but periodically they are wet long enough that most meophytic crops are effected. They commonly have a slowly pervious layer within or directly below the solum, or periodically receive high rainfall, or both. 
SOMEWHAT POORLY DRAINED: Water is removed slowly enough that the soil is wet for significant periods during the growing season. Wetness markedly restricts the growth of mesophytic crops unless artificial drainage is provided. Somewhat poorly drained soils commonly have a slowly pervious layer, a high water table, additional water from seepage, nearly continuous rainfall, or a combination of these. 
POORLY DRAINED: Water is removed so slowly that the soil is saturated periodically during the growing season or remains wet for long periods. Free water is commonly at or near the surface for long enough during the growing season that most hydrophytic crops cannot be grown unless the soil is artificially drained. The soil is not continuously saturated in layers directly below plow depth. Poor drainage results forma high water table, a slowly pervious layer within the profile, seepage, nearly continuous rainfall, or a combination of these. 
VERY POORLY DRAINED: Water is removed from the soil so slowly that free water remains at or on the surface during most of the growing season. Unless the soil is artificially drained, most mesophytic crops cannot be grown. Very poorly drained soils are commonly level or depressed and are frequently ponded. Yet, where rainfall is high and nearly continuous, they can have moderate or high slope gradients. 
FLOOD PLAIN: A nearly level alluvial plain that border a stream and is subject to flooding unless protected artificially. 
FRAGIPAN: A loamy, brittle subsurface horizon low in porosity and content of organic matter and low or moderate in clay but high in silt or very fine sand. A fragipan appears cemented and restricts roots. When dry, it is hard or very hard and has a higher bulk density than the horizon or horizons above. When moist, it tends to rupture suddenly under pressure rather than to deform slowly. 
HARDPAN: A hardened or cemented soil horizon, or layer. The soil material is sandy, loamy, or clayey and is cemented by iron oxide, silica, calcium carbonate, and other substances. 
HORIZON, SOIL: A layer of soil, approximately parallel to the surface, having distinct characteristics produced by soil-forming processes. In the identification of soil horizons, an upper case letter represents the major horizons. Numbers or lower case letters that follow represent subdivisions of the major horizons. An explanation of the subdivisions is given in the Soil Survey Manual. The major horizons of mineral soil are as follows: 
0 HORIZON: An organic layer of fresh and decaying plant residue at the surface of a mineral soil. 
A HORIZON: The mineral horizon at or near the surface in which an accumulation of humified organic matter is mixed with the mineral material. Also, a plowed surface horizon, most of which was originally part of a B Horizon. 
E HORIZON: The mineral horizon in which the main feature is loss of silicate clay, iron, aluminum, or some combination of these. 
B HORIZON: The mineral horizon below an 0, A , or E Horizon. The B Horizon is in part a layer of transition from the overlying horizon to the underlying C Horizon. The B Horizon also has distinct characteristics such as: 
An accumulation of clay, sesquioxides, humus, or a combination of these; 
Prismatic or blocky structure; 
Redder or browner colors than those in the A Horizon; or 
A combination of these 
The combined A and B horizons are generally called the solum, or true soil. If a soil does not have a B horizon, the A horizon alone is the solum. 
C HORIZON: The mineral horizon or layer, excluding indurated bedrock, which is little affected by soil-forming processes and does not have the properties typical of the A or B horizon. The material of a C horizon may be either like or unlike that in which the solum formed. If the material is known to differ from that in the solum, the Arabic numeral 2 precedes the letter C. 
R LAYER: Consolidated rock beneath the soil. The rock commonly underlies C horizon, but can be directly below an A or B horizon. 
IMPERVIOUS SOIL: A soil through which water, air, or roots penetrate slowly or not at all. No soil is absolutely impervious to air and water all the time. 
INFILTRATION: The downward entry of water into the immediate surface of soil or other material, as contrasted with percolation, which is movement of water through soil layers or material. 
INFILTRATION CAPACITY: The maximum rate at which water can infiltrate into a soil under a given set of conditions. 
INFILTRATION RATE: The rate at which water penetrates the surface of the soil at any given instant, usually expressed in inches per hour. The rate can be limited by the infiltration capacity of the soil or the rate at which water is applied at the surface. 
INTAKE RATE: The average rate of water entering the soil under irrigation. Most soils have a fast initial rate; the rate decreased with application time. Therefore, intake rate for design purposes is not a constant but is a variable depending on the net irrigation application. The rate of water intake in inches per hour is expressed as follows: 
Less than 0.2 Very Low 0.2 to 0.4 Low 0.7 to 0.75 Moderately Low 0.75 to 1.25 Moderate 1.25 to 1.75 Moderately High 1.75 to 2.5 High More than 2.5 Very High  
LOAM: Soil material that is 7 to 27 percent clay particles, 28 to 50 percent silt particles, and less than 52 percent sand particles. 
LOAMY: Soil ranging for moderately coarse textured to moderately fine textured soils. 
MEDIUM TEXTURED SOIL: Very fine sandy loam, loam, silt loam, or silt. 
METAMORPHIC ROCK: Rock of any origin altered in mineralogical composition, chemical composition, or structure by heat, pressure, and movement. Nearly all such rocks are crystalline. 
MODERATELY COARSE TEXTURED SOIL: Sandy loam and fine sandy loam. 
MODERATELY FINE TEXTURED SOIL: Clay loam, sandy clay loam, and silty clay loam. 
MORPHOLOGY SOIL: The physical make-up of the soil including the texture, structure, porosity, consistence, color, and other physical, mineral, and biological properties of the various horizons, and the thickness and arrangement of those horizons in the soil profile. 
MOTTLING, SOIL: Irregular spots of different colors that vary in number and size. Mottling generally indicates poor aeration and impeded drainage. Descriptive terms are as follows: abundance, few, common, and many; size, fine, medium, and coarse; and contrast, faint, distinct, and prominent. The size measurements are of the diameter along the greatest dimension. Fine indicates less that 5 millimeters (about 0.2 inch); medium, from 5 to 15 millimeters (about 0.2 to 0.6 inch); and coarse, more than 15 millimeters (about 0.6 inch). 
MUCK: Dark colored, finely divided, and well decomposed organic soil material. (See Sapric soil material). 
ORGANIC MATTER: Plant and animal residue in the soil in various stages of decomposition. 
PAN: A compact, dense layer in a soil that impedes the movement of water and the growth of roots. For example, hardpan, fragipan, clayplan, plowpan, and land traffic pan. 
PARENT MATERIAL: The unconsolidated organic and mineral material from which soil forms. 
PED: An individual natural soil aggregate, such as a granule, a prism, or a block. 
PEDON: The smallest volume that can be called "a soil". A pedon is three dimensional and large enough to permit study of all horizons. Its area ranges from about 10 to 100 square feet (1 square meter to 10 square meters), depending on the variability of the soil. 
PERCOLATION: The downward movement of water through the soil. 
PERMEABILITY: The quality of the soil that enables water to move downward through the profile. Permeability is measured as the number of inches per hour that water moved downward through the saturated soil. Terms describing permeability are: 
Less than 0.06 inch/hr. Very Slow 0.06 inch to 0.2 inch/hr. Slow 0.2 inch to 0.6 inch/hr. Moderately Slow 0.6 inch to 2.0 inches/hr. Moderate 2.0 inches to 6.0 inches/hr. Moderately Rapid 6.0 inches to 20 inches/hr. Rapid More than 20 inches/hr. Very Rapid  
PLINTHITE: The sesquioxide-rich, humus-poor, highly weathered mixture of clay with quartz and other diluents. It commonly appears as red mottles, usually in platy, polygonal, or reticulate patterns. Plinthite changes irreversibly to an ironstone hardpan or to irregular aggregates on repeated wetting and drying, especially if it is exposed also to heat from the sun. In a moist soil, plinthite can be cut with a spade. It is a form of laterite. 
PONDING: Standing water on soils in closed depressions. Unless the soils are artificially drained, the water can be removed only by percolation or evapotranspiration. 
POOR FILTER: Because of rapid permeability the soil may not adequately filter effluent from a waste disposal system. 
PROFILE, SOIL: A vertical section of the soil extending through all its horizons and into the parent material. 
RUNOFF: The precipitation discharged into stream channels from an area. The water that flows off the surface of the land without sinking into the soil is called surface runoff. Water that enters the soil before reaching surface streams is called groundwater runoff or seepage flow from groundwater. 
SAND: As a soil separate, individual rock or mineral fragments from 0.05 millimeter to 2.0 millimeters in diameter. Most and grains consist of quartz. As a soil textural class, a soil that is 85 percent or more sand and not more than 10 percent clay. 
SANDSTONE: Sedimentary rock containing dominantly sand-size particles. 
SEDIMENTARY ROCK: Rock made up of particles deposited from suspension in water. The chief kinds of sedimentary rock are conglomerate, formed from gravel; sandstone, formed from sand; shale, formed from clay; and limestone, formed from soft masses of calcium carbonate. There are many intermediate types. Some wind-deposited sand is consolidated into sandstone. 
SEEPAGE: The movement of water through the soil. Seepage adversely affects the specified use. 
SERIES, SOIL: A group of soils that have profiles that are almost alike, except for differences in texture of the surface layer or of the underlying material. All the soils of a series have horizons that are similar in composition, thickness, and arrangements. 
SHALE: Sedimentary rock formed by the hardening of a clay deposit. 
SHRINK-WELL: The shrinking of soil when dry and the swelling when wet. Shrinking and swelling can damage roads, dams, building foundations, and other structures. It can also damage plant roots. 
SILICA: A combination of silicon and oxygen. The mineral form is called quartz. 
SLOPE: The inclination of the land surface from the horizontal. Percentage of slope is the vertical distance divided by horizontal distance, and then multiplied by 100. Thus, a slope of 20 percent is a drop of 20 feet in 100 feet of horizontal distance. 
SUBSOIL: Technically, the B horizon; roughly, the part of the solum below plow depth. 
SUBSURFACE LAYER: Technically, the A2 or E horizon. Generally refers to a leached horizon lighter in color and lower in content of organic matter than the overlying surface layer. 
SURFACE LAYER: The soil ordinarily moved in tillage, or its equivalent in uncultivated soil, ranging in depth from 4 to 10 inches (10 to 25 centimeter). Frequently designated as the "plow layer", or the "Ap Horizon". 
TERRACE: An embankment, or ridge, constructed across sloping soils on the contour or at a slight angle to the contour. The terrace intercepts surface runoff so that water soaks into the soil or flows slowly to a prepared outlet. 
TEXTURE, SOIL: The relative proportions of sand, silt, and clay particles in a mass of soil. The basic textural classes, in order of increasing proportion of fine particles, are sand, loamy sand, sandy loam, loam, silt loam, silt, sandy clay loam, clay loam, silty clay loam, sandy clay, silty clay, and clay. The sand, loamy sand, and sandy loam classes may be further divided by specifying "coarse", "fine", or "very fine". 
TOPSOIL: The upper part of the soil, which is the most favorable material for plant growth. It is ordinarily rich in organic matter and is used to topdress roadbanks, laws, and land affected by mining. 
WEATHERING: All physical and chemical changes produced in rocks or other deposits at or near the earth's surface by atmospheric agents. These changes result in disintegration and decomposition of the material. 
Appendix D - STORM WATER MANAGEMENT/BMP FACILITIES COVENANT 
City of Woodstock, Georgia 
Public Works/Utilities 
THIS Covenant made and entered into this _____ day of _______, 20___, by and between (Insert Full Name of Owner) ___________ hereinafter called the "Landowner", and City of Woodstock, Georgia hereinafter called the "City." 
WHEREAS, the Landowner is the owner of certain real property described as (City of Woodstock Tax Map/Parcel Identification Number) ___________ as recorded by deed in the land records of Cherokee County, Georgia at Deed Book _______ Page _______, hereinafter called the "Property," and 
WHEREAS the Landowner is proceeding to, or has, made improvements on the Property; and 
WHEREAS, the Site Plan/Subdivision Plan known as ___________ (Name of Plan/Development) hereinafter called the "Plan," which is expressly incorporated herein by reference, as approved, or to be approved, by the City, provides for detention of storm water within the confines of the Property; and 
WHEREAS, the City requires that onsite storm water management/BMP facilities as shown on the Plan be constructed and adequately maintained by the Landowner, its successors and assigns, including any homeowners association; 
WHEREAS, Chapter Seven of the Georgia Storm Water Management Manual (First Edition, August 2001) addresses issues relating to the operation and/or maintenance of storm water systems; and 
WHEREAS, the Landowner, its successors and assigns, understands that the execution and adherence to the provisions of this Covenant is a condition precedent to the City's permitting, and/or approving the final plant for the Property and subdivision located thereon; 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing premises and mutual covenants the parties hereby agree as follows: 
1.  The on-site storm water management/BMP facilities shall be constructed, operated, and maintained by the landowner, its successors and assigns, in accordance with the plans and specifications identified in the Plan, as well as in accordance with State and Federal law, the Georgia Storm Water Management Manual, and any and all applicable City ordinances. 
2.  The Landowner, its successors and assigns, including any homeowners association, shall adequately maintain the storm water facilities and improvements on the Property. Adequate Maintenance required by this Covenant shall include, but is not limited to, scheduled and corrective maintenance of all facilities and improvements intended to manage and/or control storm water on the Property, with such facilities and improvements to expressly include, but not be limited to pipes, channels structures, vegetation, berms, outlet structures, pond areas, access roads, or any other improvement relating to storm water on the Property, but excluding any such improvements located on, under, or within any publicly owned rights of way (the "Storm Water Facilities and Improvements"). Adequate maintenance is herein defined as keeping such Storm Water Facilities and Improvements in good working condition such that they satisfactorily perform their intended design functions. 
3.  The Landowner, its successors and assigns, shall inspect the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements and submit an inspection report to the City on an annual basis. The purpose of the inspection is to assure safe and proper functioning of the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements located on the Property. Each annual inspection shall include a full and complete inspection of all Storm Water Facilities and Improvements located on the Property. Any and all deficiencies identified during such inspections shall be noted in the inspection report submitted to the City. The inspection report shall also include a detailed plan for any and all repairs to the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements necessary to correct any deficiencies identified during the inspection, with the repair plan to be prepared by a professional engineer, or some other duly qualified professional, licensed in the State of Georgia. 
4.  The Landower, its successors and assigns, hereby grants permission to the City, its authorized agents and employees, to enter upon the Property and to inspect the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements as deemed necessary by the City for purposes of protecting the public health, safety or welfare, for purposes of investigating or inspecting any reported or suspected deficiencies in the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements on the Property, for purposes of responding to or investigating citizens' complaints relating to the management or control of storm water on the Property, or for any other purpose deemed necessary by the City. The City shall provide the Landowner, its successors and assigns, with a copy of any inspection findings, as well as a directive to commence with any required repairs. To the extent that the City does not agree with or to the contemplated repairs proposed by the Landowner, The City may submit an alternate repair plan to the Landowner. 
5.  In the event the Landowner, it successors and assigns, fails to maintain the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements on the Property in good working condition acceptable to the City, or fails to make repairs as specified in the inspection report within a reasonable time frame as established by the City, with such time frame not to be shorter than thirty (30) days, the City may enter upon the Property and take and all action necessary to correct deficiencies identified in the inspection report. The Landowner, its successors and assigns, shall be responsible for any and all fees and expenses incurred by the City in taking such corrective action. This provision shall not be construed to allow the City to erect any structure of a permanent nature on the land of the Landowner outside the easement for the storm water management/BMP facilities. It is expressly understood and agreed that this Covenant imposes no obligation or responsibility on the City to routinely maintain or repair any Storm Water Facilities and Improvements located on the property. 
6.  The Landowner, its successors and assigns, will perform all work necessary to keep the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements in good working condition as required by the Approved Plan, as well as by State and Federal law, the Georgia Storm Water Management Manual, and any and all applicable City ordinances. 
7.  In the event that the City performs or undertakes work of any kind pursuant to this Covenant or expends any funds or resources in performance of said work for labor, use of equipment, supplies, material, and the like, the Landowner, its successors and assigns, shall reimburse the City upon demand, within thirty (30) days of receipt of same. 
8.  This Covenant shall impose no liability on the City with respect to the maintenance or repair of any Storm Water Facilities and Improvements on the Property, nor does the City assume any obligation or duty to undertake or perform any action allowed for, or permitted by, this Covenant. The Landowner, its successors and assigns, further agrees to I indemnify and hold the City harmless from any liability arising out of the management, operation, maintenance, or failure of any Storm Water Facilities and Improvements subject to this Covenant. 
9.  Notwithstanding any right extended to the City pursuant to this Covenant, it is expressly recognized and acknowledged that the City retains all prosecutorial rights and remedies available to it, including the enforcement of any and all applicable City ordinances, against the Landowner, its successors and assigns, relating to the operation, maintenance, and/or repair of Storm Water Facilities and Improvements located on the Property. 
10.  This Covenant shall be recorded among the lands records of Cherokee County, Georgia, and shall constitute a covenant running with the land, and shall be binding on the Landowner, its administrators, executors, assigns heirs and any other successors in interests, including any homeowners association. 
WITNESS the following signatures and seals 
_____
Company/Corporation/Partnership Name (Seal) By: _____
(Signature) _____
(Type/Print Name) _____
(Type/Print Title) STATE OF _____ COUNTY OF _____ The foregoing Instrument was acknowledged before me this _____ day of _______, 20___, by _____
UNOFFICIAL WITNESS _____
NOTARY PUBLIC (Seal) My Commission Expires _____  
Attachment A 
Responsible Person 
The Landowner hereby identifies the responsible person or position responsible for ensuring that the inspection and maintenance of the Storm Water Facilities and Improvements is accomplished according to the inspection and maintenance schedule prepared by the engineer of records for this Property ______________________ 
______________________(Address or Name of the Property as ______________________(Name and title of person so identified). 
Results of the inspections shall be submitted annually to the City of Woodstock. Inspection reports shall be submitted to: 
City of Woodstock 
Public Works/Utilities Department 
103 Arnold Mill Road 
Woodstock, GA 30188 
If the responsible entity or contact person changes City of Woodstock shall be notified in writing of the change no later than thirty (30) days from the effective date of such change. 
_____
Responsible Entity 
_____
Contact Person's Name 
_____
Signature 
_____
Address 
_____
City, State, Zip Code 
_____
Phone Number 
Attachment B 
Required Inspection and Maintenance Schedule 
Attach a maintenance and inspection schedule. Refer to Chapter 7 of the Georgia Storm Water Management Manual for minimum recommended inspection and maintenance requirements. 
TABLE OF AMENDMENTS 
This table contains all amendments/ordinances adopted since the original adoption of the Land Development Regulations on January 24, 1995 and included in this publication. For all amendments/ordinances adopted after September 24, 2009, see the Code Comparative Table following this Table of Amendments. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 11-12-1996       Added Ch. XVI, Arts. I-VI  9-10-1996 10.100-10.103, 10.200  4-13-1999 3.903.7  2-27-2001 11.206.7  1-13-2004 Ch. VIII, Arts. I-XI 10-12-2004 Ch. II, 3.710, 7.767  2-22-2005 4.100-4.1000  4-26-2005 3.706, 3.901, 3.902, 3.120-3.122  4-26-2005 Ch. XIII, Arts. I-IV  4-26-2005 Ch. XIV, Arts. I-VII  7-12-2005 8.210 9.201.3  9-26-2006       Added Ch. XIII, Arts. V-XI 11-14-2006 Ch. IX, Arts. I-V  2-12-2007       Added 10.104 11-19-2007 3.900.13, 3.903.7, Ch. 3, Art. XII 020-2007 12-10-2007       Rpld Ch. VI       Added Ch. VI, Arts. I-VI  5-19-2008       Rpld Ch. IX, Arts. I-V       Added Ch. IX, Arts. I-IV  7-21-2008 Ch. VII, Arts. I-IX  7-28-2008 Ch. VIII, Arts. I-XI  3-23-2009 Ch. X, Arts. I-III  9-24-2009 Ch. II  9-24-2009 Ch. VII, Arts. I-IX  9-24-2009 Ch. XIII, Arts. I-VII  9-24-2009 Ch. XIV, Arts. I-VI       Added App. D  9-24-2009       Added Ch. XVII, Arts. I-X  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
    This table contains all amendments/ordinances adopted after September 24, 2009 and included in this Land Development Code. 
Ordinance 
No. Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code (Ord.)  1-25-2010 1-8       Added Adopting ord., 
p. ix (Ord.)  7-12-2010(1)       Rpld Ch. II Exh. A       Added Ch. II (Ord.)  7-12-2010(2)       Rpld Ch. IV, 
4.100-4.1000 Exh. A       Added Ch. IV, 
4.100-4.1000 (Ord.)  7-12-2010(3) 1       Rpld 7.304(8) 2       Rpld 7.304(9) 3       Rpld 7.304(20) 4       Rpld Ch. VII, Art. V Exh. A       Added Ch. VII, Art. V, 
7.500-7.508 5       Rpld 7.722       Rpld 7.724       Rnbd 7.724(1)-(8)       as 7.301 6       Rpld 7.742 7       Rpld 7.743       Rnbd 7.743(1)-(3)       as 7.301 8       Rpld 7.907 9       Rpld 7.926 10       Rpld 7.927 11       Rpld 7.964 12       Rpld 7.965 (Ord.) 10-25-2010       Rpld 3.105       Added 3.105       Rpld 3.705       Added 3.705 (Ord.)  8-22-2011       Rpld Ch. VI, 6.1.1-6.1.5, 6.2.1-6.2.15, 6.3.1-6.3.9, 6.4.1-6.4.17, 6.5.1-6.5.5, 6.6.1-6.6.8 Exh. A       Added Ch. VI, 6.1.1-6.1.5, 6.2.1-6.2.8, 6.3.1-6.3.9, 6.4.1-6.4.15, 6.5.1-6.5.6, 6.6.1-6.6.3, 6.7.1-6.7.8 (Ord.)  9-12-2011(1) 1       Rpld Ch. II 1(Exh. A)       Added Ch. II (Ord.)  9-12-2011(2) 1       Rpld Ch. IV, 
4.100-4.1000 1(Exh. A)       Added Ch. IV, 
4.100-4.1000 (Ord.)  4- 9-2012 1, 2       Rpld Ch. VIII, Art. I, 
8.110-8.134 1, 2 
(Exh. A)       Added   
Ch. VIII, Art. I, 
8.110-8.135 1989  5-14-2012 1       Rpld 7.505 1(Exh. A)       Added 7.505 2       Rpld 7.767 2(Exh. B)       Added 7.767 3       Rpld 7.768 3(Exh. C)       Added 7.768 (Ord.)  9-24-2012       Added Ch. XVIII, 18.101-18.605 (Ord.) 12-10-2012 1(Exh. A) 7.506 10. (Ord.)  2-11-2013 1(Exh. A) 7.505 (Ord.)  6-17-2013 7.301       Added 7.509 (Ord.)  7- 8-2013 Exh. A       Rpld 6.1.1-6.1.5, 6.2.1-6.2.8, 6.3.1-6.3.9, 6.4.1-6.4.15, 6.5.1-6.5.6, 6.6.1-6.6.3, 6.7.1-6.7.8       Added 6.1.1-6.1.5, 6.2.1-6.2.8, 6.3.1-6.3.9, 6.4.1-6.4.17, 6.5.1-6.5.6, 6.6.1-6.6.3, 6.7.1-6.7.8 (Ord.) 10-28-2013(1) 1(Exh. A) 7.505 2(Exh. A) 7.506 (Ord. of) 10-28-2013(2) 1(Exh. A) 7.941 (Ord. of) 10-28-2013(3) 1(Exh. A) Table 7 (Ord. of)  2-24-2014(1) 1(Exh. A) 7.506 (Ord. of)  3-24-2014(1) 1(Exh. A) 7.505 (Ord. of)  4-28-2014(1) Exh. A 6.1.1-6.1.5, 6.2.1-6.2.8, 6.3.1-6.3.9, 6.4.1-6.4.17, 6.5.1-6.5.6, 6.6.1-6.6.4, 6.7.1-6.7.8 (Ord. of)  4-28-2014(2) 1 7.723 (Ord. of)  7-28-2014(1) 1(Exh. A) 7.506 (Ord. of)  7-28-2014(2) 1(Exh. A) 7.301 (Ord. of)  7-28-2014(3) 1(Exh. A) 7.729 (Ord. of)  9-22-2014(1) 1(Exh. A) 7.505 (Ord. of) 10-13-2014(1) 1(Exh. A) Ch. II (Ord. of) 11-17-2014(1) 1(Exh. A) 7.609 (Ord. of) 12- 8-2014(1) 1(Exh. A) 6.2.5 6.3.5 (Ord. of)  1-12-2015(1) 1(Exh. A) 7.505 (Ord. of)  1-12-2015(2) 1(Exh. A) 7.506 (Ord. of)  3-23-2015(1) 1(Exh. A) Ch. II (Ord. of)  3-23-2015(2) 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 7.740-7.749       Added 7.740-7.749 (Ord. of)  5-18-2015(1) 1(Exh. A) Ch. II (Ord. of)  5-18-2015(2) 1(Exh. A)       Added 7.510 (Ord. of)  5-18-2015(3) 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 7.760-7.769       Added 7.760-7.769 (Ord. of)  5-18-2015(4) 1(Exh. A) 18.304 (Ord. of)  6- 8-2015(1) 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 3.100-3.105, 3.200-3.203, 3.300, 3.400-3.402, 3.500-3.502, 3.600, 3.601, 3.700-3.710, 3.800, 3.801, 3.900-3.903, 3.110-3.114, 3.120-3.122       Added 3.100-3.106, 3.200, 3.201, 3.300-3.302, 3.400-3.404, 3.500-3.503, 3.600-3.603, 3.700-3.709, 3.800, 3.801, 3.900-3.905 (Ord. of)  6- 8-2015(2) 1(Exh. A) 8.210 1. (Ord. of)  6- 8-2015(3) 1(Exh. A)       Added 19.100-19.703 (Ord. of)  6- 8-2015(4) 1       Rpld Ch. XV, Art. I, 15.100-15.180 2       Added Art. I, 15.100-15.108 Art. II, 15.200-15.202 Art. III, 15.300-15.305 (Ord. of)  7-27-2015(1) 1(Exh. A) Ch. II (Ord. of)  7-27-2015(2) 1(Exh. A) 7.505 (Ord. of) 12-14-2015(1)       Added 11.203 5., 6. (Ord. of) 12-14-2015(2) 7.505       Added 7.506 15. (Ord. of)  1-11-2016(1)       Rpld 6.6.1-6.6.4       Added 20.101-20.104, 20.201-20.206, 20.301-20.306, 20.401-20.406, 20.501-20.505 (Ord. of)  1-11-2016(2) 7.505 7.506 (Ord. of)  1-25-2016(1) Ch. II       Rpld 6.1.3 (Ord. of)  2- 8-2016(1) Ch. II 7.505       Added 7.506 16. (Ord. of)  2-22-2016(1) 7.502       Added 7.830-7.833 3927  5-23-2016 1(Exh. A)       Added Ch. XXI, Art. I, 21.1.1-21.1.8 Art. II, 21.2.1-21.2.7 3928  5-23-2016 1(Exh. A), 2       Rpld Ch. VI, 6.1.1-6.1.5, 6.2.1-6.1.8, 6.3.1-6.3.9, 6.4.1-6.4.17, 6.5.1-6.5.6, 6.7.1-6.7.8,       Added Ch. VI, 6.1.1-6.1.5, 6.2.1-6.2.8, 6.3.1-6.3.3, 6.4.1-6.4.15, 6.5.1-6.5.6, 6.7.1-6.7.8 4010  5-23-2016 1 Ch. XV(title) 2       Added Art. VI, 15.600 3998  7-11-2016 1(Exh. A)       Added Art. IV, 15.400-15.422 Art. V, 15.500-15.523 (Ord. of)  9-12-2016(1) 1 7.879 (Ord. of)  9-12-2016(2) 1, 3 Ch. II 4, 5 7.505, 7.506 5(Exh. A)       Rpld Art. VII, 7.710-7.769       Added Art. VII, 7.721-7.731 6       Rpld 7.760-7.769 7       Added 7.511-7.521 8       Rpld Art. VIII, 7.810, 7.811, 7.830-7.833 8(Exh. B)       Added Art. VIII, 7.840, 7.841, 7.843-7.868, 7.870-7.876, 7.879-7.894, 7.897-7.899 9(Exh. C)       Rpld Art. IX, 7.900-7.906, 7.908, 7.910-7.925, 7.928-7.963, 7.966-7.968       Added Art. IX, 7.910, 7.911, 7.930-7.933 (Ord. of)  9-12-2016(3) 1, 2 Ch. II 3 6.25 6.4.8 (Ord. of)  9-12-2016(4) 1, 2       Rpld Ch. III, 3.100-3.106, 3.200, 3.201, 3.300-3.102, 3.400-3.405, 3.500-3.503, 3.600-3.602, 3.700-3.709, 3.800, 3.801, 3.900-3.905 2(Exh. A)       Added 3.100, 3.104, 3.200-3.210, 3.300-3.303, 3.400-3.402, 3.500-3.515, 3.600-3.602, 3.700-3.702, 3.800-3.803, 3.900-3.906 (Ord. of)  9-12-2016(5) 1 7.510 (Ord. of) 11-14-2016(1) 1       Added 7.721 2 7.726 (Ord. of) 11-14-2016(2) 1 15.201 2(Exh. A) App. A, Figs. 14-16 3(Exh. B) App. A, Fig. 21 (Ord. of) 11-14-2016(3) 1 10.140 (Ord. of) 11-14-2016(4) 1, 2 9.401 (Ord. of) 12-12-2016(1) 1       Rpld Ch. IX, 9.100-9.103, 9.200, 9.300-9.307, 9.400-9.408, App. A-F 2(Exh. A)       Added 9.100-9.103, 9.200, 9.300-9.307, 9.400-9.408, App. A (Ord. of)  1-23-2017(1) 1       Rpld Ch. XVIII, Table 7 2, 3 7.505 (Ord. of)  2-13-2017(1) 1 7.721 2, 3 7.723 (Ord. of)  2-13-2017(2) 1, 2 10.165 3 10.169 (Ord. of)  3-13-2017(1) 1(Exh. A) 6.1.1-6.1.5, 6.2.1-6.2.8, 6.3.1-6.3.3, 6.4.1-6.4.15, 6.5.1-6.5.6, 6.7.1-6.7.9 (Ord. of)  3-13-2017(2) 1 10.110 (Ord. of)  5- 8-2017(1) 1 7.879 2 7.880 (Ord. of)  5- 8-2017(2) 1, 2 7.505 (Ord. of)  5- 8-2017(3) 1 7.767 003-2017  7-10-17 1, 2 Ch. II 3, 4 4.400 5, 6 4.500 7 4.900 (Ord. of)  9-25-2017(1) 10.100 10.140 (Ord. of) 10- 9-2017(1) 1 Ch. II 2 7.507 3, 4 7.508 (Ord. of) 11-13-2017(1) 1 7.301 (Ord. of) 12-11-2017(1) III       Added 10.140 2.g. (Ord. of) 12-15-2017(1) 1, 2 Ch. II 3 7.505 4 7.506 4958-2018  2-12-2018 1(Exh. A) Ch. VII 5202-A-2018  7- 9-18 1       Added 7.304 22. 5202-B-2018  7- 9-18 1 9.102 5202-C-2018  7- 9-18 1, 2 7.505 (table) 5305-2018  8-27-18 1 7.304 21.g. 2-6(Exh. A) 7.505 7 7.506 7., 8. 5359-2018  9-10-18 1 11.203 5. 2, 3 11.203 5.b. 4 11.203 6. 5360-2018  9-10-18 1 7.723 5503-2018 11-26-18 1-5 7.505 6 7.506 9. 5642-2019  2-25-19 1(Exh. A) 7.505 2 7.506 1. 3 7.506 2. 4       Added 7.800-7.807 5697-2019  3-25-19 1, 2 Ch. II 3 13.220 4 13.510(1) 5 13.520(1)(b) 6 13.520(2)(a), (b) 7 13.520(5)(a) 8 13.530  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Land Development Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to state law. 
O.C.G.A. 
Section Section  
this Code 1-3-3 4.300 5-4-1 Ch. XIII, Art. VI 12-2-8 4.400 12-4-72 4.300 12-5-20 Ch. II 12-5-20 et seq. 4.200 12-5-23(a)(5) 4.500 12-5-30(f) Ch. II 4.200 4.400 ch. 12-7 Ch. II 12-7-1 et seq. 4.400 12-7-6 4.300 12-7-6(b) Ch. II 4.200 4.400 12-7-6(c) 4.400 12-7-7(e) 4.600 12-7-7(f)(1) 4.500 12-7-7.1 4.300 12-7-8(a) Ch. II 4.500 4.600 12-7-17(9), (10) 4.500 12-7-19 Ch. II 12-7-19(a)(1) 4.800 12-7-19(b)(1), (4) 4.800 12-7-20 4.500 4.800 16-6-4 Ch. II 16-12-80 6.2.5 20.204 32-6102 Ch. I 18.101 tit. 36, ch. 66 11.101 36-18-1 4.300 36-66-4 10.165 11.203 42-1-12 Ch. II 41-2-8-41-2-17 16.350 16.360 16.550 41-2-17 Ch. 16, Art. I 69-1214- 
69-1221 3.105 69-9904, 
69-9905 3.105  
