CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1 -
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1.01 Title 1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions 1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers 1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity 1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries 1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction 1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 Standard Penalty
1.01 TITLE. This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Carlisle, Iowa.
1.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are
defined in the Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or
repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases used herein have the
following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code of
Ordinances or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or repugnant to the context of the provision:
1. “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording secondary
means of access to abutting property.
2. “City” means the City of Carlisle, Iowa.
3. “Clerk” means the city clerk of Carlisle, Iowa.
4. “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the Building
Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
5. “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Carlisle,
Iowa.
6. “Council” means the city council of Carlisle, Iowa.
7. “County” means Warren County, Iowa.
8. “May” confers a power.
9. “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
10. “Must” states a requirement.
11. “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
12. “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Carlisle, Iowa, as embodied
in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance adopting this
Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
13. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust or other legal entity,
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 2 -
and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative thereof, but does
not include a governmental body.
14. “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
15. “Shall” imposes a duty.
16. “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of the
traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
17. “State” means the State of Iowa.
18. “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
19. “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public,
as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa have their
ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Council, or repugnant to the context of the provision.
1.03 CITY POWERS. The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa
Constitution, and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any
power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the City and of its residents, and to preserve and improve the peace,
safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its residents, and each and every
provision of this Code of Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing
powers and the performance of the foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04 INDEMNITY. The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of
Ordinances, by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for any injury to or death
of any person or persons whomsoever, and any loss of or damage to property whatsoever,
including all costs and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or related to, directly,
indirectly or remotely, the issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything
thereunder, or the failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such
applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the
terms and conditions of such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such
application, forever agrees to indemnify the City and its officers, agents and employees, and
agrees to save them harmless from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability
whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury or death, including all costs and expenses incident
thereto, by reason of the foregoing. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part
of any permit or license issued under this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the
City whether expressly recited therein or not.
1.05 PERSONAL INJURIES. When action is brought against the City for personal
injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any
person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the
action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the
City believes that the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City,
and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 3 -
any action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or other
cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named
action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The City may maintain an action against
the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses
incurred by the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the
rules of statutory construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council with the understanding that the term “statute” as used
therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term “ordinance” when applied to this
Code of Ordinances.
1.07 EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever an officer or employee is required or
authorized to do an act by a provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be
construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly authorized
designee of said officer or employee.
1.08 AMENDMENTS. All ordinances that amend, repeal or in any manner affect this
Code of Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection, or
paragraph to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09 CATCHLINES AND NOTES. The catchlines of the several sections of this Code of
Ordinances, titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references,
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in this Code
of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law and are intended merely to indicate,
explain, supplement, or clarify the contents of a section.
1.10 ALTERING CODE. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend,
by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code of Ordinances, or to insert or delete
pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code of Ordinances in any manner
that will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented.
1.11 SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision, or part of this Code of Ordinances is
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of this Code
of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision, or part thereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
1.12 WARRANTS. If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful right to
exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or conduct the inspection
may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the
Code of Iowa, for an administrative search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant, or any
other person having charge, care, or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building, or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search warrant, to permit
entry therein by the municipal officer or employee.
1.13 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION. Whenever this Code of Ordinances
grants any discretionary power to the Council or any commission, board or officer or
employee of the City and does not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 4 -
power shall be exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant,
deny, or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and circumstances then
existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due consideration shall be given to the
impact upon the public health, safety and welfare, and the decision shall be that of a
reasonably prudent person under similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14 STANDARD PENALTY. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code
of Ordinances for violation of any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating any provision of
this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of at least sixty-five dollars ($65.00) but not to exceed six
hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00). The court may order imprisonment not to exceed
thirty (30) days in lieu of a fine or in addition to a fine.†
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
[The next page is 9]
† EDITOR’S NOTE: For civil penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see Chapter 4.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 9 -
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
2.01 Title 2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties of City Officers 2.06 Copies on File
2.01 TITLE. This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Carlisle, Iowa.
2.02 FORM OF GOVERNMENT. The form of government of the City is the Mayor-
Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY OFFICERS. The Council and Mayor and
other City officers have such powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or
required by State law and by the ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the City.
2.04 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of five Council
Members elected at large for overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05 TERM OF MAYOR. The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06 COPIES ON FILE. The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with
the official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the charter
available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 11 -
CHAPTER 3
ELECTION PRECINCTS
3.01 ELECTION PRECINCTS. The incorporated area of the City is divided into three
voting precincts described as follows:
1. Precinct 1: All of the City of Carlisle located in Polk County, Iowa, and the
unincorporated portion of Allen Township in Polk County described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of U.S. Highway 65 and
the centerline of the Des Moines River; thence southeasterly along the
centerline of the Des Moines River to the southern boundary of Polk
County; thence west along the southern boundary of Polk County to
the municipal boundary of the City of Des Moines to the centerline of
State Highway 5; thence east along the centerline of State Highway 5
to the centerline of U.S. Highway 65; thence north along the centerline
of U.S. Highway 65 to the point of beginning.
2. Precinct 2: The portion of the City of Carlisle located in Warren County,
Iowa, lying east of 155th Avenue and north of a boundary described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of Highway 5 and the corporate limits of
the City; thence southeast on Highway 5 to that portion of Scotch
Ridge Road lying north of Highway 5; thence northeast to the Old
Highway 5 Frontage Road; thence easterly to School Street; thence
east on School Street to the corporate limits.
3. Precinct 3: The remaining portions of the City of Carlisle located in Warren
County, Iowa, which are not included in Precinct 2 and all of the unincorporated Allen
Township in Warren County.
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
4.01 Municipal Infraction 4.04 Civil Citations
4.02 Environmental Violation 4.05 Alternative Relief
4.03 Penalties 4.06 Alternative Penalties
4.01 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any ordinance or code
herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by the same, with
the exception of those provisions specifically provided under State law as a felony, an aggravated
misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the
Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.†
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
4.02 ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION. A municipal infraction that is a violation of Chapter 455B
of the Code of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with the Department of Natural
Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental violation. However, the provisions of this section
shall not be applicable until the City has offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the
violation or to the following specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1. A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement
referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying, or storing of
grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial production or manufacturing of grain products.
3. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying, or storing of
grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production or manufacturing if such discharge occurs
from September 15 to January 15.
4.03 PENALTIES. A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1. Standard Civil Penalties.
A. First offense $250.00
B. Second offense $500.00
C. Third offense and all future offenses $750.00
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat offense.
2. Special Civil Penalties.
A. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard
or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an industrial user is punishable by a
penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each day a violation exists or continues.
† EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see Section 1.14.
B. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is punishable by a
penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence. However, an environmental
violation is not subject to such penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup, cleaning,
repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or conducting a shutdown
of either equipment causing the violation or the equipment designed to reduce or
eliminate the violation.
(2) The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24) hours from
the time that the violation begins.
(3) The violation does not continue in existence for more than eight (8) hours.
4.04 CIVIL CITATIONS. Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of Ordinances may
issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy of the citation may be served
by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.305, by certified mail addressed to the
defendant at defendant’s last known mailing address, return receipt requested, or by publication in the
manner as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.311. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation
shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense
has been committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
1. The name and address of the defendant.
2. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the citation.
3. The location and time of the infraction.
4. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or both.
5. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6. The time and place of court appearance.
7. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
8. The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the condition of the property, including
a building code violation, a local housing regulation violation, a housing code violation, or a public health
or safety violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of the District Court, the City shall also file the
citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
4.05 ALTERNATIVE RELIEF. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude
the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such alternative relief may
include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[8])
4.06 ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES. This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from issuing a
criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties are also
provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the authority of the City to enforce the provisions
of this Code of Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
5.01 Oaths 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Powers and Duties 5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records 5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings
5.01 OATHS. The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the following:
1. Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for office by taking the
prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The oath shall be taken, and bond
provided, after such officer is certified as elected, no later than noon of the first day that is not a
Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which the officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2. Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear that I will
support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I
will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all duties of the office of (name
of office) in Carlisle as now or hereafter required by law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3. Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to administer
oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the business of their respective offices:
A. Mayor
B. City Clerk
C. Members of all boards, commissions, or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02 BONDS. Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1. Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or blanket position
bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer, and such other officers and
employees as may be necessary and advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2. Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
3. Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
4. Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of Official Bonds” in
which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City officers, elective or appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])
5.03 POWERS AND DUTIES. Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the
duties prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the Council unless
contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04 BOOKS AND RECORDS. All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall
be open to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions of law expressly limit
such right or require such records to be kept confidential. Access to public records that are combined
with data processing software shall be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)
5.05 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR. Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in office all
books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06 MEETINGS. All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multi-membered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held in accordance with the
following:
1. Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the time, date, and
place of each meeting and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
2. Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed sessions are
held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
3. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and place, the
members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes shall show the results of
each vote taken and information sufficient to indicate the vote of each member present. The vote
of each member present shall be made public at the open session. The minutes shall be public
records open to public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
4. Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of either twothirds
of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and in accordance with Chapter 21
of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
5. Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices at any open
session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
6. Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only in
circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical and then only in
compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
5.07 CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A City officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or
indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to be furnished or
performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A contract entered into in violation of this
section is void. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1. Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City officer or
employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding of which is not incompatible
with another public office or is not prohibited by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3a])
2. Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository, paying
agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])
3. City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as Treasurer of the
City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])
4. Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an interest solely by
reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind described in subsection 8 of this section, or
both, if the contracts are made by competitive bid in writing, publicly invited and opened, or if
the remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a result of the contract and the
duties of employment do not directly involve the procurement or preparation of any part of the
contract. The competitive bid qualification of this subsection does not apply to a contract for
professional services not customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])
5. Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])
6. Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has an interest if the
contract was made before the time the officer or employee was elected or appointed, but the
contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])
7. Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])
8. Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or employee has an
interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock of
the corporation is owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the
spouse or immediate family of such officer or employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])
9. Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing, publicly invited
and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])
10. Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section, for the
purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or employee, if the purchases benefiting
that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative total purchase price of fifteen hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])
11. Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a utility and
contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City utility services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
12. Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other obligation of the City and
the contract is not acquired directly from the City but is acquired in a transaction with a third
party who may or may not be the original underwriter, purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3m])
5.08 RESIGNATIONS. An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a
resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A person who
resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to the same office during the time for which
the person was elected if, during that time, the compensation of the office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. Except as otherwise
provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to City office or employment may be removed by the
officer or body making the appointment, but every such removal shall be by written order. The order
shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy shall be sent by certified mail to the
person removed, who, upon request filed with the Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing
the copy, shall be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal.
The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date the request is filed, unless the person
removed requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10 VACANCIES. A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be filled, at the
Council’s option, by one of the two following procedures:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2])
1. Appointment. By appointment, following public notice, by the remaining members of
the Council. The appointment shall be made within sixty (60) days after the vacancy occurs and
shall be for the period until the next regular City election unless there is an intervening special
election for the City, in which event the election for the office shall be placed on the ballot at such
special election. If the Council chooses to proceed under this subsection, the Council shall
publish notice of the appointment in accordance with Section 372.13 of the Code of Iowa. If the
remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the full membership, or if a petition is filed
requesting an election, the Council shall call a special election as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2a])
2. Special Election. By a special election held to fill the office for the remaining balance of
the unexpired term as provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[2b])
5.11 GIFTS. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public official,
public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family member, shall not, directly or indirectly,
accept or receive any gift or series of gifts from a “restricted donor” as defined in Chapter 68B and a
restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly with one or more other restricted
donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a public official, public employee or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 29 -
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
6.01 Nominating Method to Be Used 6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition 6.05 Filing; Presumption; Withdrawals; Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition 6.06 Persons Elected
6.01 NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED. All candidates for elective municipal
offices shall be nominated under the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02 NOMINATIONS BY PETITION. Nominations for elective municipal offices of the
City may be made by nomination paper or papers signed by not less than 25 eligible electors,
residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03 ADDING NAME BY PETITION. The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot
by any other method than by petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04 PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT. Nomination papers shall
include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy. The petition and affidavit shall be
substantially in the form prescribed by the State Commissioner of Elections, shall include
information required by the Code of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 & 45.6)
6.05 FILING; PRESUMPTION; WITHDRAWALS; OBJECTIONS. The time and
place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity thereof, the right of a
candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object
to the legal sufficiency of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be
governed by the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06 PERSONS ELECTED. The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for
each office on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
7.01 Purpose 7.05 Operating Budget Preparation
7.02 Finance Officer 7.06 Budget Amendments
7.03 Cash Control 7.07 Accounting
7.04 Fund Control 7.08 Financial Reports
7.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules and
regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02 FINANCE OFFICER. The Clerk is the finance and accounting officer of the City and is
responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03 CASH CONTROL. To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the following
shall apply:
1. Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any City officer shall
be deposited through the office of the finance officer. If any said fees are due to an officer, they
shall be paid to the officer by check drawn by the finance officer and approved by the Council only
upon such officer’s making adequate reports relating thereto as required by law, ordinance, or
Council directive.
2. Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be promptly deposited
in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not exceeding the authorized depository
limitation established by the Council or invested in accordance with the City’s written investment
policy and State law, including joint investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
3. Petty Cash Fund. The finance officer shall be custodian of a petty cash fund for the
payment of small claims for minor purchases, collect-on-delivery transportation charges, and small
fees customarily paid at the time of rendering a service, for which payments the finance officer
shall obtain some form of receipt or bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such
time as the petty cash fund is approaching depletion, the finance officer shall draw a check for
replenishment in the amount of the accumulated expenditures and said check and supporting detail
shall be submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual manner for claims and charged to the
proper funds and accounts. It shall not be used for salary payments or other personal services or
personal expenses.
4. Change Fund. The finance officer is authorized to establish a change fund for the purpose
of making change without comingling other funds to meet the requirements of the office.
7.04 FUND CONTROL. There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct funds in
accordance with the following:
1. Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the proper fund as required
by law, ordinance, or resolution.
2. Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such disbursement is
authorized by law, ordinance, or resolution, was properly budgeted, and supported by a claim
approved by the Council.
3. Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency Fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])
4. Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law, moneys may be
transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to meet payments of principal and
interest. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])
5. Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Such
transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])
6. Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund may be transferred
to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund and Road Use Tax Funds, by resolution of the
Council. A surplus may exist only after all required transfers have been made to any restricted
accounts in accordance with the terms and provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements
relating to the Utility or Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the operating
account or the unrestricted retained earnings calculated in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles in excess of:
A. The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating and maintaining the
utility or enterprise for the preceding three (3) months, and
B. The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted accounts for the
succeeding three (3) months.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])
7. Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each month and a
report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05 OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION. The annual operating budget of the City shall be
prepared in accordance with the following:
1. Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible for preparation of the annual budget
detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption by the Council in accordance with
directives of the Mayor and Council.
2. Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions and other administrative agencies of
the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must submit their budget proposals
to the finance officer for inclusion in the proposed City budget at such time and in such form as
required by the Council.
3. Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the completed budget proposal to
the Council no later than February 15 of each year.
4. Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may make any
adjustments it deems appropriate in the budget before accepting such proposal for publication,
hearing, and final adoption.
5. Notice of Hearing. Upon adopting a proposed budget the Council shall set a date for public
hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause notice of such hearing and a summary of the
proposed budget to be published not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days before the
date established for the hearing. Proof of such publication must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
6. Copies of Budget on File. Not less than twenty (20) days before the date that the budget
must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than ten (10) days before the public hearing,
the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number of copies of the detailed budget to meet the
requests of taxpayers and organizations, and have them available for distribution at the offices of
the Mayor and Clerk and at the City library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
7. Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt, by resolution, a
budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall certify the necessary tax levy for the next
fiscal year to the County Auditor and the County Board of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may
be less than, but not more than, the amount estimated in the proposed budget. Two copies each of
the detailed budget as adopted and of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06 BUDGET AMENDMENTS. A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal year becomes
effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and purpose specified therein until
amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
1. Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program must be prepared,
adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2[384, 388])
2. Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to another must be
prepared, adopted, and subject to protest in the same manner as the original budget.
(IAC, 545-2.3[384, 388])
3. Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to another activity
within a program must be approved by resolution of the Council.
(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])
4. Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the authority to adjust, by transfer
or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a specific activity without prior Council approval.
(IAC, 545-2.4[384, 388])
7.07 ACCOUNTING. The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the following:
1. Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained books of original entry
to provide a chronological record of cash received and disbursed.
2. General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general ledger controlling all
cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording unappropriated surpluses.
3. Checks. Two signatures are required on all City checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and
signed by two of the following officials following Council approval, except as provided by
subsection 5 hereof:
A. Mayor
B. Mayor Pro Tem
C. Treasurer (Deputy Clerk)
D. City Clerk (City Administrator)
4. Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to record receipts
by source and expenditures by program and activity as will provide adequate information and
control for budgeting purposes as planned and approved by the Council. Each individual account
shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept that receipts can be immediately and directly
compared with revenue estimates and expenditures can be related to the authorizing appropriation.
No expenditure shall be posted except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which
the expense was incurred.
5. Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize the Clerk to
issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not paid promptly would result in
loss of discount, penalty for late payment or additional interest cost. Any such payments made
shall be reported to the Council for review and approval with and in the same manner as other
claims at the next meeting following such payment. The resolution authorizing immediate payment
shall specify the type of payment so authorized and may include but is not limited to payment of
utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.
6. Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for accounting functions of
the municipally owned utilities.
7.08 FINANCIAL REPORTS. The finance officer shall prepare and file the following financial
reports:
1. Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a report showing
the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program and activity for the preceding month.
2. Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be published an annual
report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all collections and receipts, all accounts
due the City, and all expenditures, the current public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of the
City for the current fiscal year. A copy of the annual report must be filed with the Auditor of State
not later than December 1 of each year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CHAPTER 8
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
8.01 Purpose 8.06 Applications
8.02 Definitions 8.07 Approval
8.03 Period of Partial Exemption 8.08 Exemption Repealed
8.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 8.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
8.05 Limitations
8.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from property
taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of industrial real estate,
research-service facilities, warehouses, and distribution centers.
8.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year for which the
exemption is received.
2. “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for the storage of goods
that are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets. Distribution center does not mean a
building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a
manufacturer to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage
of petroleum products, or used for the retail sale of goods.
3. “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new buildings and
structures that are constructed as additions to existing buildings and structures. New construction
does not include reconstruction of an existing building or structure that does not constitute complete
replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure
unless the reconstruction of an existing building or structure is required due to economic
obsolescence and the reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for
the manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required for the
owner of the building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or process those
products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the City Council upon the
recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic Development.
4. “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings devoted primarily to
research and development activities, including (but not limited to) the design and production or
manufacture of prototype products for experimental use and corporate research services that do not
have a primary purpose of providing on-site services to the public.
5. “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse for the storage of
goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of Iowa, except that it does not mean a
building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products or from which goods are sold
at retail.
8.03 PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION. The actual value added to industrial real estate by the
new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses, and distribution centers
is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation for a period of five (5) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
CHAPTER 8 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
8.04 AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION. The amount of actual value added, which is
eligible to be exempt from taxation, shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
1. For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%)
2. For the second year, sixty percent (60%)
3. For the third year, forty-five percent (45%)
4. For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%)
5. For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)
8.05 LIMITATIONS. The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new construction
constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall not result in the assessed value
of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed value of the industrial real estate before the
start of the new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
8.06 APPLICATIONS. An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual value added
for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
1. The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with the local
assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for taxation.
2. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director of Revenue
and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the improvement, its cost, and other
information deemed necessary by the Director of Revenue.
8.07 APPROVAL. A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior approval for
eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the City Council resolves to consider such proposal,
it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing thereon. Thereafter, at least thirty (30) days after such
hearing, the City Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction
if the new construction is in conformance with City zoning. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner
to exemption from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real
estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
8.08 EXEMPTION REPEALED. When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the
exemption granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council may repeal this
chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
8.09 DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED. A property tax exemption under this chapter shall not
be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other property tax exemption
authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
CHAPTER 9 URBAN RENEWAL
CHAPTER 9
URBAN RENEWAL
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been
adopted establishing Urban Renewal Areas in the City and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
459 November 24, 1997 Carlisle Urban Renewal Project for Areas 1 and 2
604 November 23, 2009 Amended Project Area #1
605 November 23, 2009 Amended Project Area #2
658 November 11, 2013 Amended Project Area #2
659 November 11, 2013 Carlisle Urban Renewal Area #3
677 June 22, 2015 Carlisle Urban Renewal Area #3
680 July 13, 2015 Gateway Urban Renewal Area
692 December 14, 2015 Gateway Urban Renewal Area
710 August 22, 2016 Gateway Urban Renewal Area
720 May 22, 2017 Carlisle Gateway Townhomes Urban Renewal
Area
722 June 12, 2017 Repealing Ord. No. 604 Amended Urban Renewal
Area #1
CHAPTER 9 URBAN RENEWAL
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CHAPTER 10
URBAN REVITALIZATION
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted
designating Urban Revitalization Areas in the City and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED NAME OF AREA
371 May 29, 1990 Urban Revitalization Area
373 October 8, 1990 Urban Revitalization Area
CHAPTER 16
MAYOR PRO TEM
16.01 Vice President of Council 16.03 Voting Rights
16.02 Powers and Duties 16.04 Compensation
16.01 VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. The Mayor shall appoint a member of the Council as Mayor
Pro Tem, who shall serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro
Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the Mayor to perform such
duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor Pro Tem shall not have power to appoint,
employ, or discharge from employment officers or employees that the Mayor has the power to appoint,
employ, or discharge without the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.03 VOTING RIGHTS. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
16.04 COMPENSATION. If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor’s
absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or more, the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid
for that period the compensation as determined by the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s
performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 17
CITY COUNCIL
17.01 Number and Term of Council 17.04 Council Meetings
17.02 Powers and Duties 17.05 Appointments
17.03 Exercise of Power 17.06 Compensation
17.01 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of five Council members elected
at large for overlapping terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 & 376.2)
17.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not limited to
the following:
1. General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as otherwise provided by
law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
2. Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based upon population,
change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards, or create new wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
3. Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds, and audit and
allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment thereof. It shall make all
assessments for the cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement,
or repairs that may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38[1])
4. Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the construction of any
improvements, bridges, or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
5. Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts. No contract
shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 26.10)
6. Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties, term of office
and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise provided for by State law or the Code of
Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
7. Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall prescribe the
compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected City officers, but a change in the
compensation of the Mayor does not become effective during the term in which the change is
adopted, and the Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of any
elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of a regular City election.
A change in the compensation of Council members becomes effective for all Council members at
the beginning of the term of the Council members elected at the election next following the change
in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.03 EXERCISE OF POWER. The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage of a motion,
a resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
1. Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution requires a majority
vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum
of the Council. A resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on a public improvement project, or to accept public improvements
and facilities upon their completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded.
A measure that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2. Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor’s veto, the Council may
pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
3. Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become effective in one of
the following ways:
A. An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective when the
ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent effective date
is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
B. A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately upon signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
C. A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion by the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
D. If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution and the Council
repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes effective immediately
upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when the ordinance or a
summary of the ordinance is published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided
within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
E. If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment or resolution, a
resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, and an ordinance
or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is
published, but not sooner than 14 days after the date of passage, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council including a vacant seat and a
seat where the member is absent, but does not include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by
reason of a conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
17.04 COUNCIL MEETINGS. Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council and other
provisions regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06 of this Code of
Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are the following:
1. Regular Meetings. The time and place of the regular meetings of the Council shall be fixed
by resolution of the Council.
2. Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or upon the
request of a majority of the members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
3. Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
4. Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and maintain records of its
proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
5. Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the attendance of
the absent members at any regular, adjourned, or duly called meeting, by serving a written notice
upon the absent members to attend at once.
17.05 APPOINTMENTS. The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe their powers,
duties, compensation, and term of office:
1. City Clerk
2. City Attorney
3. Planning and Zoning Commission
4. Zoning Board of Adjustment
5. Cemetery Board of Trustees
6. Deputy Clerk
17.06 COMPENSATION. The salary of each Council member is $1,600.00 per year, payable in
quarterly installments of $400.00.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 18
CITY CLERK
18.01 Appointment and Compensation 18.08 Records
18.02 Powers and Duties: General 18.09 Attendance at Meetings
18.03 Publication of Minutes 18.10 Issue Licenses and Permits
18.04 Recording Measures 18.11 Notify Appointees
18.05 Publication 18.12 Elections
18.06 Authentication 18.13 City Seal
18.07 Certify Measures
18.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City
Clerk to serve at the discretion of the Council. The Clerk shall receive such compensation as established
by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
18.02 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL. The Clerk or, in the Clerk’s absence or inability to act,
the Deputy Clerk has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this Code of Ordinances, and the
law.
18.03 PUBLICATION OF MINUTES. Within fifteen (15) days following a regular or special meeting,
the Clerk shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. Such publication shall include
a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and shall show the gross amount of the claims.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
18.04 RECORDING MEASURES. The Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the
Council and record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating whether the Mayor signed,
vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether the measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])
18.05 PUBLICATION. The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments, proceedings
and official notices requiring publication as follows:
1. Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is required by this Code of
Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at least once, not less than four (4) or more than
twenty (20) days before the date of the election, hearing, or other action, unless otherwise provided
by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])
2. Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of Ordinances or law must be
in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general circulation in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])
18.06 AUTHENTICATION. The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the Clerk’s
signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
18.07 CERTIFY MEASURES. The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning district,
building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the recorder of the County
containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
18.08 RECORDS. The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following manner:
1. Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances and codes for
public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
2. Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings or documents
in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3. Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate reproductions, for at
least five (5) years except that ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and
documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption
or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least eleven (11) years following
the final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings,
records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be
maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])
4. Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any record, paper
or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be necessary to such officer in the
discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment of the
fee set by Council resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix the
seal of the City to those public documents or instruments that by this Code of Ordinances are
required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])
5. Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and petitions directed to the
Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall endorse thereon the action of the Council taken
upon matters considered in such communications and petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.09 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS. The Clerk shall attend all regular and special Council
meetings and, at the direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of committees, boards, and
commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record of the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.10 ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS. The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when
authorized by this Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued which shall show
date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of person to whom issued, term
of license or permit, and purpose for which issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.11 NOTIFY APPOINTEES. The Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or Council
to offices in the City government of their positions and the time at which they shall assume the duties of
their offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
18.12 ELECTIONS. The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance with Chapter
376 of the Code of Iowa.
18.13 CITY SEAL. The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the Clerk to all
transcripts, orders, and certificates that it may be necessary or proper to authenticate. The City seal is
circular in form, in the center of which is the word “SEAL” and around the margin of which are the words
“CITY OF CARLISLE, IOWA.”
CHAPTER 19
CITY TREASURER
19.01 Appointment 19.03 Duties of Treasurer
19.02 Compensation
19.01 APPOINTMENT. The City Clerk is the Treasurer and performs all functions
required of the position of Treasurer.
(Ord. 715 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
19.02 COMPENSATION. The City Clerk receives no additional compensation for
performing the duties of the Treasurer.
(Ord. 715 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
19.03 DUTIES OF TREASURER. The duties of the Treasurer are as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the City
in the manner provided by law and Council direction.
2. Record of Fund. Keep the record of each fund separate.
3. Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities received
by the Treasurer on behalf of the City and specify the date, from whom, and for what
purpose received.
4. Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements,
money, or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
5. Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received by the
Treasurer from special assessments.
6. Deposit Funds. Upon receipt of moneys to be held in the Treasurer’s custody
and belonging to the City, deposit the same in depositories selected by the Council.
7. Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Treasurer’s books
and certify monthly to the Council the balance of cash and investments of each fund
and amounts received and disbursed.
8. Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all
payments of interest and principal.
9. Other Duties. Perform such other duties as specified by the Council by
resolution or ordinance.
CHAPTER 19 CITY TREASURER
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CHAPTER 20
CITY ATTORNEY
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.05 Review and Comment
20.02 Attorney for City 20.06 Provide Legal Opinion
20.03 Power of Attorney 20.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
20.04 Ordinance Preparation 20.08 Prepare Documents
20.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City
Attorney to serve at the discretion of the Council. The City Attorney shall receive such compensation as
established by resolution of the Council.
20.02 ATTORNEY FOR CITY. The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all matters
affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court, tribunal, commission, or
board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all actions and proceedings when so requested by the
Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.03 POWER OF ATTORNEY. The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all appeal bonds
and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the prosecution of any cause in court,
and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.04 ORDINANCE PREPARATION. The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances that the
Council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such ordinances before their
final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.05 REVIEW AND COMMENT. The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report to the Council
giving an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances submitted to or coming under the
City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.06 PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION. The City Attorney shall give advice or a written legal opinion on
City contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by the Mayor, Council, or City
Administrator.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.07 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS. The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the
Council at the request of the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.08 PREPARE DOCUMENTS. The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts for contracts,
forms, and other writings that may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 22
PUBLIC SAFETY DIRECTOR
22.01 Director of Public Safety 22.03 General Duties
22.02 Organization
22.01 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY. The City may appoint a Public Safety Director to direct
and be responsible for the following departments: Police, Fire Service, Emergency Medical Service, and
Emergency Manager. The Council shall make the decision whether or not to appoint a Public Safety
Director. If the position is so authorized, the Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Public Safety Director,
subject to the consent of a majority of the Council. The Public Safety Director need not be a resident of the
City at the time of his or her appointment, but shall become a resident thereof within six months after the
appointment unless such residence requirement is waived by ordinance.
22.02 ORGANIZATION. If the City elects to appoint a Public Safety Director, such director shall
become the executive head of the Police and Fire Departments and the chief administrative authority of the
emergency medical services. The Public Safety Director shall report to the City Administrator, and upon
approval of the City Administrator, shall create any employment positions necessary to effectively operate
the Police, Fire, and Emergency Medical Departments.
22.03 GENERAL DUTIES. The Public Safety Director shall have jurisdiction, supervision, and control
of the administration, disposition, and discipline of the officers and members of the Police, Fire and EMS
Departments, and such other departments as directed by the Mayor, and shall have all powers and duties
connected with and incident to the supervision and control of the Police, Fire and EMS Departments,
including those identified in Chapters 30, 31 and 35 of this Code of Ordinances, except as otherwise
provided by law. The Public Safety Director shall also have the following duties and powers:
1. Be responsible for the preparation and administration of the Department’s budget;
2. Review and monitor monthly reports, expenditures, and balances;
3. Establish Departmental goals and objectives;
4. Develop rules, regulations, general orders and standard operating procedures;
5. Have the power to appoint all officers and members of the Fire Department and Police
Department (except for the Fire Chief and Police Chief) to such positions in said departments as
are established by the Council, either by special ordinance or by incorporation in the City budget,
and to fill all vacancies therein and to remove the officers and members thereof for cause, pursuant
to law, all subject to City rules and regulations; and
6. Create and maintain relations with local and civic business organizations, establish public
relations goals and objectives that are consistent with the goals and objectives of the City, and
establish and maintain a positive public image for the City.
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ?
CHAPTER 23
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
23.01 Public Library 23.07 Nonresident Use
23.02 Library Trustees 23.08 Expenditures
23.03 Qualifications of Trustees 23.09 Annual Report
23.04 Organization of the Board 23.10 Injury to Books or Property
23.05 Powers and Duties 23.11 Theft
23.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 23.12 Notice Posted
23.01 PUBLIC LIBRARY. The public library for the City is known as the Carlisle Public Library. It
is referred to in this chapter as the Library.
23.02 LIBRARY TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred to as the
Board, consists of seven resident members and up to two nonresident members. All resident members are
to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The nonresident members are to be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the County Board of Supervisors.
23.03 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES. All resident members of the Board shall be bona fide
citizens and residents of the City. The nonresident member of the Board shall be a bona fide citizen and
resident of the unincorporated County. Members shall be over the age of eighteen (18) years.
23.04 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD. The organization of the Board shall be as follows:
1. Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for six years, except to fill
vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments shall be made every two years of
one-third the total number or as near as possible, to stagger the terms.
2. Vacancies. The position of any resident Trustee shall be vacated if such member moves
permanently from the City. The position of a nonresident Trustee shall be vacated if such member
moves permanently from the County or into the City. The position of any Trustee shall be deemed
vacated if such member is absent from six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in
the case of sickness or temporary absence from the City or County. Vacancies in the Board shall
be filled in the same manner as an original appointment except that the new Trustee shall fill out
the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
3. Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.
23.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:
1. Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary, and such other
officers as it deems necessary. The City Treasurer shall serve as Board Treasurer, but shall not be
a member of the Board.
2. Physical Plant. To have charge, control and supervision of the Library, its appurtenances,
fixtures and rooms containing the same.
3. Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
4. Hiring of Personnel. To employ a Library Director, and authorize the Library Director to
employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper management of the
Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, prior to such employment, the
compensation of the Library Director, assistants, and employees shall have been fixed and approved
by a majority of the members of the Board voting in favor thereof.
5. Removal of Personnel. To remove the Library Director, by a two-thirds vote of the Board,
and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or employees for misdemeanor,
incompetence, or inattention to duty, subject however, to the provisions of Chapter 35C of the Code
of Iowa.
6. Purchases. To select, or authorize the Library Director to select, and make purchases of
books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other Library materials,
furniture, fixtures, stationery, and supplies for the Library within budgetary limits set by the Board.
7. Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents and to fix charges
therefor unless a contract for free service exists.
8. Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify, or repeal rules and regulations,
not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law, for the care, use, government and
management of the Library and the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for
violations.
9. Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds allocated for
Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by gift or otherwise for the erection
of Library buildings, and of all other moneys belonging to the Library including fines and rentals
collected under the rules of the Board.
10. Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed property, and devises
and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said property in the name of the Library; to
execute deeds and bills of sale for the conveyance of said property; and to expend the funds received
by them from such gifts, for the improvement of the Library.
11. Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the performance of conditions
on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the City by action against the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)
12. Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
13. County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements with the local
County historical association where such exists, and to set apart the necessary room and to care for
such articles as may come into the possession of the association. The Trustees are further
authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and protection of
such articles as are in their judgment of a historical and educational nature and pay for the same
out of funds allocated for Library purposes.
23.06 CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES. The Board has power to contract with other
libraries in accordance with the following:
1. Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees of free public
libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or semiprivate organization, institution of
higher learning, township, or County, or with the trustees of any County library district for the use
of the Library by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)
2. Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual consent of the
contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority vote of the electors represented by
either of the contracting parties. Such a termination proposition shall be submitted to the electors
by the governing body of a contracting party on a written petition of not less than five percent (5%)
in number of the electors who voted for governor in the territory of the contracting party at the last
general election. The petition must be presented to the governing body not less than forty (40) days
before the election. The proposition may be submitted at any election provided by law which is
held in the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
23.07 NONRESIDENT USE. The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons not residents
of the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
1. Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to nonresidents on the
same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or County, or upon payment of a special
nonresident Library fee.
2. Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other materials to be loaned
to nonresidents.
3. Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that books or other
Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
4. Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other Library
materials to nonresidents.
23.08 EXPENDITURES. All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance of
the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures shall be paid for only on orders
of the Board, signed by its President and Secretary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)
23.09 ANNUAL REPORT. The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the close
of the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the Library, the number of
books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in
the maintenance of the Library during the year, together with such further information as may be required
by the Council.
23.10 INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY. It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or
wantonly to tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper, periodical, book,
map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to the Library or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
23.11 THEFT. No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with the intent to
deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
23.12 NOTICE POSTED. There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library notices
informing the public of the following:
1. Failure to Return. Failure to return Library materials for two months or more after the date
the person agreed to return the Library materials, or failure to return Library equipment for one
month or more after the date the person agreed to return the Library equipment, is evidence of
intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the mailing by restricted
certified mail of notice that such material or equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be
taken, has been made to reclaim the materials or equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
2. Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be detained and searched
pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)

CHAPTER 24
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
24.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 24.04 Compensation
24.02 Term of Office 24.05 Powers and Duties
24.03 Vacancies
24.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The City Planning and Zoning Commission,
hereinafter referred to as the Commission, consists of seven members, five of whom are residents of the
City. The resident members shall be appointed by the Council and shall not hold any elective office in the
City government. The additional two members of the Commission are one member of the County Boards
of Supervisors, or a person designated by the Boards, and one resident of the area outside the City over
which the zoning jurisdiction of the City has been extended, both jointly appointed by the County Boards
of Supervisors of the affected counties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6, 414.23 & 392.1)
24.02 TERM OF OFFICE. The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be five years.
The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
24.03 VACANCIES. If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or otherwise, a
successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as the original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
24.04 COMPENSATION. All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except
their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
24.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and
duties:
1. Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its first regular meeting
one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all
the duties of the Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or disability.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2. Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations
governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
3. Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties and privileges
in establishing the City zoning regulations and other related matters and may from time to time
recommend to the Council amendments, supplements, changes or modifications, all as provided by
Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4. Recommendations on Improvements. The design and proposed location of public
improvements shall be submitted to the Commission for its recommendations prior to any actions
being taken by the City for the construction or placement of such improvements. Such
requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any such improvement if
the Commission, after thirty (30) days’ written notice requesting such recommendations, has failed
to file the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
5. Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivisions or resubdivisions
of land in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys,
or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to the public in the City, shall first be
submitted to the Commission and its recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
6. Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete, and exclusive authority
to expend, for and on behalf of the City, all sums of money appropriated to it and to use and expend
all gifts, donations, or payments that are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
7. Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to contract debts
beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as approved by the Council for the
present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
8. Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor and Council
of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts and disbursements and the progress of its
work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
CHAPTER 25
CEMETERY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
25.01 Purpose 25.10 Lot Valuation
25.02 Management and Control 25.11 Perpetual Care
25.03 Authority to Employ Sexton 25.12 Method of Purchase
25.04 Maintenance Contracts 25.13 Record of Ownership
25.05 Rules and Regulations 25.14 Cemetery Accounts
25.06 Cemetery Board of Trustees 25.15 Reports
25.07 Meetings 25.16 Behavior
25.08 Sexton 25.17 Cemeteries Closed
25.09 Rules of Interment
25.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of the Carlisle Municipal
Cemetery, which is a municipal cemetery under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and
which shall be operated under the provisions of Chapter 523I of the Code of Iowa and this chapter, and to
provide for the establishment of rules and regulations relative to the same.
25.02 MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL. The general management of the Carlisle Municipal
Cemetery shall be lodged in the Carlisle Cemetery Board of Trustees, who may delegate to a sexton
(superintendent) certain duties and responsibilities so as to carry out the directions of the Board of Trustees
and of the City Council, all in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances governing the operation
of the Carlisle Municipal Cemetery.
25.03 AUTHORITY TO EMPLOY SEXTON. The Cemetery Board of Trustees shall, with the consent
and approval of the City Council, have authority to employ a sexton and such additional employees as may
be necessary, and at such wages or salary as the Council may, from time to time, prescribe.
25.04 MAINTENANCE CONTRACTS. The Cemetery Board of Trustees shall, when necessary,
review contracts with third persons for upkeep, maintenance, and improvements of the Cemetery, and make
recommendations as to the purchase or payment of said services or materials to the City Council, who shall
review such recommendations and give approval to the same.
25.05 RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Cemetery Board of Trustees shall establish rules and
regulations for the use of the cemetery relating to subdivision of the cemetery into lots, capacity of each
lot, location of graves, type of plantings, monuments and markers that will be permitted for the proper and
most attractive development of the cemetery, and all matters relating to the cemetery, including egress and
ingress. The rules shall specify the cemetery’s obligations in the event that interment spaces, memorials,
or memorializations are damaged or defaced by acts of vandalism. Any veteran, as defined in Section 35.1
of the Code of Iowa, who is a landowner or who lives within the City shall be allowed to purchase an
interment space and to be interred within the cemetery.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 523I.304)
25.06 CEMETERY BOARD OF TRUSTEES. The Carlisle Municipal Cemetery Board of Trustees
shall consist of five resident members appointed by the Council for staggered five-year terms. Vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the balance of the term. The Board shall
carry out the duties outlined in this chapter, shall have the authority to elect its Chairperson and affix times
for regular meetings, and shall have the power to call special meetings in the event it is deemed necessary.
25.07 MEETINGS. All meetings of the Carlisle Municipal Cemetery Board of Trustees shall be open
to the public, and the agenda of meetings, special or regular, shall be posted within the City bulletin board
in the Carlisle City Hall at least twenty-four (24) hours before said hearing, which agenda shall include
subject matter and topics to be discussed or passed upon by said Board of Trustees, and it is prohibited that
matters beyond the agenda be discussed or acted upon without the foregoing notice.
25.08 SEXTON. The sexton recommended to and selected by the Council shall supervise interment, and
shall supervise and take proper care of the cemetery and see that no lot therein is used or occupied in
violation of this chapter, or any other rules, regulations or statutes pertaining to the same.
25.09 RULES OF INTERMENT. No deceased person shall be interred in the cemetery unless the
sexton has found that all requirements of the State, Federal, County and Municipal laws and ordinances
have been complied with. Such requirements shall include establishing the following:
1. The lot in which burial is to be made has been fully paid for or arrangement has been made
with reference to the payment of any balance that may be owed relative thereto.
2. The person arranging for such burial has a right to use such lot.
3. Such lot is not used beyond its capacity.
4. Proper record is made of the lot and age of the deceased person, and the exact location of
the grave.
A plat shall be maintained by the sexton indicating thereupon the name of the person interred, the age of
the deceased, former address, next of kin and location of the grave.
25.10 LOT VALUATION. The Carlisle Municipal Cemetery Board of Trustees shall place a value upon
all unsold lots in the cemetery, and shall record such valuation on the official map and plan of said cemetery,
which shall be kept on file and open for the public in the office of the City Clerk, who shall record the
prices for which such lots are sold. There shall be no discrimination in the sale of the lots on any basis.
There may, however, be a reduction and discount of lots from time to time, and notice thereof shall be given
by posting in the City bulletin board the reduction as determined by the City Council. There is authorized
the payment of commissions to salespersons for the sale of said lots. Said commissions may vary, as
determined by the recommendation of the Carlisle Municipal Cemetery Board of Trustees and the approval
of the City Council. All commissions shall be computed upon the net amount received after reduction for
perpetual care.
25.11 PERPETUAL CARE. There shall be established by the City a trust fund referred to as the
“Perpetual Care Trust Fund,” which fund shall be permanently maintained by the City for expenses relative
to the mowing and upkeep of the grave sites incorporated within the Carlisle Municipal Cemetery. Said
fund shall be established by deducting from any sale of lots, regardless of price, an amount of the gross
price, as heretofore established, which price shall not reflect discount. Twenty-five percent (25%) of said
amount shall then be deposited within the perpetual fund heretofore referred to, and the interest from the
earning of said perpetual care trust fund shall be devoted to the maintenance of lots, as heretofore stated.
The corpus of said account shall not be used for any purpose, and shall be maintained and deposited in a
government-guaranteed account so as to reflect the highest earnings possible.
25.12 METHOD OF PURCHASE. Any person desiring to purchase a particular lot or lots for the
purpose for which it is intended shall be permitted to do so upon payment of the price fixed for such lots,
or upon making arrangements according to rules and regulations or purchase agreements with reference to
the purchase of lots on installment plans.
25.13 RECORD OF OWNERSHIP. The sexton, on behalf of the Carlisle Municipal Cemetery, shall
keep full and complete records of ownership of all lots in the cemetery, of the burial capacities of each lot
sold or unsold, the location of each grave, and the name of the persons buried in the grave that has been or
shall be used, and the date of burial of each.
25.14 CEMETERY ACCOUNTS. The City Clerk shall keep full and detailed accounts of receipts and
expenditures on the account of the cemetery, and shall be responsible, as provided by law, for the reporting
of said monies to the City Council. Said funds are to be handled as all other funds are handled relative to
the operation of the City.
25.15 REPORTS. The Carlisle Municipal Cemetery Board of Trustees shall annually make a report of
the condition of the cemetery to the City Council, said annual report to contain recommendations with
reference to improvement, expansion, or rules and regulations. The Board of Trustees shall furnish an
annual recommendation with reference to the budgeting of funds relative thereto.
25.16 BEHAVIOR. It is unlawful to do any of the following in a cemetery:
1. Bring or have in possession, or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn,
any firecrackers, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable material, or
discharge them or throw them into any area except by permit issued by authorized City officials or
the Cemetery Board.
2. Allow dogs or other domestic animals to run free in the cemetery. All dogs or other
domestic animals shall be restrained at all times on adequate leashes.
3. Build or attempt to build a fire in any area of the cemetery. No person shall throw, or
otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars or other inflammable material within
the cemetery area or any road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
4. Enter an area posted as “Closed to the Public” or use or abet the use of any area in violation
of posted notices.
5. Engage in any loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language, or
engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace.
25.17 CEMETERIES CLOSED. No person shall enter or remain within any cemetery between the
hours of 10:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
CHAPTER 30
POLICE DEPARTMENT
30.01 Department Established 30.06 Peace Officers Appointed
30.02 Organization 30.07 Police Chief: Duties
30.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 30.08 Departmental Rules
30.04 Required Training 30.09 Summoning Aid
30.05 Compensation 30.10 Taking Weapons
30.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED. The police department of the City is established
to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
30.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Police Chief and such other law
enforcement officers and personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the
Council.
30.03 PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS. In no case shall any person be selected or
appointed as a law enforcement officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification
standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
30.04 REQUIRED TRAINING. All peace officers shall have received the minimum
training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of
employment. Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
30.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department are designated by rank and receive
such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
30.06 PEACE OFFICERS APPOINTED. The Mayor shall appoint and dismiss the Police
Chief subject to the consent of a majority of the Council.
30.07 POLICE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Police Chief has the following powers and duties
subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. General. Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or ordinance.
2. Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances, and regulations and bring all
persons committing any offense before the proper court.
3. Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the Police
Chief.
4. Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the State
Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
CHAPTER 30 POLICE DEPARTMENT
5. Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including conveyance
to detention facilities as may be required.
6. Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers, boards,
and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
7. Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the
prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
8. Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by showing
whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City ordinance, the
offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the charge.
9. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report as
well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
10. Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be
responsible for the care, maintenance, and use of all vehicles, equipment, and materials
of the department.
30.08 DEPARTMENTAL RULES. The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in
conflict with the Code of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be
necessary for the operation of the department.
30.09 SUMMONING AID. Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as
many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
30.10 TAKING WEAPONS. Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person
arrested all items that are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may have
within such person’s control, to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
[The next page is 139]
CHAPTER 31 RESERVE PEACE OFFICERS
CHAPTER 31
RESERVE PEACE OFFICERS
31.01 Establishment of Force 31.08 Compensation
31.02 Training 31.09 Benefits When Injured
31.03 Status of Reserve Officers 31.10 Liability and False Arrest Insurance
31.04 Carrying Weapons 31.11 No Participation in Pension Fund or
31.05 Supplementary Capacity Retirement System
31.06 Supervision of Officers 31.12 Bylaws, Rules and Regulations
31.07 No Reduction of Regular Force
31.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF FORCE. A force of reserve peace officers is hereby established. A
reserve peace officer is a volunteer, non-regular, sworn member of the Police Department who will serve
with or without compensation and has regular police powers while functioning as the Police Department’s
representative, and will participate on a regular basis in the agency’s activities, including those of crime
prevention and control, preservation of the peace and enforcement of the law.
31.02 TRAINING. Training for individuals appointed as reserve peace officers shall be provided by
instructors in a community college or other facility, including a law enforcement agency, selected by the
individual and approved by the law enforcement agency and the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy. All
standards and training required under Chapter 80D of the Code of Iowa constitute the minimum standards
for reserve peace officers. Upon satisfactory completion of training, the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy
shall certify the individual as a reserve peace officer. There shall be no exemptions from the personal and
training standards provided for in this chapter.
31.03 STATUS OF RESERVE OFFICERS. Reserve peace officers shall serve as peace officers on the
orders and at the discretion of the Police Chief. While in the actual performance of official duties, reserve
peace officers shall be vested with the same rights, privileges, obligations and duties as any other peace
officers, pursuant to the established policies and bylaws.
31.04 CARRYING WEAPONS. A member of the reserve force shall not carry a weapon in the line of
duty until he or she has been approved by the Council and certified by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy
Council. After approval and certification, a reserve peace officer may carry a weapon in the line of duty
only when authorized by the Police Chief.
31.05 SUPPLEMENTARY CAPACITY. Reserve peace officers shall act only in a supplementary
capacity to the regular force and shall not assume full-time duties of regular peace officers without first
complying with all the requirements of regular peace officers.
31.06 SUPERVISION OF OFFICERS. Reserve peace officers shall be subordinate to the Police Chief,
shall not serve as peace officers unless under the direction of the Police Chief, and shall wear a uniform
prescribed by the Police Chief, unless that superior officer designates alternate apparel for use when
engaged in assignments involving special investigations, civil process, court duties, jail duties and the
handling of mental patients. The reserve peace officers shall not wear an insignia of rank. The Police
Department shall appoint a regular force police officer as the reserve force coordinating and supervising
officer. The regular peace officer shall report directly to the Police Chief.
CHAPTER 31 RESERVE PEACE OFFICERS
31.07 NO REDUCTION OF REGULAR FORCE. There shall be no reduction of the authorized size
of the regular law enforcement department of the City because of the establishment or utilization of reserve
peace officers.
31.08 COMPENSATION. While performing official duties, each reserve peace officer shall be
considered an employee of the City and shall be paid a minimum of $1.00 per year. The City shall provide
uniforms and equipment used by reserve peace officers as deemed necessary by the Police Chief and
approved by the Council.
31.09 BENEFITS WHEN INJURED. Hospital and medical assistance and benefits, as provided in
Chapter 85 of the Code of Iowa, shall be provided by the Council to members of the reserve force who
sustain injury in the course of performing official duties.
31.10 LIABILITY AND FALSE ARREST INSURANCE. Liability and false arrest insurance shall
be provided by the City to members of the reserve force while performing official duties in the same manner
as for regular peace officers.
31.11 NO PARTICIPATION IN PENSION FUND OR RETIREMENT SYSTEM. This chapter
shall not be construed to authorize or permit a reserve peace officer to become eligible for participation in
a pension fund or retirement system created by the laws of the State and of which regular peace officers
may become members.
31.12 BYLAWS, RULES AND REGULATIONS. The reserve peace officer force shall adopt bylaws
for its organization and rules and regulations for its operation, all with the advice and consent of the City
Administrator and Police Chief. Said bylaws, rules, and regulations and amendments thereto shall be
effective only upon approval of the Council.
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Establishment and Purpose 35.10 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.02 Organization 35.11 Liability Insurance
35.03 Approved by Council 35.12 Calls Outside City
35.04 Training 35.13 Mutual Aid
35.05 Compensation 35.14 Authority to Cite Violations
35.06 Fire Chief Appointed 35.15 Emergency Ambulance Service
35.07 Fire Chief: Duties 35.16 EMS Fees
35.08 Obedience to Fire Chief 35.17 Fire Service Fees and Charges
35.09 Constitution 35.18 Key Vault
35.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE. A volunteer fire department is hereby
established to prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to
promote fire prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there is
no other established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02 ORGANIZATION. The department consists of the Fire Chief and such other
officers and personnel as may be authorized by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.03 APPROVED BY COUNCIL. No person having otherwise qualified shall be
appointed to the department until such appointment is submitted to and approved by a
majority of the Council members.
35.04 TRAINING. All members of the department shall meet the minimum training
standards established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in regular
or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])
35.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department shall be designated by rank and
receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.06 FIRE CHIEF APPOINTED. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of a majority of the Council. The Fire Chief shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor and may be removed by the Mayor at any time for just cause with the consent of a
majority of the Council. Once appointed, if the Chief is absent, the officer next in rank shall
be in charge and have and exercise all powers of the Chief. The Department shall elect such
other officers as their constitution and bylaws may provide.
35.07 FIRE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire
Chief by law or ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention and
the investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
2. Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits, and development
of fire emergency plans.
3. Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as
necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation, investigate the
existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other hazardous condition, or
take any other action deemed necessary in the reasonable performance of the
department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
4. Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching
a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or individual that
may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
5. Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect ropes,
guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-of-way, or private
property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent accidents or
interference with the firefighting efforts of the Fire Department, to control the scene
until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire
or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
6. Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency,
discipline, and control of the Fire Department. The members of the Fire Department
shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
7. Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire
apparatus, tools, equipment, and other property used by or belonging to the Fire
Department.
8. Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in
excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000) has occurred as a result of a fire,
or if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all
other fires causing an estimated damage of fifty dollars ($50.00) or more or
emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire Marshal’s
Division within ten (10) days following the end of the month. The report shall
indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the name of the owners and occupants of
the property at the time of the fire, the value of the property, the estimated total loss to
the property, origin of the fire as determined by investigation, and other facts,
statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
9. Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building
or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of making such
investigation or inspection that under law or ordinance may be necessary to be made
and that is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
10. Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers, or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
11. Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal, and as
provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by investigating,
preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
12. Records. Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number of
responses to alarms, their cause, and location, and an analysis of losses by value, type
and location of buildings.
13. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report of
the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as may be
requested by the Mayor or Council.
35.08 OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Chief.
35.09 CONSTITUTION. The department shall adopt a constitution and bylaws as they
deem calculated to accomplish the object contemplated, and such constitution and bylaws and
any change or amendment to such constitution and bylaws before being effective, must be
approved by the Council.
35.10 ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure the
City against liability for worker’s compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of
hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for volunteer firefighters injured in the
performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the corporate limits of the
City. All volunteer firefighters shall be covered by the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
35.11 LIABILITY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure against liability of
the City or members of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of
and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the corporate
limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)
35.12 CALLS OUTSIDE CITY. The department shall answer calls to fires and other
emergencies outside the City limits if the Fire Chief determines that such emergency exists
and that such action will not endanger persons and property within the City limits.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
35.13 MUTUAL AID. Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department
may enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. Copies
of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
35.14 AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS. Fire officials acting under the authority
of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the
Code of Iowa, for violations of State and/or local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
35.15 EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE. The department is authorized to
provide emergency ambulance or rescue services, and the accidental injury and liability
insurance provided for herein shall include such operation.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
35.16 EMS FEES. The following schedule of fees shall be imposed for all EMS calls made
by the Fire Department.
Activity Rate
A. Response with Basic Life Support transport $ 575.00*
Mileage $ 12.00 per loaded mile
B. Response with Advanced Life Support transport $ 682.00**
Mileage $ 12.00 per loaded mile
C. Response with Advanced Life Support 2 transport $ 988.00**
Mileage $ 12.00 per loaded mile
D. Response with treatment but no transport
Basic Life Support $ 200.00*
Advanced Life Support $ 200.00**
Advanced Life Support 2 $ 200.00**
E. Response with no treatment or transport No Charge
F. Care refusal No Charge
G. Tier Response $ 200.00
* = No Invasive Procedures
** = Invasive Procedures
(Ord. 696 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
35.17 FIRE SERVICE FEES AND CHARGES.
1. The following schedule of charges shall be imposed for all fire calls made by
the Fire Department, to wit:
A. Vehicle Fires.
Cars $ 150.00
Trucks and vans (less than 10,000 pounds) $ 200.00
Registered gross weight vehicles weighing more than
10,000 pounds $ 500.00
B. Grass Fires. Any fire started by the owner of the property
and who loses control of the fire (as determined by the
fire officer in charge)
First call No Charge
Second call $ 100.00
Third call and all additional calls within a calendar year $ 200.00
C. House Fires.
Any dwelling needing any type of fire suppression $ 500.00
D. Commercial Structural Fires.
Any commercial dwelling needing any type of fire
suppression $ 500.00
E. Dwelling Burned at Owner’s Request.
Any dwelling that cannot be used by CVFD as a training
opportunity $ 500.00
Any dwelling that can be used by CVFD for training
purposes $ 500.00
F. Extrication.
Use of any type of extrication tools to extract any person
or animal from a vehicle, machinery, etc. $ 150.00
2. The City will accept insurance payments as full and complete payment of the
above references charges, except for grass fires, dwellings burned at owner’s request
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
as shown in paragraphs B and E above, arson and/or insurance claim that has been
denied for some reason other than lack of coverage in the policy. Those charges
shown as an exception in this subsection will be the responsibility of the landowner.
3. The Fire Chief and City Clerk are authorized to issue invoices for such fire
services, and to collect such fees on behalf of the City and to deposit such fees in a
City Fire Equipment Trust and Agency Fund, which shall be used to purchase
equipment for the Carlisle Volunteer Fire Department or to retire debt related to the
purchase of said equipment.
4. The City of Carlisle/Carlisle Volunteer Fire Department shall only be entitled
to receive said fees if they are the primary fire department called to the scene.
5. In any township where service is provided by more than one fire department,
no invoices will be issued by the City for fire services fees until all fire departments
providing service to said township agree to bill for the above referenced fire services
fees.
35.18 KEY VAULT. All new commercial, industrial, and institutional buildings shall
install a key vault on the exterior of the building at a location determined by the Fire Chief.
The box will be installed at the building owner’s expense and will only be used by the Fire
Department to gain access to the building in an emergency. All existing commercial,
industrial, and institutional buildings shall install a key vault system any time improvements
are made to the property that require a building permit.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
[The next page is 155]
CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
36.01 Purpose 36.05 Notifications
36.02 Definitions 36.06 Police Authority
36.03 Cleanup Required 36.07 Liability
36.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs 36.08 Fees
36.01 PURPOSE. In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety, and welfare from the leaks
and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated to establish responsibility for the
treatment, removal and cleanup of hazardous substance spills within the City limits.
36.02 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify, analyze, clean up,
treat, disperse, remove, or dispose of a hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
2. “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual, imminent, or probable
spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance onto the land, into a water of the State, or into
the atmosphere which creates an immediate or potential danger to the public health or safety or to
the environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
3. “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that presents a
danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not limited to, a substance that is toxic,
corrosive, or flammable, or that is an irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition,
heat, or other means. “Hazardous substance” may include any hazardous waste identified or listed
by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the Solid Waste
Disposal Act as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic
pollutant listed under Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to
January 1, 1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section 311 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous material designated by the
Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
4. “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles, stores, uses,
transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the release of which creates a hazardous
condition, including bailees, carriers, and any other person in control of a hazardous substance
when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the person owns the hazardous substance or is
operating under a lease, contract, or other agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous
substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
36.03 CLEANUP REQUIRED. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous substance or a
constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged
into any waters, including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to be remedied
by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as feasible to an acceptable, safe condition.
The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the
cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the City
may, by an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition,
said notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City will proceed to procure
cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup if the cleanup is
not accomplished within the deadline. In the event that it is determined that immediate cleanup is necessary
as a result of the present danger to the public health, safety and welfare, then no notice shall be required
and the City may proceed to procure the cleanup and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with
the cleanup. If the bill for those services is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City Attorney shall proceed
to obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the City to finance
it, the authorized officer shall report to the Council and immediately seek any State or Federal funds
available for said cleanup.
36.04 LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS. The responsible person shall be strictly liable to the City
for all of the following:
1. The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City as a result of
the failure of the responsible person to clean up a hazardous substance involved in a hazardous
condition.
2. The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to evacuate people from
the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person.
3. The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of, or loss of City property,
including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous condition caused by that person, including
the costs of assessing the injury, destruction or loss.
4. The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents of the City in
responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused by that person.
36.05 NOTIFICATIONS.
1. A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing of a hazardous
substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources and the Police Chief of the
occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as possible but not later than six (6) hours after the
onset of the hazardous condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. The Police Chief shall
immediately notify the Department of Natural Resources.
2. Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the Police Department,
which shall then notify the Department of Natural Resources.
36.06 POLICE AUTHORITY. If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law enforcement officer
or an authorized representative may:
1. Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a hazardous condition,
and
2. Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a hazardous condition and
limit access to cleanup personnel.
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under this section.
36.07 LIABILITY. The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages, injuries, or losses
resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the responsible person as defined in Section
36.02(4).
36.08 FEES. In order to ensure that the Fire Department has adequate equipment and personnel at the
scene of a hazardous material response and to ensure a safe and successful operation, it is necessary to
establish fees to reimburse the Fire Department for said related expenses. The billing shall be to the
responsible parties that cause the hazardous material response and shall be done in a standardized manner,
with all bills being written in an invoice fashion and itemized to delineate for what purpose and how long
each matter was used. All bills shall be accompanied by an NFIRS report including a narrative. Available
items shall be billed under the following categories, to-wit:
1. Heavy Response Apparatus: Billable range approximately $125.00 to $250.00 per hour.
This figure includes four personnel. An example of a heavy response apparatus would include an
engine, ladder, heavy rescue, etc.
2. Light Response Apparatus: Billing range approximately $100.00 to $200.00 per hour.
This figure includes two personnel. An example of a light response apparatus would include a
tanker, brush truck, staff car, etc.
3. Extra Response Personnel: Billing range approximately $15.00 to $20.00 per hour. This
would fit those personnel that do not fit in the above categories.†
4. Expended Materials: Expended materials will be billed at replacement cost plus a
restocking fee of up to 15%.
5. Damaged Equipment: Equipment damaged beyond repair will be billed at current
replacement cost plus shipping.
6. Other: Other equipment usage will be billed as used (cellular phones, generators, radios,
SCBA, etc.)
† Disclaimer: Any costs that exceed the above parameter must be accompanied by an itemized
justification.
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
42.01 Trespassing 42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief 42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.07 Fire Hydrants
42.04 Unauthorized Entry 42.08 Other Public Property Offenses
42.01 TRESPASSING.
1. Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
2. Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])
A. “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle, or other
temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or privately owned.
B. “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of the Code of Iowa
or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of the Code of Iowa.
C. “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle,
or other temporary or permanent structure owned, leased, or operated by a public utility
and that is completely enclosed by a physical barrier of any kind.
D. “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person owning, leasing,
or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this State.
E. “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property owned, leased,
or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any administrative building or
offices of the railway corporation.
F. “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
(1) Entering upon or in property without the express permission of the owner,
lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to commit a public offense or
to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass, or place thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate.
(2) Entering or remaining upon or in property without justification after being
notified or requested to abstain from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by
the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or the agent or employee of the
owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate,
or public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance of the
property.
(3) Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly
interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
(4) Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom,
altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein anything animate or
inanimate, without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee, or person
in lawful possession.
(5) Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without lawful authority
or without the consent of the railway corporation which owns, leases, or operates
the railway property. This paragraph does not apply to passage over a railroad
right-of-way, other than a track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge, trestle, or
railroad yard, by an unarmed person if the person has not been notified or requested
to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-of-way and the
passage over the right-of-way does not interfere with the operation of the railroad.
(6) Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property without lawful
authority or without the consent of the public utility that owns, leases, or operates
the public utility property. This paragraph does not apply to passage over public
utility right-of-way by a person if the person has not been notified or requested by
posted signage or other means to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to
vacate the right-of-way.
3. Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
A. Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal
property which has accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown
onto the property of another, provided that the person retrieving the property takes the most
direct and accessible route to and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as
quickly as is possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has been notified
or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from entering.
B. Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
42.02 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to intentionally
damage, deface, alter, or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03 DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES. It is unlawful for a person intentionally to
deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any law of
the United States or the State, or any proclamation, advertisement or notification, set up at any place within
the City by authority of the law or by order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain
set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY. No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public
building, premises, or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or when said building, premises or
grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open to the public, a failure to pay any required
admission fee also constitutes an unauthorized entry.
42.05 FRAUD. It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in Section 714.8
of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06 THEFT. It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.07 FIRE HYDRANTS. It is unlawful for an individual or business to place a fire hydrant, either real
or fake, within ten (10) feet of the road surface. The City is exempt from this section.
42.08 OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES. The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances
contain regulations prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that are also deemed to be public
property offenses:
1. Chapter 23 – Library
A. Section 23.10 – Injury to Books or Property
B. Section 23.11 – Theft of Library Property
2. Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control and Recycling
A. Section 105.07 – Littering Prohibited
B. Section 105.08 – Open Dumping Prohibited
3. Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
A. Section 135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
B. Section 135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
C. Section 135.03 – Placing Debris On
D. Section 135.04 – Playing In
E. Section 135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
F. Section 135.08 – Burning Prohibited
G. Section 135.12 – Dumping of Snow
4. Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
A. Section 136.11 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
B. Section 136.14 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
C. Section 136.15 – Defacing
D. Section 136.16 – Debris on Sidewalks
E. Section 136.17 – Merchandise Display
F. Section 136.18 – Sales Stands
CHAPTER 43
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
43.01 Purpose 43.04 Determining Factors
43.02 Controlled Substance Defined 43.05 Possession of Drug Paraphernalia
43.03 Drug Paraphernalia Defined 43.06 Manufacture, Delivery, or Offering For Sale
43.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use, possession with intent to use,
manufacture, and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined herein.
43.02 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED. The term “controlled substance” as used in this
chapter is defined as the term “controlled substance” is defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.
43.03 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED. The term “drug paraphernalia” as used in this chapter
means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for
use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing,
containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa. It
includes, but is not limited to:
1. Growing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from
which a controlled substance can be derived.
2. Processing Kits. Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances.
3. Isomerization Devices. Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
4. Testing Equipment. Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances.
5. Scales. Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or
measuring controlled substances.
6. Diluents. Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite,
dextrose, or lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances.
7. Separators; Sifters. Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use
in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana.
8. Mixing Devices. Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended
for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances.
9. Containers. Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or
designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances.
10. Storage Containers. Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for
use in storing or concealing controlled substances.
11. Injecting Devices. Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use,
or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body.
12. Ingesting-Inhaling Device. Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing heroin, marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the
human body, such as:
A. Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without
screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;
B. Water pipes;
C. Carburetion tubes and devices;
D. Smoking and carburetion masks;
E. Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana
cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
F. Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
G. Chamber pipes;
H. Carburetor pipes;
I. Electric pipes;
J. Air driven pipes;
K. Chillums;
L. Bongs;
M. Ice pipes or chillers.
43.04 DETERMINING FACTORS. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the
purpose of enforcing this chapter, the following factors should be considered in addition to all other
logically relevant factors:
1. Statements. Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its
use.
2. Prior Convictions. Prior convictions, if any, of an owner or of anyone in control of the
object under any State or Federal law relating to any controlled substance.
3. Proximity to Violation. The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
4. Proximity to Substances. The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
5. Residue. The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
6. Evidence of Intent. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone
in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know,
intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter
124 of the Code of Iowa.
7. Innocence of an Owner. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object,
as to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa,
should not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug
paraphernalia.
8. Instructions. Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use.
9. Descriptive Materials. Descriptive materials accompanying the object explaining or
depicting its use.
10. Advertising. National and local advertising concerning its use.
11. Displayed. The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
12. Licensed Distributor or Dealer. Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is
a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or
dealer of tobacco products.
13. Sales Ratios. Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the
total sales of the business enterprise.
14. Legitimate Uses. The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
15. Expert Testimony. Expert testimony concerning its use.
43.05 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to
possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substance Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
43.06 MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY, OR OFFERING FOR SALE. It is unlawful for any person to
deliver, possess with intent to deliver, manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug
paraphernalia, intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or knowing, or under circumstances where
one reasonably should know that it will be used, or knowing that it is designed for use to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 124 of the Code of
Iowa.
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or Intoxication
45.01 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. As used in this section, “legal age” means twentyone
(21) years of age or more.
1. Social Host. A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has
control over, property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any
person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age
of eighteen, to consume or possess on such property any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer.
The provisions of this subsection do not apply to a landlord or manager of the property
or to a person under legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic liquor, wine,
or beer in connection with a religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[1A])
2. Purchase, Consume, or Possess. A person or persons under legal age shall not
purchase or attempt to purchase, consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic
liquor, wine or beer in their possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine or
beer given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a private home and with the
knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal
purposes or as administered to the person by either a physician or dentist for medicinal
purposes and except to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic
beverages, wine, and beer during the regular course of the person’s employment by a
liquor control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
3. Misrepresentation of Age. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the
person’s age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic
beverage, wine, or beer from any licensee or permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1. As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of
Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code
of Iowa.
B. “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to
determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using devices
and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
C. “Peace officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the Code
of Iowa.
D. “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public or
private school that provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten through
grade twelve.
CHAPTER 45 ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
2. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the
public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor in any
public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall not
possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer on public school property or while
attending any public or private school-related function. A person shall not be
intoxicated in a public place.
3. A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
4. When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication under
this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person may have a
chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a device approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine
the person’s blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be
offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the
results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of a
proper foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours after the
person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of
alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES. [See Section 62.01(49) and (50)
of this Code of Ordinances.]
CHAPTER 45 ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
46.01 Curfew 46.03 Contributing to Delinquency
46.02 Cigarettes and Tobacco
46.01 CURFEW. The Council has determined that a curfew for minors is necessary to promote the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City and specifically to reinforce the primary
authority and responsibility of adults responsible for minors; to protect the public from the illegal acts of
minors committed after the curfew hour; and to protect minors from improper influences and criminal
activity that prevail in public places after the curfew hour.
1. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have
their given meanings:
A. “Emergency errand” means, but is not limited to, an errand relating to a fire, a
natural disaster, an automobile accident or any other situation requiring immediate action
to prevent serious illness, bodily injury or loss of life.
B. “Home” means the minor’s dwelling place. It need not be the minor’s permanent
dwelling place.
C. “Knowingly” means knowledge which a responsible adult should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that responsible adult’s custody.
This is an objective standard. It shall, therefore, be no defense that an adult responsible for
a minor was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of the minor.
D. “Minor” means any child under the age of eighteen (18) years.
E. “Nonsecured custody” means custody in an unlocked multipurpose area, such as a
lobby, office or interrogation room which is not designed, set aside or used as a secure
detention area, and the person arrested is not physically secured during the period of
custody in the area; the person is physically accompanied by a peace officer or a person
employed by the facility where the person arrested is being held; and the use of the area is
limited to providing nonsecured custody only while awaiting transfer to an appropriate
juvenile facility or to court, for contacting of and release to the person’s parents or other
responsible adult or for other administrative purposes; but not for longer than six (6) hours
without the oral or written order of a judge or magistrate authorizing the detention. A judge
shall not extend the period of time in excess of six hours beyond the initial six-hour period.
F. “Public place” includes stores, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, streets, alleys and
sidewalks dedicated to public use; and also includes such parts of buildings and other
premises whether publicly or privately owned which are used by the general public or to
which the general public is invited commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which
the general public is permitted without specific invitation; or to which the general public
has access. For purposes of this section, a vehicle or other conveyance is considered to be
a public place when in the areas defined above.
G. “Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian or other adult specifically authorized
by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have custody or control of a minor.
H. “Unemancipated” means unmarried and still under the custody or control of a
responsible adult.
2. Curfew Established. Unless accompanied by a responsible adult, no minor under the age
of eighteen (18) years of age shall be in any public place between the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight)
and 5:00 a.m. each day.
(Ord. 670 – Sep. 14 Supp.)
3. Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the curfew:
A. The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.
B. The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or on either side
of the place where the minor resides and the adult responsible for the minor has given
permission for the minor to be there.
C. The minor is present at or is traveling between home and one of the following:
(1) Minor’s place of employment in a business, trade or occupation in which
the minor is permitted by law to be engaged or, if traveling, within one-half hour
after the end of work or within one-half hour before the beginning of work;
(2) Minor’s place of religious activity or, if traveling, within one-half hour
after the end of the religious activity or within one-half hour before the beginning
of the activity;
(3) Governmental or political activity or, if traveling, within one-half hour
after the end of the activity or within one-half hour before the beginning of the
activity;
(4) School activity or, if traveling, within one-half hour after the end of the
activity or within one-half hour before the beginning of the activity;
(5) Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration, sit-in or meeting of an
association for the advancement of economic, political, religious or cultural
matters, or for any other activity protected by the First Amendment of the U.S.
Constitution guarantees of free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, freedom
of assembly or, if traveling, within one-half hour after the end of the activity or
within one-half hour before the beginning of the activity.
D. The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible adult;
E. The minor is engaged in interstate travel through the City beginning, ending or
passing through the City when such travel is by direct route.
4. Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any responsible adult knowingly to permit or
to allow a minor to be in any public place in the City within the time periods prohibited by this
section unless the minor’s presence falls within one of the above exceptions.
5. Enforcement Procedures.
A. Determination of Age. In determining the age of the juvenile and in the absence
of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver’s license, a peace officer on the
street shall, in the first instance, use his or her best judgment in determining age.
B. Grounds for Arrest; Conditions of Custody. Grounds for arrest are that the person
refuses to sign the citation without qualification; persists in violating the ordinance; refuses
to provide proper identification or to identify himself or herself; or constitutes an
immediate threat to the person’s own safety or to the safety of the public. A law
enforcement officer who arrests a minor for a curfew violation may keep the minor in
custody either in a shelter care facility or in any non-secured setting. The officer shall not
place bodily restraints, such as handcuffs, on the minor unless the minor physically resists
or threatens physical violence when being taken into custody. A minor shall not be placed
in detention following a curfew violation.
C. Notification of Responsible Adult. After a minor is taken into custody, the law
enforcement officer shall notify the adult responsible for the minor as soon as possible.
The minor shall be released to the adult responsible for the minor upon the promise of such
person to produce the child in court at such time as the court may direct.
D. Minor Without Adult Supervision. If a peace officer determines that a minor does
not have adult supervision because the peace officer cannot locate the minor’s parent,
guardian or other person legally responsible for the care of the minor, within a reasonable
time, the peace officer shall attempt to place the minor with an adult relative of the minor,
an adult person who cares for the child or another adult person who is known to the child.
6. Penalties.
A. Responsible Adult’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the
Police Chief shall, by certified mail, send to the adult responsible for the minor, written
notice of the violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in full
enforcement of the curfew ordinance against both the responsible adult and minor, with
applicable penalties.
B. Responsible Adult’s Second Violation. Any responsible adult as defined in this
section who, following receipt of a warning, knowingly allows the minor to violate any of
the provisions of this section is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
C. Violations. For the minor’s first and subsequent violations of any of the provisions
of this section, the minor is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
7. Notice. Notice of the ordinance codified in this section and its contents may be posted in
or about such public or quasi-public places as may be designated by the Council or the Police
Department in order that the public may be constantly informed of the existence of such ordinance
and its regulations.
46.02 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO. It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age
to smoke, use, possess, purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, vapor products, or cigarettes by a person under eighteen years of age shall not constitute a
violation of this section if said person possesses the tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, or cigarettes as part of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person
who holds a valid permit under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for sale or sells
cigarettes or tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.03 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY. It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child
under eighteen (18) years of age to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.05 Nuisance Abatement
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated 50.06 Abatement of Nuisance by Written Notice
50.03 Other Conditions 50.07 Municipal Infraction Abatement Procedure
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited
50.01 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or
unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as
essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED. The following subsections include, but do not
limit, the conditions that are deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
1. Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing, or using any building or other place
for the exercise of any trade, employment, or manufacture that, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes
injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort, or property of individuals or the
public.
2. Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth, or noisome
substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
3. Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without legal
authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor, or collection of water.
4. Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water
of any river, stream, or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course
or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
5. Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by fences,
buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons,
landing places, or burying grounds.
6. Billboards. Billboards, signboards, and advertising signs, whether erected and
constructed on public or private property, that so obstruct and impair the view of any
portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad
or street railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof. (See also Section
62.06)
7. Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such as
old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such articles within the
fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof construction. (See also
Chapter 51)
8. Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes, or fly ash.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
9. Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush, or other vegetation
in the City so as to constitute a health, safety, or fire hazard. (See also Chapter 52)
10. Grasses and Weeds. Grasses and weeds on any developed lot that are allowed
to grow to a height greater than eight (8) inches, grasses and weeds on any
undeveloped lot that are allowed to grow to a height greater than twelve (12) inches,
and any growth of noxious weeds as defined in the Code of Iowa. This section does
not apply to grasses grown as agricultural crops on undeveloped property or to grasses
growing in an area declared by the City Council to be a natural woodlands area. (See
also Chapter 52)
11. Dutch Elm Disease and Emerald Ash Borer Infestation. Trees infected with
Dutch Elm Disease or Emerald Ash Borer infestation. (See also Chapter 151)
12. Vermin Harborage. Conditions that are conducive to the harborage or
breeding of vermin.
13. Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-off
and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of
the land on which the same is located.
14. Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution
and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons participating in criminal
gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code of Iowa or places resorted to by
persons using controlled substances, as defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of
Iowa, in violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or
breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
15. Businesses Adversely Impacting Nearby Areas. Businesses, the operation or
maintenance of which adversely impacts nearby residential, commercial or industrial
uses and which:
A. Jeopardizes or endangers the public health or safety, or the health or
safety of persons residing or working on the premises or in the surrounding
area;
B. Has resulted in or facilitated any of the following activities:
disturbances of the peace, illegal drug activity including sales or possession
thereof, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby,
gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults,
batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, illegal parking, excessive
noise (particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.) noxious
smells or fumes, traffic violations, or police detention, citations or arrests; or
C. Violates any other sections of this section or any other City, State, or
Federal regulation, ordinance or statute.
16. Outside Storage of Household Goods and Machinery. No furniture,
household furnishings, appliances or other such items not designed for outside use,
and no machinery, implements or other such equipment which is in an inoperable
condition, including component parts thereof, shall be stored or kept outside for a
period of more than 24 hours on any premises in a residential area.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
17. Open Storage of Construction Equipment and Materials. Operable
machinery, equipment and materials being used for construction purposes, including
pipes, lumber, forms, dirt, sand and sod, shall not be stored or kept in the open,
except:
A. For use in the ordinary course of business as the inventory or asset of
a contractor, supplier or government subdivision; or
B. On the job site of a project in progress for a period not to exceed 30
days after construction has been completed or a separate certificate of
occupancy has been issued, whichever occurs first.
18. Water Discharge. The discharge of water from a sump pump, roof, or footing
drain onto public right-of-way, sidewalk, street, or into the sanitary sewer.
50.03 OTHER CONDITIONS. The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain
regulations prohibiting or restricting other conditions that are deemed to be nuisances:
1. Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)
2. Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 145)
3. Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
4. Trees (See Chapter 151)
50.04 NUISANCES PROHIBITED. The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is
prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this
chapter or State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT. Whenever any authorized municipal officer finds that
a nuisance exists, such officer has the authority to determine on a case-by-case basis whether
to utilize the nuisance abatement procedure described in Section 50.06 of this chapter or the
municipal infraction procedure referred to in Section 50.07.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY WRITTEN NOTICE. Any nuisance, public
or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1. Contents of Notice to Property Owner. The notice to abate shall contain: †
A. Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the
nuisance.
B. Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
† EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is included in the
Appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this administrative abatement
procedure, particularly where cost of abatement is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to
whether or not a nuisance does in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings,
we recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with abatement and
assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court under Chapter 657 of the
Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
C. Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to
abate the nuisance.
D. Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
E. Assessment of City Costs. A statement that if the nuisance or
condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made within
the time prescribed, the City will abate it and assess the costs against the
property owner.
2. Method of Service. The notice may be in the form of an Ordinance, sent by
certified mail to the property owner or delivered in person by a Law Enforcement
Official. (Ord. 698 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
3. Request for Hearing. Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a
hearing with the Council as to whether a nuisance exists. A request for a hearing must
be made in writing and delivered to the Clerk within the time stated in the notice, or it
will be conclusively presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered.
The hearing will be before the Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. The
findings of the Council shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall
be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the circumstances.
4. Abatement in Emergency. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may
perform any action that may be required under this chapter without prior notice. The
City shall assess the costs as provided in subsection 6 of this section after notice to the
property owner under the applicable provisions of subsection 1 and 2, and the hearing
as provided in subsection 3.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
5. Abatement by City. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition
neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to
abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense
account shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the
City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
6. Collection of Costs. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense
incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice
to abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one
month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs shall
then be collected with, and in the same manner as, general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
7. Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement. If the amount expended to abate
the nuisance or condition exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), the City may permit
the assessment to be paid in up to ten (10) annual installments, to be paid in the same
manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited
property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
8. Failure to Abate. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall
fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and
specified in the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances.
50.07 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION ABATEMENT PROCEDURE. In lieu of the
abatement procedures set forth in Section 50.06, the requirements of this chapter may be
enforced under the procedures applicable to municipal infractions as set forth in Chapter 4 of
this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
[The next page is 261]
CHAPTER 52
WEEDS
52.01 Cutting 52.03 Natural Landscape
52.02 Costs
52.01 CUTTING. All weeds, vines, brush, or other growth that constitutes a health, safety or fire hazard
shall be cut or destroyed by the property owners as needed (to be determined by the Council or its authorized
representative, if the property owner fails to do so) but in any event, no later than May 15 of each year and
thereafter shall be cut and destroyed no later than the first day of each succeeding month through and
including October 1 of each year. In the event any property owner fails to cut or destroy weeds, vines,
brush, or other growth as above described, then a person or persons duly designated and appointed by the
Council shall destroy such weeds, vines, brush, or other growth as above described by cutting or such other
method as may be necessary to make such destruction. In the event the City destroys such weeds, vines,
brush, or other growth, any loss or damage to crops growing on the property or other damage caused to the
property shall be borne by the owners or occupants of said property and not by the City or its employees or
agents. In the event such weeds, vines, brush, or other growth cannot be destroyed by the usual and ordinary
methods because of the terrain or rough surface of the property, then the person or persons herein designated
may grade or otherwise level said property such that a proper destruction of said weeds, vines, brush, or
other growth can be accomplished. In addition to the requirements provided in this section for destruction
by the property owners as needed and monthly from May 15 through October 1, the Council or its duly
authorized representative may from time to time require the property owners to cut or destroy weeds, vines,
brush, or other growth as herein described at other times, and upon failure of the property owners to cut or
destroy such weeds, vines, brush, or other growth, then persons herein designated shall cut and destroy such
weeds, vines, brush, or other growth for and on behalf of the City and the costs shall be assessed as provided
herein. Upon completion thereof, the duly designated person or persons shall certify the costs and expenses
as provided by law against the property to be paid as required by law.
52.02 COSTS. The costs and expenses to be assessed against the property for the cutting or destroying
of weeds, vines, brush, or other growth by persons designated in Section 52.01 shall be as follows:
1. Hand crews, $22.50 per hour, minimum one hour.
2. Tractor mowers (5 to 7-foot cut), $25.00 per hour, minimum one hour.
3. Large mower (15-foot cut), $50.00 per hour, minimum $25.00 for one-half hour or less.
52.03 NATURAL LANDSCAPE.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote the use of native vegetation, including
native grasses and wildflowers, in managed yards and landscapes to allow the use of such plants in
the preservation or restoration of natural plant communities. It is not the intent of this chapter to
allow vegetated areas to be unmanaged or overgrown when such growth provides either a direct
health hazard or provides a demonstrated breeding ground for fauna known to create a safety or
health hazard. The City Council recognizes that a limited number of species may be indicators of
neglect, a condition which may adversely affect human health or safety. Below, the City has
specifically defined certain noxious weeds recognized to be indicators of neglect. The use of
wildflowers and other native plants in managed landscape design can be economical, lowmaintenance,
effective in soil and water conservation, and may preclude the excessive use of
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers. Furthermore, native vegetation and native plant
communities, on a worldwide basis, are disappearing at an alarmingly rapid rate. The City
recognizes the desirability of permitting and encouraging managed natural vegetation within the
City limits of Carlisle while maintaining public health and safety.
2. Definitions. The following plant species are defined as noxious weeds and do not come
within the protection of this chapter:
NOXIOUS WEEDS
Sonchus asper (L.) Hill Asteraceae Sow Thistle
Sorghum halepense (L.) Pers. Poaceae Johnson Grass
Ambrosia sp. Asteraceae Rag Weed
Cenchrus incertus M.A. Curtis Poaceae Grass Bur
Rumex crispus L. Polygonaceae Curly Dock
Croton capitatus Michx. Euphorbiaceae Dove Weed
Chenopodium sp. Chenopodiaceae Goosefoot
Amaranthus sp. Amaranthaceae Pig Weed
Rhus toxicodendron L. Anacardiaceae Poison Ivy
Cirsium Arvense Canada Thistle
Convolvulus Arvensis Creeping Jenny Field Bindweed
Euphorbia Esula Leafy Spurge
Ambrosia Artemisifolia Ragweed
Psilostachya Ragweed
Trifida Ragweed
English Charlock Wild Mustard
Marijuana
Goatsbeard
Field Dodder
Indian Mustard
Oxeye Daisy
Harmful Barberry
Bull Thistle
Conyza canadensis (L.) Cronq. Asteraceae Horse Weed
The term “managed,” as used in this section, means a planned and designed yard or landscape with
the intent to control, direct, and maintain the growth of natural vegetation.
3. Managed Natural Landscaping. It is lawful to grow native and naturalized plants to any
heights, including ferns, wildflowers, grasses, forbs, shrubs, and trees, in a managed landscape
design, as long as said plants were not obtained in violation of local, State, or Federal laws. All
managed natural landscapes are subject to the prior approval of the City Council. No employee of
the City may undertake to damage, remove, burn, or cut vegetation on a managed natural landscape
incorporating native plants, except those specifically prohibited herein, and except on order of the
City Council following a hearing at which it is established that noxious weeds exist in a managed
natural landscape and that a condition creating a clear and present hazard to public health or safety
has arisen. An action for a City Council order under this subsection shall provide that the
destruction, cutting, or removal of vegetation shall be selective unless general cutting, destruction,
or removal is necessary to eliminate the offending condition.
4. Statements of Intent.
A. If a complaint is filed by a citizen or the City against a piece of property, the burden
of proof lies with the complainant to establish that a health or safety hazard in fact exists.
Natural landscapes shall be assumed to be harmless, until proven otherwise.
B. This section shall be proactively and uniformly enforced, and shall apply to all
property not specifically exempted within the City limits.
C. Aesthetic judgments shall not be a consideration or play any role in determining
noncompliance or compliance with this section.
D. The City shall notify the property owners of their rights of appeal.
E. It shall not be the policy of the City to enter upon private land and to destroy
property thereon without due process of law.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
-285-
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions 55.10 Owner’s Duty
55.02 Animal Neglect 55.11 Confinement
55.03 Livestock Neglect 55.12 Impoundment
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.13 Dangerous Animals
55.05 Livestock 55.14 Location of Kennels
55.06 At Large Prohibited 55.15 Traps Prohibited
55.07 Damage or Interference 55.16 Animal Excreta
55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance 55.17 Pet Awards Prohibited
55.09 Rabies Vaccination
55.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1. “Advertise” means to present a commercial message in any medium including
but not limited to print, radio, television, sign, display, label, tag or articulation.
2. “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
3. “Animal at large” means an animal running or found within the City upon any
street, alley, sidewalk, public or private ground. An animal shall not be deemed at
large if:
A. It is on the premises of its owner or upon the premises of either its
owner or a person consenting to its presence.
B. It is under the control of a person, competent to restrain and control
the animal either by leash, cord, chain or similar restraints not more than six
(6) feet in length, or properly restrained within a motor vehicle.
C. It is properly housed in a veterinary hospital or registered kennel.
D. It is accompanied by or at heel beside or obedient to the commands of
the owner or a person capable of controlling the animal or carried by a
competent person capable of controlling and restraining the animal.
4. “Business” means any enterprise relating to any of the following:
A. The sale or offer for sale of goods or services.
B. A recruitment for employment or membership in an organization.
C. A solicitation to make an investment.
D. An amusement or entertainment activity.
5. “Dangerous animal” means any animal that:
A. Without provocation causes a serious injury to a person or domestic
animal; or
B. Has been designated as a potentially dangerous animal and engages in
behavior that poses a threat to public safety as defined in subparagraph (1)(a)
of this paragraph or serious injury as defined in subparagraph (1)(b) of this
paragraph.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
-286-
(1) “Potentially dangerous animal” means an animal that may
reasonably be assumed to pose a threat to public safety as
demonstrated by any of the following behaviors:
a. Without provocation causes an injury to a person or
domestic animal on public or private property that is less
severe than a serious injury;
b. Without provocation, chases or approaches a person,
a domestic animal, or a wheeled conveyance upon the streets,
sidewalks, or any public or private property, in an apparent
attitude of attack; or has a known propensity, tendency, or
disposition to attack, causing injury or otherwise threatening
the safety of humans or domestic animals;
c. Without provocation acts in a highly aggressive
manner within a fenced yard or enclosure and appears, to a
reasonable adult, able to jump over or escape;
d. Acts in a highly aggressive manner within a fenced
yard/enclosure and appears to a reasonable person able to
jump over or escape; or
(2) “Serious injury” means any physical injury incurred by an
animal that results in a major bone fracture, muscle tears, disfiguring
lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective surgery or
cosmetic surgery.
C. Has been designated as a dangerous animal, potentially dangerous
animal or serious injury by another jurisdiction.
6. “Fair” means any of the following:
A. The annual fair and exposition held by the Iowa State Fair Board
pursuant to Chapter 173 of the Code of Iowa or any fair event conducted by a
fair under the provisions of Chapter 174 of the Code of Iowa.
B. An exhibition of agricultural or manufactured products.
C. An event for operation of amusement rides or devices or concession
booths.
7. “Game” means a “game of chance” or “game of skill” as defined in Section
99B.1 of the Code of Iowa.
8. “Kennel” means a facility designed to commercially breed, board or house
animals for a fee. (Ord. 727 – Aug. 17 Supp.)
9. “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine, ovine
or porcine species, ostriches, rheas and emus; farm deer as defined in Section 170.1 of
the Code of Iowa; or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
10. “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an
animal.
11. “Pet” means a living dog, cat, or an animal normally maintained in a small
tank or cage in or near a residence, including but not limited to a rabbit, gerbil,
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
-287-
hamster, mouse, parrot, canary, mynah, finch, tropical fish, goldfish, snake, turtle,
gecko, or iguana.
55.02 ANIMAL NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in any
place, an animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during confinement with a
sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined dog or cat with adequate
shelter, or to torture, deprive of necessary sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by
any means that causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
55.03 LIVESTOCK NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines
livestock in any place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary
animal husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary sustenance or to injure or
destroy livestock by any means that causes pain or suffering in a manner inconsistent with
customary animal husbandry practices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.2)
55.04 ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS. A person who has ownership or
custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat
or dog to another person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the
cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
55.05 LIVESTOCK. It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City, except a
person may keep up to three (3) horses on a lot of ten (10) acres or more.
(Ord. 727 – Aug. 17 Supp.)
55.06 AT LARGE PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to run
at large within the corporate limits of the City. The owner of said animal shall pay the sum of
$25.00 for a first offense, a fine in the sum of $50.00 for the second offense and a fine in the
sum of $75.00 for a third and subsequent offense. (Ord. 688 – Mar. 16 Supp.)
55.07 DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE. It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to
allow or permit such animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to,
or interference with, the premises.
55.08 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE. It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow
or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person by frequent and
habitual howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise, or by running after or chasing persons,
bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles. The owner of said dog shall pay the sum of $25.00
for a first offense, a fine in the sum of $50.00 for the second offense and a fine in the sum of
$75.00 for a third and subsequent offense. (Ord. 688 – Mar. 16 Supp.)
55.09 RABIES VACCINATION. Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination
for such animal. It is unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s
possession, six months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies. Dogs
kept in State or Federally licensed kennels and not allowed to run at large are not subject to
these vaccination requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
-288-
55.10 OWNER’S DUTY. It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat, or other animal that
has bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or attack to report
this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty of physicians and
veterinarians to report to the local board of health the existence of any animal known or
suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
55.11 CONFINEMENT. If a local board of health receives information that an animal has
bitten a person or that a dog or animal is suspected of having rabies, the board shall order the
owner to confine such animal in the manner it directs. If the owner fails to confine such
animal in the manner directed, the animal shall be apprehended and impounded by such board,
and after ten (10) days the board may humanely destroy the animal. If such animal is returned
to its owner, the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a
police service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the performance
of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.12 IMPOUNDMENT. It is the duty of the City, through its agents or police force, to
apprehend any animal found at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter and, upon
apprehension, such animal shall be impounded in the City pound or other suitable place
provided for by the City. Upon receiving of any such animal, it shall be the duty of the City to
attempt to ascertain the owner or custodian of said animal and to notify said owner or
custodian at the earliest opportunity; and, in the event that said owner cannot be located, the
duly authorized representative of the City shall post for seven (7) days upon the City bulletin
board a description of the animal in question and the place and time of taking. The owner of
any animal so impounded may reclaim such animal upon furnishing the proof of vaccination
and all costs and charges incurred by the City for impounding and maintenance of said
animals, and in addition thereto, for the first offense shall pay the sum of $25.00, for the
second offense the sum of $50.00, for the third offense the sum of $75.00 and in the event that
there is a fourth offense, the animal in question may be deemed a nuisance and destroyed, or
in the alternative, $100.00 shall be paid.
55.13 DANGEROUS ANIMALS. It is the duty of all owners or custodians of animals
known to be dangerous to protect the public from the same; that is, to confine the animal in
question in such a manner so as to prevent said animal from having access or contacting any
other animal or person on or off the premises of the owner or keeper. It is further the duty of a
person harboring a known dangerous animal to post the premises occupied by said animal or
animals with a printed warning of the danger, said sign to be posted in a conspicuous place so
that persons entering said premises shall be so warned. No animal designated by another
jurisdiction as a dangerous animal shall be allowed in the City limits. If it has been
determined that an animal designated as a dangerous animal by another jurisdiction is located
in the City limits, the police or other authorized officers of the City are authorized to
immediately impound the animal pursuant to Section 55.12 of the Code and cite the owners or
custodians of said animal.
55.14 LOCATION OF KENNELS. No kennel, as defined herein, shall be located within
300 feet of any residence within the City.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
-289-
55.15 TRAPS PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person to rig, set, or maintain any
steel-jaw leg hold trap, humane trap (Conibear) snare or box-type trap within that portion of
the corporate limits south of the North River of the City. Upon application to the City
Council, and after review of said application, the Council may permit the use of box-type
(“have a heart”) traps to capture animals or fowl, to be removed from the City by designated
public officials charged with the responsibility for the care, keeping or destruction of said
animal or fowl.
55.16 ANIMAL EXCRETA. The owner or custodian of any animal is responsible for the
immediate removal of any excreta deposited by said animal on any public walk, park,
boulevard, recreation area, or other public right-of-way, or on any private property outside the
owner’s or custodian’s own property. The owner or custodian of any animal is responsible for
the removal of any excreta deposited by said animal in any kennel or any other location on the
owner’s or custodian’s property. The owner of said animal shall pay the sum of $25.00 for a
first offense, a fine in the sum of $50.00 for the second offense and a fine in the sum of $75.00
for a third and subsequent offense. (Ord. 688 – Jan. 16 Supp.)
55.17 PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
1. Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise that a pet
may be awarded as any of the following:
A. A prize for participating in a game.
B. A prize for participating in a fair.
C. An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
D. An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care or disposition of the pet.
2. Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
A. A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
B. Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of
America; the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated
with outdoor recreation, hunting or fishing, including but not limited to the
Iowa Sportsmen’s Federation.
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
60.01 Title 60.05 Traffic Accidents: Reports
60.02 Definitions 60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic 60.08 Parades Regulated
60.01 TITLE. Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited as the
“Carlisle Traffic Code.”
60.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by State law, such
definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by reference. Those definitions so
adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the
following meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
1. “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway when fifty
percent (50%) or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is
occupied by buildings in use for business.
2. “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise
or passengers.
3. “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make
arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
4. “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty percent (40%) or more of the
frontage on such a highway for a distance of three hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by
dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.
5. “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway for a distance
of two hundred (200) feet in either direction from a schoolhouse.
6. “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers.
7. “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
8. “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily,
whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control sign or signal.
9. “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in the business, school,
or residence districts.
10. “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent
with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding
traffic.
11. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley.
60.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. Provisions of this Traffic Code and State law
relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
60.04 POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC. A peace officer or, in the absence of a peace officer, any
officer of the Fire Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as
conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
60.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS. The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the
limits of the City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa Department of Transportation. A
copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject
to the provisions of Section 321.271 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06 PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY. A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require
exhibition of the driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of traffic violation, to
inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, log book,
bills of lading or other manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment, or to inspect the registration
certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order, or permit of such vehicle. A peace officer having
probable cause to stop a vehicle may require exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card
issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07 OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate
traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08 PARADES REGULATED. No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as
provided herein:
1. “Parade” Defined. “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or vehicles
organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or manner or any march
or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to the public as a parade.
2. Permit Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a written permit
from the Police Chief. Such permit shall state the time and date for the parade to be held and the
streets or general route therefor. Such written permit granted to the person organizing or sponsoring
the parade shall be permission for all participants therein to parade when such participants have
been invited by the permittee to participate therein. No fee shall be required for such permit.
3. Parade Not a Street Obstruction. Any parade for which a permit has been issued as herein
required, and the persons lawfully participating therein, shall not be deemed an obstruction of the
streets notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.
4. Control by Police and Firefighters. Persons participating in any parade shall at all times
be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the performance of their duties of law enforcement
personnel and members of the Fire Department.
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
61.01 Installation 61.04 Standards
61.02 Crosswalks 61.05 Compliance
61.03 Traffic Lanes
61.01 INSTALLATION. The Police Chief shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control
devices when and as required under this Traffic Code or under State law or emergency or temporary traffic
control devices for the duration of an emergency or temporary condition as traffic conditions may require
to regulate, guide or warn traffic. The Police Chief shall keep a record of all such traffic control devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.02 CROSSWALKS. The Police Chief is hereby authorized, subject to approval of the Council by
resolution, to designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control devices at intersections
where, due to traffic conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or roadway, and
at such other places as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.03 TRAFFIC LANES. The Police Chief is hereby authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street
pavements at such places as traffic conditions require, consistent with this Traffic Code. Where such traffic
lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle
within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to
making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.04 STANDARDS. Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The Manual of
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
61.05 COMPLIANCE. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic control
device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
peace officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under Section
321.231 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
CHAPTER 63 SPEED REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
63.01 General 63.04 Special Speed Zones
63.02 State Code Speed Limits 63.05 Minimum Speed
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries, and Parking Lots 63.06 Penalties for Excessive Speed
63.01 GENERAL. Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a careful and
prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic,
surface and width of the street and of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle
on any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, such driver having the right to assume, however, that all persons using said street will
observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02 STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS. The following speed limits are established in Section 321.285
of the Code of Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated otherwise in
this chapter as a special speed zone.
1. Business District – twenty (20) miles per hour.
2. Residence or School District – twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
3. Suburban District – forty-five (45) miles per hour.
63.03 PARKS, CEMETERIES, AND PARKING LOTS. A speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour
in any public park, cemetery, or parking lot, unless specifically designated otherwise in this chapter, is
unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04 SPECIAL SPEED ZONES. In accordance with requirements of the Iowa Department of
Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation that any speed limit listed in Section 63.02 is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under
the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the City street system,
the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance such higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable
and safe at such location. The following special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
1. Special 25 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. From a point 500 feet southwest of Bellflower Drive and to the intersection of Iowa
Highway 5.
2. Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour is
unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. From a point 1,000 feet southwest of Bellflower Drive to a point 500 feet southwest
of Bellflower Drive.
CHAPTER 63 SPEED REGULATIONS
63.05 MINIMUM SPEED. A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
63.06 PENALTIES FOR EXCESSIVE SPEED. The following are hereby adopted as penalties for
excessive speed as stated:
1. Excessive Speed - Zones 55 M.P.H. or Less.
A. 1 – 5 over $ 20.00
B. 6 – 10 over $ 40.00
C. 11 – 15 over $ 80.00
D. 16 – 20 over $ 90.00
E. 20 mph over, plus $5.00 each mile $ 100.00
2. Excessive Speed - Zones Greater Than 55 M.P.H.
A. 1 – 5 over $ 20.00
B. 6 – 10 over $ 40.00
C. 11 – 15 over $ 80.00
D. 16 – 20 over $ 90.00
E. 20 mph over, plus $5.00 each mile $ 100.00
3. Excessive Speed - Road Work Zones.
A. 1 – 10 over $ 150.00
B. 11 – 20 over $ 300.00
C. 21 – 25 over $ 500.00
D. Greater than 25 over $1,000.00
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.02 U-Turns
64.01 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection
shall do so as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2. Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest
the centerline thereof and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to depart
from the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered.
3. Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that
portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of
such centerline where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way
street shall be made by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon leaving
the intersection.
The Police Chief may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and
thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions require, that a different course from that specified above be
traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of
a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons
or signs.
64.02 U-TURNS. It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection; however, U-turns
are prohibited within the business district, at the following designated intersections and at intersections
where there are automatic traffic signals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
1. At the intersection of First Street and School Street.
CHAPTER 66 LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
66.01 Temporary Embargo 66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Route
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
66.01 TEMPORARY EMBARGO. If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be seriously damaged or
destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by the signs, no such vehicles shall be
operated on streets so designated by such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)
66.02 PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT. The Police Chief may, upon application and
good cause being shown, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load exceeding the maximum specified by State
law or the City over those streets or bridges named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City
and for which the City is responsible for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)
66.03 LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no
person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at any
time upon any of the following streets or parts of streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475)
– NONE –
66.04 LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES. Where it has been determined that any City bridge has a capacity
less than the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street serving the bridge, the Police
Chief may cause to be posted and maintained signs on said bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the
entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits. No person shall drive upon said bridge any
vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
66.05 TRUCK ROUTE. Truck route regulations are established as follows:
1. Truck Routes Designated. Every motor vehicle weighing five (5) tons or more, when
loaded or empty, having no fixed terminal within the City or making no scheduled or definite stops
within the City for the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon the following
streets within the City and none other:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
A. Iowa State Highway No. 5.
B. First Street from Iowa State Highway No. 5 to Vine Street.
C. Vine Street from First Street to Garfield Street.
D. School Street from Garfield Street to the east corporate limits.
CHAPTER 66 LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
E. Garfield Street from Iowa State Highway No. 5 to School Street.
2. Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any motor vehicle weighing five (5) tons or more, when
loaded or empty, having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the City for
the purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the designated routes set out in this
section to the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or unload
and return, by the most direct route to its point of departure from said designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
3. Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing or otherwise
directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly permit the operation of such
vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
4. Posting. The City shall post the prohibitions and limitations herein referred to by
appropriate signposts upon the heavy vehicle (truck) routes herein referred to; said posting may use
the designation “Truck Route,” which shall be considered synonymous with the term “heavy
vehicle route.”
5. Restriction. This section shall not apply to “implements of husbandry” as defined in
Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa, and amendments thereto.
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking 67.04 Use of Sidewalks
67.01 WALKING IN STREET. Pedestrians shall at all times when walking on or along a street, walk
on the left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02 HITCHHIKING. No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the purpose of
soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03 PEDESTRIAN CROSSING. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within
a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04 USE OF SIDEWALKS. Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk
along and upon an adjacent street.
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED. Upon the following streets and alleys, vehicular traffic,
other than permitted cross traffic, shall move only in the indicated direction when appropriate signs are in
place.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[4])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 291 -
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Park Adjacent to Curb 69.09 Parking Limited – School Zones
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb – One-Way Street 69.10 Parking Limited to Two Hours
69.03 Angle Parking 69.11 Truck Parking Prohibited
69.04 Angle Parking – Manner 69.12 Parking Prohibited During Snow Emergency
69.05 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal 69.13 Fire Lanes
69.06 Parking Prohibited 69.14 Parking Signs Required
69.07 Persons With Disabilities Parking 69.15 Municipal Parking Lots
69.08 No Parking Zones 69.16 Trailer Parking and Use
69.01 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a
roadway or right of way other than parallel with the edge of the roadway or right of way,
headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway or right of way, except
as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand side
of one-way streets. (Ord. 701 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.02 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB – ONE-WAY STREET. No person shall stand or
park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a one-way street other than parallel with the edge of the
roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of
the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as
hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03 ANGLE PARKING. Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following
locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
1. Third Street on the west side from Market Street north 150 feet.
2. Market Street on the north side from Third Street west 150 feet.
3. Fourth Street on the west side from School Street north 150 feet.
4. Fourth Street on the west side from School Street to Main Street.
69.04 ANGLE PARKING – MANNER. Upon those streets or portions of streets that have
been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at
an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated by
such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle or the load thereon, when said vehicle is
parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance
of sixteen (16) feet when measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.05 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL. No person shall park a
vehicle upon public property for more than 48 hours, unless otherwise limited under the
provisions of this chapter, or for any of the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 292 -
1. Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
2. Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
3. Advertising. Displaying advertising.
4. Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly
established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code of
Ordinances.
69.06 PARKING PROHIBITED. No one shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])
2. Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
3. Mailboxes. Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a mailbox that is so
placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
4. Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])
5. Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])
6. Intersection. Within an intersection or within ten (10) feet of an intersection
of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
7. Fire Hydrant. Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])
8. Stop Sign or Signal. Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])
9. Railroad Crossing. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])
10. Fire Station. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])
11. Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 293 -
12. Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])
13. Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when standing
or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic
conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be painted with a yellow color and
erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
14. Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings. A space of fifty (50) feet is
hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium, hotel
having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab
stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people are
being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall
be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or
freight, and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15. Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or
park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to
any abutting property. The provisions of this subsection do not apply to a vehicle
parked in any alley that is eighteen (18) feet wide or less, provided that said vehicle is
parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
A. Parking shall be allowed in the north eight (8) feet of the sixteen (16)
foot alley lying north of and adjacent to 630 Market Street and 620 Market
Street. (Ord. 695 – Mar. 16 Supp.)
16. Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private
property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
17. Area Between Lot Line and Curb Line. That area of the public way not
covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line, where curbing
has been installed.
18. In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any part of
the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the markings
designating such space.
19. Yards. No person shall park a motor vehicle (defined as a self-propelled
rubber-tired conveyance primarily operated on highways) in a yard other than in that
area commonly referred to as a driveway. Said driveway shall be surfaced with an
asphaltic or Portland cement binder pavement, asphaltic seal coat, crushed rock or
gravel, brick, or such other surface, as shall be approved by the City Engineer so as to
provide a durable and dustless surface, and shall be so graded and drained as to
properly dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area. For each
residentially zoned lot abutting a street, not more than 24 feet in width of the driveway
can be used for parking where there is no garage, a one-car garage or a two-car garage
and not more than 36 feet in width of the driveway can be used for parking where
there is a three-car or larger garage. If existing parking in the driveway area is less
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 294 -
than 24 feet in width where there is no garage, a one-car garage or a two-car garage or
less than 36 feet in width where there is a three-car or larger garage at the time of the
adoption of Ordinance No. 652, the parking may be expanded to 24 feet in width
where there is no garage, a one-car garage or a two-car garage and 36 feet in width
where there is a three-car or larger garage. A 24-foot driveway, where there is less
than a three-car garage, may be expanded up to 36 feet, provided the expanded area is
between the existing driveway and the side lot line and not in front of the residence
and provided the design meets line of sight and vision clearance requirements. In no
case shall a residential driveway be wider than 24 feet at the right-of-way property
line, nor shall the approach be wider than 30 feet with 3:1 flares at the curb cut line.
20. Yellow Curb. In front of a yellow curb.
69.07 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING. The following regulations shall
apply to the establishment and use of persons with disabilities parking spaces:
1. Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be established
and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa and Iowa
Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish any on-street
persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining Council approval.
2. Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of a
persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code of
Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
A. Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit;
B. Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities
parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being
transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa;
C. Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section
321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
3. Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a wheelchair
parking cone in violation of the following:
A. A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must
comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A(1) of the Code of Iowa
when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
B. A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone that is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A(1) of the Code of
Iowa.
69.08 NO PARKING ZONES. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the
following specifically designated no parking zones except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a peace officer or traffic control
signal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
1. North First Street on both sides from Main Street to 161 feet south of Elm
Street.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 295 -
2. North First Street on the east side from 161 feet south of Elm Street to Park
Street.
3. North First Street on both sides from Park Street to north City limit.
4. South First Street on the west side from Vine Street to Highway 5.
5. South First Street on the east side from Highway 5 north 374 feet.
6. South Second Street on the east side from Ash Street to Poplar Street.
7. South Second Street on both sides from Highway 5 to Ash Street.
8. North Second Street on the west side from School Street to Park Street.
9. North Third Street on the east side from School Street to Pennsylvania Street.
10. North Fourth Street on the east side from Market Street to Elm Street.
11. North Fourth Street on the east side from School Street to Market Street.
12. North Fifth Street on the east side from Elm Street to Pennsylvania Street.
13. North Fifth Street on the west side from School Street to Valley Drive.
14. School Street on the south side from South Garfield Street east to the railroad
tracks.
15. North Fifth Street on both sides from Pennsylvania Street to Lexington Street.
16. North Fifth Street on the west side from Lexington Street to Ridge Road.
17. South Fifth Street on the east side from School Street for a distance of 66 feet
south from the intersection and from Highway 5 for a distance 63 feet north from the
intersection.
18. South Fifth Street on both sides from Highway 5 to 90 feet south of Ash
Street.
19. South Fifth Street on the west side from School Street to Highway 5.
20. South Fifth Street on the east side from 90 feet south of Ash Street to Linden
Street.
21. South Fifth Street on both sides from Linden Street to 165 feet south of
Linden Street.
22. South Fifth Street on the east side from 165 feet south of Linden Street to 151
feet north of John Goodhue Road.
23. South Fifth Street on both sides from 151 feet north of John Goodhue Road to
122 feet south of John Goodhue Road.
24. South Fifth Street on the east side from 122 feet south of John Goodhue Road
to south City limit.
25. North Sixth Street on the east side from School Street to Market Street.
26. North Sixth Street on the east side Terrace Drive to Ridge Road.
27. North Sixth Street on the west side from Market Street to Elm Street.
28. North Seventh Street on the west side from School Street to Market Street.
29. North Eighth Street on the east side from School Street to Elm Street.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 296 -
30. South Eighth Street on both sides from Highway 5 to School Street.
31. South Eighth Street on the east side from Highway 5 to Ash Street.
32. North Ninth Street on the east side from Market Street to Terrace Drive.
33. North Ninth Street on the west side for 35 feet back north from Market Street.
34. Ash Street on the north side from South Eighth Street to east end of Ash Street.
35. Circle Drive on the south and east sides from Pennsylvania Street to North
First Street.
36. Columbia Street on the south side from Railroad Street to North Third Street.
37. Crescent Drive on the east and north sides from Market Street to Pleasant
Street.
38. Crescent Drive on the west side for 30 feet back north from Market Street.
39. Crestview Drive on the east side from John Goodhue Road to dead end.
40. East School Street on the south side from railroad tracks to east City limits.
41. Elm Street on the north side from Railroad Street to North Third Street and
Elm Street on the south side from Railroad Street to a point 100 feet west of Railroad
Street and from a point 85 feet east of North First Street to North Third Street.
42. Elm Street on the south side from North Third Street to North Ninth Street.
43. Fleming Road on the east and south sides from Pleasant Street to Crescent
Drive.
44. Grant Street on both sides the entire length east to west, except for off-street
parking areas.
45. Hardin Drive on the east side from John Road Drive to Patterson Drive.
46. Jefferson Avenue on the west side from East School Street to the dead end.
47. John Clinton Drive on the east side from Ash Street to Linden Street.
48. John Goodhue Road on the north side from South Fifth Street to the dead end.
49. John Goodhue Road on the south side for 30 feet back west from South Fifth
Street.
50. Lexington Street on the south side from North Fifth Street to the dead end.
51. Lexington Street on the north side for 50 feet back west from North Fifth
Street.
52. Lindhardt Road on the west side from School Street to dead end.
53. Linden Street on the south side from South Fifth Street to John Clinton Drive.
54. Linden Street on the north side for 30 feet back east from South Fifth Street.
55. Main Street on the south side from North Garfield Street to Lindhardt Road.
56. Market Street on the north side from Garfield Street to Seventh Street except
for off-street parking in front of 225, 305 and 315 Market Street.
57. Market Street on both sides from North Seventh Street to Highway 5.
58. Market Street on the south side for 30 feet back west from North Fifth Street.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 297 -
59. North Garfield Street on the west side from Elm Street to Park Street.
60. North Garfield Street on both sides from 150 feet north of School Street to
Market Street.
61. Park Street on the north and east sides from North First Street to Circle Drive.
62. Park Street on the south side from Railroad Street to North First Street.
63. Parkview Lane on the south side from John Goodhue Road to Sunset Drive.
64. Patterson Drive on the south side full length east to west.
65. Pennsylvania Street on the north side from Railroad Street to North Third
Street.
66. Pennsylvania Street on both sides from North Third Street to North Fifth
Street.
67. Pennsylvania Street on the south side from North Fifth Street to dead end.
68. Pleasant Street on the south and west sides from Market Street to Crescent
Drive. and on the east side from Crescent Drive north to the end of Pleasant Street.
69. Popular Street on the south side from South Second Street to John Clinton
Drive.
70. Ridge Road on both sides from North Fifth Street to North Sixth Street.
71. School Street on the south side from First Street to Second Street.
72. School Street on both sides from North Fifth Street, except for the off-street
parking in the 400 block of School Street.
73. School Street on the north side from North Fifth Street to North Eighth Street.
74. School Street on both sides from North Eighth Street to Highway 5.
75. Stuart Street on the north side from North Fifth Street to North Ninth Street.
76. Sunset Drive on the east side from Parkview Lane to dead end.
77. Terrace Drive on the south and east sides from North Ninth Street to North
Sixth Street.
78. Valley Drive on the south side from North Third Street to North Eighth Street.
79. Vine Street on the south side from South First Street to South Garfield Street.
80. South Garfield Street on the west side from 80 feet south of School Street to
Highway 5.
81. Highland Drive on the south side from South Fifth Street to South Fourth
Street.
82. South Fourth Street on the west side from Highland Drive to Patterson Drive.
83. Patterson Drive on the north side from South Fourth Street to South Fifth
Street.
84. Old Highway 5 on the south side from Eighth Street west for a distance of 120
feet.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 298 -
85. Old Highway 5 on the south side from a point 10 feet east of School Street,
west to Market Street, except for the concrete off-street parking located directly south
and across from the Casey’s General Store location on Old Highway 5.
86. Old Highway 5 on the north side from Eighth Street west to a point 200 feet
west of Scotch Ridge Road.
87. Old Highway 5 on the north side from Market Street east for a distance of 100
feet.
88. South Fifth Street on the west side from 165th Place north to a point 400 feet
south of Patterson Drive.
89. South Fifth Street on the west side from a point 155 feet south of Patterson
Drive south for a distance of 30 feet.
90. North Garfield Street on the east side from School Street to Grant Street.
91. North Garfield Street on the west side from School Street north for a distance
of 42 feet.
92. School Street on the north side from First Street west for a distance of 62 feet.
93. Woodland Drive on both sides.
94. Main Street on the north side from Second Street east for a distance of 90 feet.
95. Bellflower Drive on the south and east sides from Scotchridge Road to Blue
Stem Drive. (Ord. 693 – Mar. 16 Supp.)
69.09 PARKING LIMITED – SCHOOL ZONES. It is unlawful to park any vehicle,
except for official school district vehicles, on each weekday on the following designated
streets:
1. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. on the east side of South Fifth
Street from 66 feet south of the School Street intersection to 63 feet north of the
Highway 5 intersection.
2. Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the south side of School
Street for 150 feet back east from South Fifth Street.
69.10 PARKING LIMITED TO TWO HOURS.
1. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than two (2)
hours between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on every day except Sunday upon
the following designated streets:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
A. School Street on the south side from a point due south of the north
intersection of Garfield and School Street east to the “No Parking” sign on
School Street.
B. School Street on the north and south sides between First Street and
Garfield Street.
2. It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a continuous period of more than two (2)
hours upon the following designated streets:
A. South Garfield Street on the east side from School Street to Highway 5.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 299 -
69.11 TRUCK PARKING PROHIBITED. It is unlawful to park any semi tractor and/or
semi tractor trailer on a City street, except for making deliveries.
69.12 PARKING PROHIBITED DURING SNOW EMERGENCY.
1. No person shall park, abandon, or leave unattended any vehicle on any public
street, alley, or parking lot during any snow emergency parking ban unless the snow
has been removed or plowed from the street, alley, or parking lot and the snow has
ceased to fall and the blowing has stopped. A snow emergency parking ban shall
begin when declared by the Police Officer on duty – either when the National Weather
Service predicts that two or more inches of snow or ice will fall in the Carlisle area or
when two or more inches of snow or ice has fallen in the Carlisle area – and shall
continue for a period including 24 hours after the snowing ceases and the blowing
stops, except as above provided, on the streets which have been fully opened.
2. Such a parking ban shall be applied uniformly and the Police Chief is directed
to publicize the requirements, using all available media, in early November of each
year. Each separate snow emergency shall also be publicized using all available
media. The emergency may be shortened or lengthened when conditions warrant,
upon proclamation by the Police Chief.
3. The following streets are exempt from the foregoing prohibition except during
the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.:
A. First Street from Highway 5 to Main Street.
B. School Street from Second Street to the railroad tracks.
C. Garfield Street from School Street to Main Street.
69.13 FIRE LANES. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in a fire lane as
provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236)
1. Fire Lanes Established. The Fire Chief may designate fire lanes on any
private road or driveway where deemed necessary to assure access to property or
premises by authorized emergency vehicles.
2. Signs and Markings. Wherever a fire lane has been designated, the Police
Chief shall cause appropriate signs and markings to be placed identifying such fire
lanes and the parking prohibition established by this section.
3. Exception. The provisions of this section do not apply to authorized
emergency vehicles.
69.14 PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED. Whenever by this chapter or any other section of
the Code of Ordinances any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on
designated streets or portions of streets it shall be the duty of the Police Chief to erect or cause
to be erected appropriate signs giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective
unless signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. When the signs are so
erected giving notice thereof, no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255 & 321.256)
69.15 MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS. It is unlawful to park any semi truck and/or trailer
or any travel trailer, boat trailer or similar trailer that is detached from its towing vehicle in a
City of Carlisle municipal parking lot.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 300 -
69.16 TRAILER PARKING AND USE. It is unlawful to park any non-motorized trailer,
including a semi trailer, a travel trailer, a boat trailer, a utility trailer or any other type of trailer
that is disconnected from its towing vehicle on any public street. It is also unlawful to use any
motorized or non-motorized recreational vehicle or travel trailer as a temporary residence
while it is parked on any public street or parking lot.
[The next page is 395]
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
70.01 Arrest or Citation 70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
70.02 Scheduled Violations 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.07 Impounding Vehicles with Unpaid Parking Fines
70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle Unattended
70.01 ARREST OR CITATION. Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person
has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
1. Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person before a local
magistrate; or
2. Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a combined traffic
citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of Public Safety, or issue a uniform
citation and complaint utilizing a State-approved computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)
70.02 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS. For violations of the Traffic Code that are designated by Section
805.8A of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those violations shall
be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)
70.03 PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE. Uncontested violations of parking restrictions
imposed by this Code of Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at the office
of the City Clerk. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for all
violations except prohibited parking during a snow emergency and improper use of a persons with
disabilities parking permit. If such fine is not paid within thirty (30) days, it shall be increased by five
dollars ($5.00). The simple notice of a fine for prohibited parking during a snow emergency is twenty-five
dollars ($25.00). The simple notice of a fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit
is one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] & 321L.4[2])
70.04 PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED. When a vehicle is parked in violation
of any provision of the Traffic Code, and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein
provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.
70.05 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. In any proceeding charging a
standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the registered owner was the person who
parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred
shall be raised by proof that:
1. Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was parked in
violation of the Traffic Code; and
2. Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the registered owner at
the time in question.
70.06 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES. A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be
removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the nearest garage or other
place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the City, under the circumstances hereinafter
enumerated:
1. Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic
and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to
such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
2. Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so illegally parked as
to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
3. Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on parking during
snow removal operations.
4. Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a continuous period
in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can be located, the owner shall be given an
opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
5. Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of any vehicle
impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay the
reasonable cost of towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
70.07 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES WITH UNPAID PARKING FINES. When any vehicle is located
on public property and has unpaid parking fines older than 60 days from the date of the parking ticket
issuance, the vehicle will be towed and impounded until such time as all fines are paid in full, as hereinafter
provided.
1. Towing and impoundment of such vehicles will only occur ten or more days after a Notice
of Delinquent Fine/Impoundment Warning is mailed by ordinary mail to the last known address of
the registered owner.
2. Partial payment will not be accepted for parking fines.
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
75.01 Purpose 75.05 Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles
75.02 Definitions 75.06 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations 75.07 Accident Reports
75.04 Operation of Snowmobiles
75.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain vehicles and
snowmobiles within the City.
75.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less than three and not
more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine displacement to less than 1,000 cubic
centimeters and in total dry weight to less than 1,200 pounds and that has a seat or saddle designed
to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
2. “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat or saddle
designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control and that is intended by
the manufacturer for use on natural terrain. “Off-road motorcycle” includes a motorcycle that was
originally issued a certificate of title and registered for highway use under Chapter 321 of the Code
of Iowa, but which contains design features that enable operation over natural terrain. An operator
of an off-road motorcycle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation
of all-terrain vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
3. “Off-road utility vehicle” means a motorized vehicle, with not less than four and not more
than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks, that has a seat that is of bucket or bench design,
not intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering wheel or control levers for control.
“Off-road utility vehicle” includes the following vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
A. “Off-road utility vehicle – type 1” includes vehicles with a total dry weight of
1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
B. “Off-road utility vehicle – type 2” includes vehicles, other than type 1 vehicles,
with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of 65 inches or less.
C. “Off-road utility vehicle – type 3” includes vehicles with a total dry weight of more
than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or both.
An operator of an off-road utility vehicle is also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing
the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
4. “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000 pounds, that uses
sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a width of 48 inches or less, or any
combination of runners, skis, or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or ice. “Snowmobile”
does not include an all-terrain vehicle that has been altered or equipped with runners, skis, belttype
tracks, or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall operate an ATV, off-road motorcycle or off-road
utility vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code of Iowa or a snowmobile within the
City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of the Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established
by the Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural Resources governing their registration,
equipment and manner of operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)
75.04 OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES. The operators of snowmobiles shall comply with the
following restrictions as to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
1. Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets that have not been plowed during
the snow season and on such other streets as may be designated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
2. Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under the following
circumstances:
A. Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an emergency during
the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by
conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
B. Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a prohibited street
provided all of the following occur:
(1) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees (90°) to
the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and
safe crossing;
(2) The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the street;
(3) The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic that constitutes
an immediate hazard; and
(4) In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an intersection of
such street with another street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
3. Railroad Right-of-Way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an operating railroad rightof-
way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established
crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved
portion of the established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
4. Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails except where so
designated, or at any time on recreational trails unless authorized by the Warren County
Conservation Office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])
5. Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park, playground or
upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of the City.
6. Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that
portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly
referred to as the “parking” except for purposes of crossing the same to a public street upon which
operation is authorized by this chapter.
75.05 OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES. The operators of ATVs shall comply with the
following restrictions as to where ATVs may be operated within the City:
1. Streets. ATVs and off-road utility vehicles may be operated on streets only in accordance
with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on such streets as may be designated by resolution
of the Council for the operation of registered ATVs or registered off-road utility vehicles. In
designating such streets, the Council may authorize ATVs and off-road utility vehicles to stop at
service stations or convenience stores along a designated street. The following exceptions apply:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3])
A. Persons With Disabilities or Special Needs. Any individual who has obtained a
persons with disabilities parking permit and who has provided proof of obtaining said
permit to the City Police Department shall be entitled to use ATVs or off-road utility
vehicles on all streets in the City.
B. Special Permits. The Police Department has authority to issue special permits to
individuals or companies for purposes of using an off-road utility vehicle, on a limited
basis, for property maintenance or other specialized commercial activities.
2. Trails. ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[4])
3. Railroad Right-of-Way. ATVs shall not be operated on an operating railroad right-of-way.
An ATV may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established crossing and
notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the
established crossing after yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[1h])
4. Parks and Other City Land. ATVs shall not be operated in any park, playground or upon
any other City-owned property without the express permission of the City.
5. Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion
of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to
as the “parking.”
75.06 NEGLIGENCE. The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any injury or
damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile. The owner of an ATV or
snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the owner was the operator of the ATV or
snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred or if the operator had the owner’s consent to operate
the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)
75.07 ACCIDENT REPORTS. Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an accident resulting
in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00)
or more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall immediately notify a law enforcement
officer and shall file an accident report, in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)

CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
76.01 Definitions 76.10 Control with Hands on Handlebars
76.02 Alteration of Serial Number 76.11 Place of Riding
76.03 Sirens and Whistles Prohibited 76.12 Bicycle Lanes
76.04 Lamps and Reflectors 76.13 Emerging from Alley or Driveway
76.05 Stopping 76.14 Operation on Sidewalk
76.06 Applicability of Motor Vehicle Laws 76.15 Clinging to Other Vehicles
76.07 Obedience to Signals 76.16 Following Emergency Vehicles
76.08 Improper Riding 76.17 Parking
76.09 Carrying Packages 76.18 Reckless Operation
76.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:
1. “Bicycle” means either of the following:
A. A device having up to four wheels and having at least one saddle or seat for the
use of a rider and which is propelled by human power.
B. A device having up to four wheels with fully operable pedals and an electric motor
of one horsepower or less.
2. “Multi-use trail” means a way or place, the use of which is controlled by the City as an
owner of real property, designated by the multi-use recreational trail maps, as approved by
resolution by the Council. No multi-use trail is considered as a street or highway.
76.02 ALTERATION OF SERIAL NUMBER. It is unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously
remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the manufacturer’s serial frame number of any bicycle.
76.03 SIRENS AND WHISTLES PROHIBITED. A bicycle shall not be equipped with – and a person
shall not use upon a bicycle – any siren or whistle. This section does not apply to bicycles ridden by peace
officers in the line of duty.
76.04 LAMPS AND REFLECTORS.
1. Every bicycle ridden at any time from sunset to sunrise and at such other times when
conditions such as fog, snow, sleet, or rain provide insufficient lighting to render clearly discernible
persons and vehicles on the highway at a distance of 300 feet ahead shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at least 300 feet to the front.
2. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red light visible from
a distance of 300 feet to the rear; except that a red reflector may be used in lieu of a rear light.
3. Equivalent equipment such as headlamps and red light attachments to the arm or leg may
be used in lieu of a lamp on the front and a red light on the rear of the bicycle.
4. A peace officer riding a police bicycle is not required to use either front or rear lamps if
duty so requires.
76.05 STOPPING. Every bicycle used upon the City streets, sidewalks, highways, park roads, or multiuse
trails shall be able to come to a complete stop within a safe distance.
76.06 APPLICABILITY OF MOTOR VEHICLE LAWS. Every person operating a bicycle upon the
City streets, highways, park roads, or multi-use trails shall be subject to this chapter and other City traffic
ordinances and the State statutes applicable to the drivers of motor vehicles, except as to special regulations
in this chapter and except as to those provisions of ordinances and statutes that, by their nature, can have
no application or those provisions for which specific exceptions have been set forth regarding police
bicycles.
76.07 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNALS. Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the directions of
official traffic signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to other vehicles, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer, and shall obey direction signs relative to turns permitted, unless such person
dismounts from the bicycle, when he or she shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
76.08 IMPROPER RIDING.
1. A person propelling a bicycle on any street, sidewalk, highway, park road, or multi-use
recreational trail shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached to
the bicycle and shall not use a bicycle to carry more persons at one time than the number of persons
for which the bicycle is designed and equipped.
2. This section does not apply to the use of a bicycle in a parade or special event authorized
by the City.
76.09 CARRYING PACKAGES. No person operating a bicycle upon a street, sidewalk, highway, park
road, or multi-use trail shall carry any package, bundle, or article that prevents the rider from keeping at
least one hand upon the handlebars.
76.10 CONTROL WITH HANDS ON HANDLEBARS. The operator of a bicycle upon a street,
sidewalk, highway, park road, or multi-use trail shall keep the bicycle under control at all times and at all
times during operation shall have one or both hands upon the handlebars and the feet engaged with the
braking device if the braking device is designed to be actuated by the feet.
76.11 PLACE OF RIDING.
1. Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway at a speed less than the normal speed of
traffic moving in the same direction shall ride as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway except under any of the following situations:
A. When overtaking and passing another bicycle vehicle proceeding in the same
direction.
B. When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway.
C. When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions (including, but not limited to, fixed
or moving objects, vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard
width lanes) that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge. For
purposes of this section, a “substandard width lane” is a lane that is too narrow for a bicycle
and a vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
D. A facility that would allow bicycle traffic on the left side of the roadway.
2. Any person operating a bicycle upon a roadway that carries traffic in one direction only
and has two or more marked traffic lanes, may ride as near the left-hand curb or edge of such
roadway as practicable.
3. When so riding upon any multi-use trail with other cyclists, there shall not be more than
two abreast.
This section does not apply to the use of a bicycle in a parade or special event authorized by the City.
76.12 BICYCLE LANES.
1. Whenever a bicycle lane has been established on a roadway, any person operating a bicycle
upon the roadway moving in the same direction may ride within the bicycle lane.
2. Any person operating a bicycle within a bicycle lane may move out of the lane when
overtaking and passing another bicycle, vehicle, or pedestrian within the lane or about to enter the
lane if such overtaking and passing cannot be done safely within the lane.
3. No person operating a bicycle shall leave a bicycle lane until the movement can be made
with reasonable safety and then only after giving an appropriate signal.
4. No person shall drive a motor vehicle in a bicycle lane established on a roadway except as
follows:
A. To park where parking is permitted.
B. To enter or leave the roadway.
C. To prepare for a turn within a distance of 200 feet from the intersection.
76.13 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY. The operator of a bicycle emerging from an
alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk
area and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
76.14 OPERATION ON SIDEWALK. Bicycles may be operated upon the public sidewalks in a careful
and prudent manner and except where signs are erected to prohibiting riding on the sidewalk. Every person
lawfully operating a bicycle upon a public sidewalk shall yield the right-of-way when approaching a
pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing.
76.15 CLINGING TO OTHER VEHICLES. No person riding upon any bicycle on a street, sidewalk,
highway, park road, or multi-use trail shall attach the bicycle or himself or herself to any moving vehicle
by tow rope, hand grip or otherwise.
76.16 FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES. No person riding a bicycle shall follow closer than
500 feet of an emergency vehicle, as defined by Code of Iowa Section 321.1, which has emergency lights
and/or siren activated, and shall not stop, park, or leave a bicycle within 500 feet of an emergency vehicle
stopped in response to an emergency.
76.17 PARKING. No person shall leave a bicycle lying on its side on any sidewalk, or park a bicycle
on a sidewalk in any other position, so that there is not an adequate path for pedestrian traffic. Local
authorities may, by ordinance or resolution, prohibit bicycle parking in designated areas of the public
highway, provided that appropriate signs are erected.
76.18 RECKLESS OPERATION. No person shall operate a bicycle with willful or wanton disregard
for the safety of persons or property.
CHAPTER 77
GOLF CARTS
77.01 Purpose 77.05 Hours of Operation
77.02 General Regulations 77.06 Speed
77.03 Place of Operation 77.07 Permit Required
77.04 Equipment 77.08 Fee for Permit
77.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to permit the operation of golf carts on certain streets
in the City, as authorized by Section 321.247 of the Code of Iowa, as amended. This chapter applies
whenever a golf cart is operated on any street or alley, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
77.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS. Golf carts may be operated upon the streets of the City by persons
possessing a valid Iowa operator’s license, and at least eighteen (18) years of age, except as prohibited in
Section 77.03 of this chapter.
77.03 PLACE OF OPERATION. Golf carts shall not be operated upon any City street that is a primary
road extension through the City. However, golf carts may cross such a primary road extension. First Street,
School Street, Market Street and Highway 5 are hereby designated as primary road extensions in the City.
77.04 EQUIPMENT. Golf carts operated upon City streets shall be equipped with at least the following:
1. A slow moving vehicle sign.
2. A bicycle safety flag, the top of which shall be a minimum of five (5) feet from ground
level.
3. Adequate brakes.
4. Head lights and tail lights.
77.05 HOURS OF OPERATION. Golf carts may be operated on City streets only between sunrise and
sunset.
77.06 SPEED. No golf carts shall be operated on any City street at a speed in excess of 25 miles per
hour.
77.07 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall operate a golf cart on any public street or alley for any
purpose unless the operator possesses a permit to operate a golf cart on City streets, issued by the City
Clerk. Golf cart owners may apply for a permit from the City Clerk on forms provided by the City. The
City Clerk shall not issue a permit until the owner/operator has provided the following:
1. Evidence that the operator is at least eighteen (18) years of age and possesses a valid Iowa
driver’s license; and
2. Proof that owner/operator has liability insurance covering operation of the golf carts on
City streets.
The operator of a golf cart shall display the permit sticker prominently on a rear fender or similar
component. All permits issued shall uniquely identify the name and address of the owner/operator.
77.08 FEE FOR PERMIT. The fee for such permit is $25.00.

CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
80.01 Definitions 80.06 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles 80.07 Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail 80.08 Proceeds from Sales
80.04 Notification in Newspaper 80.09 Duties of Demolisher
80.05 Fees for Impoundment
80.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1] & Sec. 321.90)
1. “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
A. A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more than twentyfour
(24) hours and lacks current registration plates or two or more wheels or other parts
which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
B. A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than 24 hours.
C. A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private property without
the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 24 hours.
D. A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police authority and has
not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days. However, a police authority may declare
the vehicle abandoned within the ten-day period by commencing the notification process.
E. Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority to create a
hazard to other vehicle traffic.
F. A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of the Code of
Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the impoundment fees after
notification by the person or agency responsible for carrying out the impoundment order.
2. “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of Iowa whose
business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck, or
dismantle vehicles.
3. “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle
storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles.
4. “Police authority” means the Iowa State Patrol or any law enforcement agency of a county
or city.
80.02 AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. A police authority,
upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of any other authority having the duties of control
of highways or traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and may take into
custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. The police authority may employ its own personnel,
equipment, and facilities or hire a private entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing,
preserving, storing, or disposing of abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person in control of
private property may employ a private entity that is a garage keeper to dispose of an abandoned vehicle,
and the private entity may take into custody the abandoned vehicle without a police authority’s initiative.
If a police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles, the police authority shall
provide the private entity with the names and addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders of record,
and any other known claimant to the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03 NOTICE BY MAIL. The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an abandoned
vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail, the last known registered owner of the
vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found
in the vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known addresses of record, that the abandoned vehicle has been
taken into custody. Notice shall be deemed given when mailed. The notice shall describe the year, make,
model and vehicle identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the vehicle,
set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, and inform the persons receiving the
notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property within ten (10) days after the effective date
of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from placing the
vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of the notice. The notice shall also state that the failure
of the owner, lienholders or claimants to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title,
claim and interest in the vehicle or personal property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal
property is deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the vehicle to a
demolisher and to disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction. If the abandoned vehicle was
taken into custody by a private entity without a police authority’s initiative, the notice shall state that the
private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as described in Section 321.90 of the Code of Iowa, and
may proceed to sell or dispose of the vehicle. If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a police
authority or by a private entity hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that any person claiming
rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the vehicle
or property by the police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by
this section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to contest those matters. If the
persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal
property within the ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants shall no longer have any
right, title, claim, or interest in or to the vehicle or the personal property. A court in any case in law or
equity shall not recognize any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders or claimants after the
expiration of the ten-day reclaiming period.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.04 NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER. If it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty
the identity and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders, notice by one publication in one
newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet
all requirements of notice under Section 80.03. The published notice may contain multiple listings of
abandoned vehicles and personal property but shall be published within the same time requirements and
contain the same information as prescribed for mailed notice in Section 80.03.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])
80.05 FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT. The owner or lienholder shall pay charges for all impounded
vehicles, as follows:
1. $25.00 impound release fee to the Carlisle Police Department.
2. If the City stores the impounded vehicle in an outside lot, fees at the rate of $8.00 per day;
if the vehicle is stored inside, fees at the rate of $10.00 per day.
3. If stored by an independent contractor, all storage charges will be paid directly to the
independent contractor and shall be the actual amount of charges made by said person, firm,
corporation, or business.
80.06 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as
provided herein, the police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether or not the
motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall dispose of the motor vehicle in
accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.07 DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES. The City or any person upon whose
property or in whose possession is found any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of
a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of such motor vehicle to a
demolisher for junk, without a title and without notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an
engine or two or more wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The
police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant shall then apply to the
County Treasurer for a junking certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the
certificate of title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.08 PROCEEDS FROM SALES. Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied
to the expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification required, in accordance with
State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety
(90) days, and then shall be deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails
to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police authority shall apply for reimbursement from the
Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.09 DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER. Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an
abandoned motor vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise demolish such motor
vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or demolish a vehicle until the demolisher
has obtained the junking certificate issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions 90.11 Installation of Water Service Pipe
90.02 Superintendent’s Duties 90.12 Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
90.03 Mandatory Connections 90.13 Failure to Maintain
90.04 Abandoned Connections 90.14 Curb Valve
90.05 Permit 90.15 Interior Valve
90.06 Fee for Trade Permit and Connection Charge 90.16 Inspection and Approval
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code 90.17 Completion by the City
90.08 Plumber Required 90.18 Shutting off Water Supply
90.09 Excavations 90.19 Operation of Curb Valve and Hydrants
90.10 Tapping Mains
90.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code of
Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
1. “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the provision of two or
more utility services.
2. “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service from the City, the
owner of the property served, and as between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and
obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.
3. “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of the City water system or any duly
authorized assistant, agent or representative.
4. “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community use.
5. “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building served.
6. “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for securing, collecting,
storing, pumping, treating, and distributing water.
90.02 SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES. The Superintendent shall supervise the installation of water
service pipes and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations pertaining to water services
in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter shall apply to all replacements of existing water
service pipes as well as to new ones. The Superintendent shall make such rules, not in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for the detailed operation of the water system, subject to the
approval of the Council. In the event of an emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the
protection of the system until due consideration by the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
90.03 MANDATORY CONNECTIONS. All residences and business establishments within the City
limits intended or used for human habitation, occupancy or use shall be connected to the public water
system, if it is reasonably available and if the building is not furnished with pure and wholesome water
from some other source. However, if the well located on the property becomes unusable or if the property
is sold or transferred by some other means, then the owner of said property shall be required to connect to
the City’s water system within 6 months of the sale or transfer of the property.
90.04 ABANDONED CONNECTIONS. When an existing water service is abandoned or a service is
renewed with a new tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains shall be turned off at the
corporation stop and made absolutely watertight.
90.05 PERMIT. Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a written permit
must be obtained from the City. The application for the permit shall include a legal description of the
property, the name of the property owner, the name and address of the person who will do the work, and
the general uses of the water. If the proposed work meets all the requirements of this chapter and if all fees
required under this chapter have been paid, the permit shall be issued. Work under any permit must be
completed within sixty (60) days after the permit is issued, except that when such time period is inequitable
or unfair due to conditions beyond the control of the person making the application, an extension of time
within which to complete the work may be granted. The permit may be revoked at any time for any violation
of these chapters.
90.06 FEE FOR TRADE PERMIT AND CONNECTION CHARGE. Before any permit is issued the
person who makes the application shall pay $65.00 to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing the permit and
supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work. In addition there shall be a connection charge in the
amount of $100.00 paid before issuance of a permit to reimburse the City for costs borne by the City in
making water service available to the property served.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
90.07 COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE. The installation of any water service pipe and any
connection with the water system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable provisions, whether
regulatory, procedural or enforcement provisions, of the State Plumbing Code.
90.08 PLUMBER REQUIRED. All installations of water service pipes and connections to the water
system shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
90.09 EXCAVATIONS. All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a connection
shall be performed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and the provisions of Chapter 135 of this
Code of Ordinances.
90.10 TAPPING MAINS. All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct supervision of
the Superintendent and in accord with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Independent Services. No more than one house, building, or premises shall be supplied
from one tap unless special written permission is obtained from the Superintendent and unless
provision is made so that each house, building, or premises may be shut off independently of the
other.
2. Sizes and Location of Taps. All mains six (6) inches or less in diameter shall receive no
larger than a ¾-inch tap. All mains of over six inches in diameter shall receive no larger than a
one-inch tap. Where a larger connection than a one-inch tap is desired, two or more small taps or
saddles shall be used, as the Superintendent shall order. All taps in the mains shall be made in the
top half of the pipe, at least eighteen (18) inches apart. No main shall be tapped nearer than two
(2) feet of the joint in the main.
3. Corporation Stop. A brass corporation stop, of the pattern and weight approved by the
Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in the main. The corporation stop in the main shall
be of the same size as the service pipe.
4. Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact location of the
tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such form as the Superintendent shall require.
90.11 INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE. Water service pipes from the main to the meter
setting shall be Type K copper. The use of any other pipe material for the service line shall first be approved
by the Superintendent. Pipe must be laid sufficiently waving, and to such depth, as to prevent rupture from
settlement or freezing.
90.12 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation, connection, and maintenance of the water service pipe from the main to the building served
shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly
or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or maintenance of said water service pipe.
90.13 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN. When any portion of the water service pipe which is the
responsibility of the property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the owner fails to correct
such nuisance, the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.14 CURB VALVE. There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a main shut-off valve on
the water service pipe of a pattern approved by the Superintendent. The shut-off valve shall be constructed
to be visible and even with the pavement or ground.
90.15 INTERIOR VALVE. There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe inside the
building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible and so located that the water
can be shut off conveniently. Where one service pipe supplies more than one customer within the building,
there shall be separate valves for each such customer so that service may be shut off for one without
interfering with service to the others.
90.16 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL. All water service pipes and their connections to the water
system must be inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they are covered, and the
Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals. If the Superintendent refuses to approve the work,
the plumber or property owner must proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or
intends to use the municipal water system shall permit the Superintendent to enter the premises to inspect
or make necessary alterations or repairs at all reasonable hours and on proof of authority.
90.17 COMPLETION BY THE CITY. Should any excavation be left open or only partly refilled for
twenty-four (24) hours after the water service pipe is installed and connected with the water system, or
should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to finish or correct the work, and the
Council shall assess the costs to the property owner or the plumber. If the plumber is assessed, the plumber
must pay the costs before receiving another permit. If the property owner is assessed, such assessment may
be collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.18 SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY. The Superintendent may shut off the supply of water to
any customer because of any violation of the regulations contained in these Water Service System chapters
that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not be turned on again until all violations have
been corrected and the Superintendent has ordered the water to be turned on.
90.19 OPERATION OF CURB VALVE AND HYDRANTS. It is unlawful for any person except the
Superintendent to turn water on at the curb valve, and no person, unless specifically authorized by the City,
shall open or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant for any purpose whatsoever.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 465 -
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
91.01 Purpose 91.07 Meter Repairs
91.02 Water Use Metered 91.08 Right of Entry
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems; Exception 91.09 Meters Serving Mobile Home Parks
91.04 Location of Meters 91.10 Resale Prohibited
91.05 Meter Setting 91.11 Fire Protection in Mobile Home Parks
91.06 Meter Costs 91.12 Irrigation System Metering
91.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water
and facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among customers.
91.02 WATER USE METERED. All water furnished customers shall be measured
through meters furnished by the City, paid for by the customer, and installed by a competent
plumber.
91.03 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; EXCEPTION. Fire sprinkler systems may be
connected to water mains by direct connection without meters under the direct supervision of
the Superintendent. No other open, unmetered connection shall be incorporated in the system,
and there shall be no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which
must be sealed open.
91.04 LOCATION OF METERS. All meters shall be so located that they are easily
accessible to meter readers and repairmen and protected from freezing. The City reserves the
right to require remote reading meters and may require the same at locations to be determined
by the City, accessible for reading purposes. The City may further require the installation of a
remote reading meter in the event that access has been denied to the City Meter Reader for a
period of three months. In the event that access has been denied, the expense of said meter
shall be charged against the customer. Costs relative to the replacement of existing meters for
which there has been prior payment, other than those required by the City by reason of denial
of access, shall be paid for by the City.
91.05 METER SETTING. The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and
fittings for proper setting of the meter including suitable valves on both the discharge side and
influent side of the meter. Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent
and shall be of a design and construction approved by the Superintendent.
91.06 METER COSTS. The full cost of any meter shall be paid to the City by the property
owner or customer prior to the installation of any such meter by the City, or, at the sole option
of the City, the property owner or customer may be required to purchase and install such meter
in accordance with requirements established by the City.
91.07 METER REPAIRS. Whenever a water meter owned by the City is found to be out
of order the Superintendent shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to the meter has
occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property owner, then the
property owner shall be liable for the cost of repairs.
CHAPTER 91 WATER METERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 466 -
91.08 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter the premises of
any customer at any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.
91.09 METERS SERVING MOBILE HOME PARKS. The City shall require one meter
accessible for reading purposes for each mobile home park, which meter shall be purchased
and installed at the cost of the mobile park owner/operator. All such meters shall meet the
specifications of the City and shall be maintained by the mobile home park owner in a manner
satisfactory to the City. Charges for water used shall be based upon this meter and shall
include all water passing through said meter, regardless of subsequent usage.
91.10 RESALE PROHIBITED. Resale of any water passing through City meters, other
than to mobile home park residents, is hereby prohibited unless prior approval has been
received from the Council.
91.11 FIRE PROTECTION IN MOBILE HOME PARKS. Fire protection within mobile
home parks may be provided by the City through the use of by-pass valves and the cost of
fighting such fires and the furnishing of the water shall be borne by the City.
91.12 IRRIGATION SYSTEM METERING. The purpose of this section is to provide a
means and method for the installation, metering, and billing for water used for irrigation
purposes so as to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and
convenience of the residents of the City.
1. Definition. For the purpose of this section, the owner of land who causes an
irrigation water meter to be installed under the provisions of this section is referred to
as the “builder,” and such term includes the heirs, successors or assigns of such
owner.
2. Construction by Owner. In the event an owner of land within the corporate
limits desires to construct an irrigation system (which is a system that returns the
water to the ground as opposed to the City sewer system) or to separately meter water
used for irrigation purposes, the owner, at said owner’s expense, may do so after
making proper application to the City and receiving a permit to install such a water
meter, in accordance with the following:
A. Meter Costs. The full cost of any meter shall be paid to the City by
the property owner or customer prior to the installation of any such meter by
the City or, at the sole option of the City, the property owner or customer may
be required to purchase and install such meter in accordance with
requirements established by the City. Irrigation meters shall be installed by
the City or a licensed plumber.
(Ord. 705 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
B. Irrigation Meters. Said meters shall be installed not more than four
(4) feet from the prime meter and shall be installed in series or beyond in
direction of flow from the prime meter.
C. If an underground irrigation system is installed, said system shall
include an approved backflow preventer.
D. Meter Repairs. Whenever a water meter is found to be out of order,
the Superintendent shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to the
meter has occurred due to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or
CHAPTER 91 WATER METERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 467 -
property owner, then the property owner shall be liable for the costs of
repairs.
E. Type of Water. The owner shall install a meter with appropriate
isolation valves and said meter shall be approved by the City prior to
installation. The meter system shall be arranged so that all readings for the
purpose of billing by the City shall be on a deductive basis for all water used
by the irrigation system.
F. Minimum Charge. In addition to any regular charges for water used,
the owner shall pay a $1.00 per month charge for the additional meter.
3. Eligibility. Only residents of the City are eligible to avail themselves of the
benefits of this section. All individuals or property owners receiving water from the
City, but not residents of the City, shall not be eligible to receive any reduction on
their billing statement as the result of the ordinance codified by this section.
CHAPTER 91 WATER METERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 468 -
[The next page is 471]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
-477-
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
92.01 Service Charges 92.07 Lien for Nonpayment
92.02 Water Utility Service Area 92.08 Lien Exemption
92.03 Rates for Service 92.09 Lien Notice
92.04 Water Consumed for Agricultural Purposes 92.10 Customer Deposits
92.05 Billing for Water Service 92.11 Temporary Vacancy
92.06 Service Discontinued
92.01 SERVICE CHARGES. Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the
City based upon use of water as determined by meters provided for in Chapter 91. Each location,
building, premises or connection shall be considered a separate and distinct customer whether
owned or controlled by the same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02 WATER UTILITY SERVICE AREA.
1. Area Defined. Water shall only be supplied to property located within the
established corporate limits of the City. There shall be no public water service supplied
to unincorporated areas or properties except upon annexation of the area or property
and payment of associated costs by the owner of the unincorporated area or property.
2. Exception. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 1, the City may
provide limited water service to an unincorporated area or property without annexation
upon the showing of exceptional benefit and need to the City and in accordance with
the favorable recommendation of City staff, the City’s comprehensive plan and the
general health, safety and welfare of the public. Among the findings made under this
section must be a finding that such water service to the unincorporated area or property
will be at no cost to the City. All existing water services to unincorporated areas or
properties as of the date of Ordinance No. 476 shall be allowed to remain in place. All
customers in the unincorporated area or property without annexation that obtain water
service from the City of Carlisle, Iowa pursuant to this section hereby agree to enter
into an agreement in which they agree to be voluntarily annexed into the corporate limits
of the City of Carlisle at such time as the City Council may determine it is prudent.
(Ord. 675 – Mar. 16 Supp.)
92.03 RATES FOR SERVICE.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84[1])
1. Rate Within the City. Water Service shall be furnished at the following
monthly rate for water service within the City: $7.00 per 1,000 gallons of water used.
Minimum monthly bill is $7.00. (Ord. 718 – May. 17 Supp.)
2. Bulk Water Rate. Water shall be furnished at the following rate for bulk water
sales at the water treatment plant: $.25 per 22½ gallons.
3. Rate Outside the City. Water shall be furnished at the following monthly rate
for water service outside the City, pursuant to Section 92.02(2): each 1,000 gallons
used per month at twice the amount set forth in Section 92.03(1). Minimum monthly
bill is 1000 gallons.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
-478-
(Ord. 708 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
92.04 WATER CONSUMED FOR AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES. Water consumed for
agricultural and industrial use shall be permitted only upon the approval of the Council and
service to agricultural and industrial establishments may be by contract if the City deems it in
its best interest. Rates pertaining to agriculture and industry are subject to review and
negotiation by the City.
92.05 BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE. Water service shall be billed as part of a
combined service account, payable in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Bills Issued. The Clerk shall prepare, date, and issue bills for combined service
accounts. Bills shall be deemed issued as of the date indicated on the bill.
2. Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due and payable at
the office of the Clerk within 20 days of the date of issue.
3. Late Payment Penalty. Bills not paid when due shall be considered delinquent.
A late payment penalty of ten percent of the current month’s charges shall be added to
each delinquent bill.
(Ord. 716 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
4. Each customer shall be allowed one late payment per annum, and no penalty
shall be assessed with reference to said late payment.
92.06 SERVICE DISCONTINUED. Water service to delinquent customers shall be
discontinued in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Notice. The Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that service will be
discontinued if payment of the combined service account, including late payment
charges, is not received by the date specified in the notice of delinquency. Such notice
shall be sent by ordinary mail to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges
were incurred and shall inform the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford
the customer the opportunity for a hearing prior to the discontinuance.
2. Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or landlord
of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the notice of
delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord. If the customer is a tenant and
requests a change of name for service under the account, such request shall be sent to
the owner or landlord of the property if the owner or landlord has made a written request
for notice of any change of name for service under the account to the rental property.
3. Hearing. If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the shut off,
the Clerk shall conduct an informal hearing and shall make a determination as to
whether the disconnection is justified. The customer has the right to appeal the Clerk’s
decision to the Council, and if the Council finds that disconnection is justified, then
such disconnection shall be made, unless payment has been received.
4. Fees. A fee of $25.00 shall be charged before service is restored to a delinquent
customer. No fee shall be charged for the usual or customary trips in the regular changes
in occupancies of property. (Ord. 716 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
-479-
92.07 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or
tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises.
Water service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises
served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same
manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.08 LIEN EXEMPTION.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to charges
for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where water service is
separately metered and the rates or charges for the water service are paid directly to the
City by the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that the property is
residential or commercial rental property and that the tenant is liable for the rates or
charges. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of ninety (90)
days of such services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the rental
property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in full. The
lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the
services.
2. Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not apply to the
charges for any of the services of sewer systems, storm water drainage systems, sewage
treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for a residential rental
property where the charge is paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives
written notice to the City that the property is residential rental property and that the
tenant is liable for the rates or charges for such service. The City may require a deposit
not exceeding the usual cost of ninety (90) days of such services to be paid to the City.
When the tenant moves from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all
service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent
charges for repairs related to any of the services.
3. Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of the
tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or commercial rental
property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the occupancy begins. Upon
receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and deposit. A change in tenant for a
residential rental property shall require a new written notice to be given to the City
within thirty (30) business days of the change in tenant. A change in tenant for a
commercial rental property shall require a new written notice to be given to the City
within ten (10) business days of the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of the
residential rental property shall require written notice of such change to be given to the
City within thirty (30) business days of the completion of the change of ownership. A
change in the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require written notice
of such change to be given to the City within ten (10) business days of the completion
of the change of ownership.
92.09 LIEN NOTICE. A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to
the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is given to the customer
in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If the customer is a tenant and if the owner
or landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the notice shall
also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate persons by
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
-480-
ordinary mail not less than thirty (30) days prior to certification of the lien to the County
Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.10 CUSTOMER DEPOSITS. There shall be required from every customer or
prospective customer not the owner of the premises served a deposit in an amount totaling one
month’s average bill, intended to guarantee the payment of bills for service.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.11 TEMPORARY VACANCY. A property owner may request water service be
temporarily discontinued and shut off at the curb valve when the property is expected to be
vacant for an extended period of time. There shall be no fee for shutting the water off at the
curb valve and a $25.00 fee for restoring service. During a period when service is temporarily
discontinued as provided herein there shall be no minimum service charge. The City will not
drain pipes or pull meters for temporary vacancies.
[The next page is 477]
CHAPTER 93
WATER LINE EXTENSIONS
93.01 Purpose 93.03 Construction by Owner
93.02 Definition 93.04 Rights of City
93.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means and method for the extension of
water mains to serve property not served by an existing water line so as to preserve and improve the peace,
safety, health, welfare, comfort and convenience of the residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
93.02 DEFINITION. For the purpose of this chapter, the owner of land who causes a water main to be
installed under the provisions of this chapter shall be referred to as the “builder,” and such term includes
the heirs and successors or assigns of such owner.
93.03 CONSTRUCTION BY OWNER. In the event an owner of land within the corporate limits, in
which no water main has been previously installed, desires to construct said water main at the owner’s own
expense, the owner may do so, after making proper application to the City and receiving a permit to install
such a water main, in accordance with the following:
1. City Supervision. The installation of such a water main by a landowner at the owner’s
expense shall be under the strict supervision of the City and shall, in all ways, conform to the
requirements and specifications of the City.
2. Surety Bond. When making application to the City for a permit to install such a water
main, the applicant shall post with the City a surety bond, in an amount to be set by the Council
and made a matter of record in the minutes of the Council, which shall be in an amount equal to
not less than 110 percent of the total estimated cost of the installation for the full distance from the
termination point of the presently existing water main to the point where the farthest boundary of
the applicant’s land abuts the public street, and which bond shall guarantee the installation of the
water main in as short a time as reasonably possible and shall further indemnify the City for the
cost of completing the project in the event the applicant fails to complete the project within a
reasonable time, and shall further indemnify the City for all damages to public property incurred in
the installation, and shall further hold the City harmless for any and all other damages arising from
the installation of the water main.
3. Ownership of Water Main. After the water main has been installed, it shall become the
property of the City.
4. Valves Furnished by Builder. The builder shall furnish main line valves, installed as part
of the water main extensions contemplated by this chapter, at its own expense, and the installation
of such valves shall be at such locations as the City may designate.
93.04 RIGHTS OF CITY. All decisions in connection with the manner of installation of any extension
and maintenance thereof shall remain in the exclusive control of the City and such extension shall be the
property of the City and no other person shall have any right, title, or interest therein.
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
95.01 Purpose 95.06 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions 95.07 Right of Entry
95.03 Superintendent 95.08 Use of Easements
95.04 Prohibited Acts 95.09 Special Penalties
95.05 Sewer Connection Required
95.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to Sanitary Sewers
is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage within the City
in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
95.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms are defined:
1. “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days
at twenty degrees (20º) C, expressed in milligrams per liter or parts per million.
2. “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of
the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.
3. “Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the building wall to its
connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment portion of an on-site wastewater treatment
and disposal system conveying the drainage of one building site.
4. “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage.
5. “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic, commercial, or
industrial waste that is directly or indirectly discharged into the public sewer system.
6. “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
7. “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade,
or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
8. “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect and approve the
installation of building sewers and their connections to the public sewer system; and to inspect such
sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
9. “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of
surface or groundwater.
10. “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment and devices
necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment, and disposal of wastewater from
four or fewer dwelling units or other facilities serving the equivalent of fifteen persons (1500 gpd)
or less.
11. “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per
liter of solution.
12. “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights,
and is controlled by public authority.
13. “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings
(including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, or institutions, and free from
storm, surface water, and industrial waste.
14. “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and
ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
15. “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm
waters as may be present.
16. “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures used for
treating sewage.
17. “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating,
and disposing of sewage.
18. “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
19. “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees levied against and payable
by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said customers by said sewer system.
20. “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste that in concentration of
any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen
(15) minutes more than five (5) times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
21. “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer that carries storm and surface waters and
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
22. “Superintendent” means the Superintendent of sewage works and/or of water pollution
control of the City or any authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
23. “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in
water, sewage, or other liquids, and that are removable by laboratory filtering.
24. “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
95.03 SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
2. Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure compliance with
the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
3. Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage connections and
manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
95.04 PROHIBITED ACTS. No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
1. Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment that is a part of the sewer
system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
2. Surface Run-Off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump, exterior
foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or groundwater to a building
sewer or building drain that is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
3. Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by authority of the
Superintendent.
4. Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
5. Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except as provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
6. Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in any area under
its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED. The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used
for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, containing less than two (2) acres, situated
within the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in
the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required to install, at such owner’s
expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a building sewer connecting such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer, and to maintain the same all in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer
chapters, such compliance to be completed within sixty (60) days after date of official notice from the City
to do so provided that said public sewer is located within one hundred (100) feet of the property line of
such owner and is of such design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may be conveyed to
it. The owners of any houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation,
or other purposes containing more than two (2) acres may connect to the City sewer system at their
discretion, subject to the requirements contained above, or, as an alternative, may install their own treating
facility, subject to the State laws relative to private sewer systems. Billing for sanitary sewer service will
begin the date of official notice to connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
95.06 SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY. The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the
City so situated that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the Council for permission to
connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions stipulated by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
95.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer
chapters. The Superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes
including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having
a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
95.08 USE OF EASEMENTS. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the City
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with
the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
95.09 SPECIAL PENALTIES. The following special penalty provisions shall apply to violations of
these Sanitary Sewer chapters:
1. Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of these chapters
except subsections 1, 3, and 4 of Section 95.04, shall be served by the City with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations.
2. Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation of this Code of Ordinances. Each day in
which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
3. Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these chapters shall
become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City by reason of such
violation.
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
96.01 Permit 96.06 Interceptors Required
96.02 Trade Permit Fee and Connection Charge 96.07 Sewer Tap
96.03 Plumber Required 96.08 Inspection Required
96.04 Excavations 96.09 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.05 Connection Requirements 96.10 Abatement of Violations
96.01 PERMIT. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the City. The application for the permit shall set forth the
location and description of the property to be connected with the sewer system and the purpose
for which the sewer is to be used, and shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or
other information considered pertinent. The permit shall require the owner to complete
construction and connection of the building sewer to the public sewer within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit, except that when a property owner makes sufficient showing
that due to conditions beyond the owner’s control or peculiar hardship, such time period is
inequitable or unfair, an extension of time within which to comply with the provisions herein
may be granted. Any sewer connection permit may be revoked at any time for a violation of
these chapters.
96.02 TRADE PERMIT FEE AND CONNECTION CHARGE. The person who makes
the application shall pay a fee in the amount of $65.00 to the Clerk to cover the cost of issuing
the permit and supervising, regulating, and inspecting the work. In addition, there shall be a
connection charge in the amount of $100.00 paid to reimburse the City for costs borne by the
City in making sewer service available to the property served.
96.03 PLUMBER REQUIRED. All installations of building sewers and connections to the
public sewer shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
96.04 EXCAVATIONS. All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required for the
installation of a building sewer shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of the State
Plumbing Code and the provisions of Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
96.05 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS. Any connection with a public sanitary sewer
must be made under the direct supervision of the Superintendent and in accordance with the
following:
1. Old Building Sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, on examination and test conducted by the owner
and observed by the Superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
2. Separate Building Sewers. A separate and independent building sewer shall be
provided for every occupied building; except where one building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. In such cases the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
3. Installation. The installation and connection of the building sewer to the public
sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Plumbing Code and applicable
rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Superintendent before installation.
4. Water Lines. When possible, building sewers should be laid at least ten (10)
feet horizontally from a water service. The horizontal separation may be less, provided
the water service line is located at one side and at least twelve (12) inches above the top
of the building sewer.
5. Size. Building sewers shall be sized for the peak expected sewage flow from
the building with a minimum building sewer size of four (4) inches.
6. Alignment and Grade. All building sewers shall be laid to a straight line to
meet the following:
A. Recommended grade at one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot.
B. Minimum grade of one-eighth (1/8) inch per foot.
C. Minimum velocity of 2.00 feet per second with the sewer half full.
D. Any deviation in alignment or grade shall be made only with the written
approval of the Superintendent and shall be made only with approved fittings.
7. Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth of cover above the sewer shall be
sufficient to afford protection from frost.
8. Sewage Lifts. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted
by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer.
9. Pipe Specifications. Building sewer pipe shall be free from flaws, splits, or
breaks. Materials shall be as specified in the State Plumbing Code except that the
building sewer pipe, from the property line to the public sewer, shall comply with the
current edition of one of the following:
A. Clay sewer pipe – A.S.T.M. C-700 (extra strength).
B. Extra heavy cast iron soil pipe – A.S.T.M. A-74.
C. Ductile iron water pipe – A.W.W.A. C-151.
D. P.V.C. – SDR26 – A.S.T.M. D-3034.
10. Bearing Walls. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3)
feet of any bearing wall that might thereby be weakened.
11. Jointing. Fittings, type of joint and jointing material shall be compatible with
the type of pipe used, subject to the approval of the Superintendent. Solvent-welded
joints are not permitted.
12. Unstable Soil. No sewer connection shall be laid so that it is exposed when
crossing any watercourse. Where an old watercourse must of necessity be crossed or
where there is any danger of undermining or settlement, cast iron soil pipe or vitrified
clay sewer pipe thoroughly encased in concrete shall be required for such crossings.
Such encasement shall extend at least six (6) inches on all sides of the pipe. The cast
iron pipe or encased clay pipe shall rest on firm, solid material at either end.
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
13. Preparation of Basement or Crawl Space. No connection for any residence,
business or other structure with any sanitary sewer shall be made unless the basement
floor is poured, or in the case of a building with a slab or crawl space, unless the ground
floor is installed with the area adjacent to the foundation of such building cleared of
debris and backfilled. The backfill shall be well compacted and graded so that the
drainage is away from the foundation. Prior to the time the basement floor is poured,
or the first floor is installed in buildings without basements, the sewer shall be plugged
and the plug shall be sealed by the Superintendent. Any accumulation of water in any
excavation or basement during construction and prior to connection to the sanitary
sewer shall be removed by means other than draining into the sanitary sewer.
96.06 INTERCEPTORS REQUIRED. Grease, oil, sludge and sand interceptors shall be
provided by gas and service stations, convenience stores, car washes, garages, and other
facilities when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling
of such wastes that contain grease in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand or other
harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. When required, such interceptors shall be installed in accordance with the
following:
1. Design and Location. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity as
specified in the State Plumbing Code, to be approved by the Superintendent, and shall
be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
2. Construction Standards. The interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
material capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They
shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable
covers that shall be gastight and watertight.
3. Maintenance. All such interceptors shall be maintained by the owner at the
owner’s expense and shall be kept in continuously efficient operations at all times.
96.07 SEWER TAP. Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made
at the “Y” branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly located “Y”
branch is available, a saddle “Y” shall be installed at the location specified by the
Superintendent. The public sewer shall be tapped with a tapping machine and a saddle
appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be glued or attached with a gasket and stainless
steel clamps to the sewer. At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a
manhole unless special written permission is received from the Superintendent and in
accordance with the Superintendent’s direction if such connection is approved.
96.08 INSPECTION REQUIRED. All connections with the sanitary sewer system before
being covered shall be inspected and approved, in writing, by the Superintendent. As soon as
all pipe work from the public sewer to inside the building has been completed, and before any
backfilling is done, the Superintendent shall be notified and the Superintendent shall inspect and
test the work as to workmanship and material; no sewer pipe laid under ground shall be covered
or trenches filled until after the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If the Superintendent
refuses to approve the work, the plumber or owner must proceed immediately to correct the
work.
96.09 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY. All costs and expenses incident to the
installation, connection, and maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
96.10 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS. Construction or maintenance of building sewer
lines, whether located upon the private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way,
which construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter,
shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within thirty (30) days after date of official notice
from the Council of such violation. If not made within such time, the Council shall, in addition
to the other penalties herein provided, have the right to finish and correct the work and assess
the cost thereof to the property owner. Such assessment shall be collected with and in the same
manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3])
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
97.01 Storm Water 97.05 Restricted Discharges; Powers
97.02 Surface Waters Exception 97.06 Special Facilities
97.03 Prohibited Discharges 97.07 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges 97.08 Testing of Wastes
97.01 STORM WATER. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers that are specifically designated as
combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the
Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02 SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION. Special permits for discharging surface waters
to a public sanitary sewer may be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the
Superintendent where such discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of flushing,
but any permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to the best
interests of the sewer system.
97.03 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or
other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2. Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in
excess of two (2) milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public
sewer.
3. Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of
such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with
the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes,
cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
5. Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.
A. Any waters or wastes: (i) having a five-day biochemical oxygen
demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or (ii) containing more
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or (iii) having an
average daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the
City, shall be subject to the review of the Superintendent.
B. Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall
provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to: (i) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per
million by weight; or (ii) reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million
by weight; or (iii) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters
or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of
the Superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced
until said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.04 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion
of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or
equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances
restricted are:
1. High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one
hundred fifty degrees (150º) F (65º C).
2. Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 600 milligrams per
liter of dispersed or other soluble matter.
3. Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances that may solidify
or become viscous at temperatures between 32º F and 150º F (0º to 65º C).
4. Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch in any
dimension.
5. Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
6. Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Superintendent for such materials.
7. Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may be established
by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet
the requirements of State, Federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such
discharge to the receiving waters.
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
8. Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance
with applicable State or Federal regulations.
9. Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
10. Unusual Wastes. Materials that exert or cause:
A. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
B. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
C. Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
D. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting “slugs”
as defined herein.
11. Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable of creating a
public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance
and repair.
12. Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials, or substances that react
with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases, develop color of
undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable concentration or create
any other condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
13. Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances that are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to
the receiving waters.
97.05 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; POWERS. If any waters or wastes are discharged
or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 97.04 and which in the judgment of the
Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:
1. Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public sewage
system;
2. Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
3. Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or
4. Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
of Chapter 99.
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
97.06 SPECIAL FACILITIES. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing
facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.
97.07 CONTROL MANHOLES. When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required,
shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner’s
expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
97.08 TESTING OF WASTES. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics
of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at
the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the
event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be
the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect
of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb,
and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of
all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour
composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic grab samples).
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
98.01 When Prohibited 98.06 Maintenance of System
98.02 When Required 98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.08 Disposal of Septage
98.04 Permit Required 98.09 Minimum Lot Area
98.05 Discharge Restrictions
98.01 WHEN PROHIBITED. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful
to construct or maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02 WHEN REQUIRED. When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are employed
shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system complying
with the provisions of this chapter.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.03 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS. The type, capacity, location, and layout
of a private on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall comply with the
specifications and requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69, and
with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the County Board of
Health.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])
98.04 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment
and disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of Health.
98.05 DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS. It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an
on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch,
stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the ground.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.06 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM. The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system shall operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at
no expense to the City.
98.07 SYSTEMS ABANDONED. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a
property served by an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in Section
95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with these Sanitary
Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall be abandoned
and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.08 DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE. No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site
treatment system at any location except an approved disposal site.
CHAPTER 98 ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
98.09 MINIMUM LOT AREA. No permit shall be issued for any on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system employing sub-surface soil absorption facilities where the area
of the lot is less than two acres.
CHAPTER 98 ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 100
NON-METERED SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
100.01 Sewer Service Charges Required 100.05 Deposit
100.02 Reconnection Charge 100.06 28E Agreement Requirements
100.03 Payment of Bills 100.07 Lien for Nonpayment
100.04 Connection Charge 100.08 Accounting and Auditing
100.01 SEWER SERVICE CHARGES REQUIRED. Every customer shall pay to the City sewer
service charges as hereinafter provided. There shall be and there is hereby established sewer service charges
for the use of and for the service rendered by the sewer system for all non-metered services, including those
residents and nonresidents who use the Northwest Rural Carlisle Gravity Sanitary Sewer System and those
nonresidents located in the Avon Lake Community. The minimum service charge shall be not less than
$45.00 per month, which is necessary to retire the indebtedness, to pay operating expenses, for maintenance
and replacement and to refund reserves necessary for maintaining the sanitary sewer system. Industrial
establishments that intend to use the system may be by contract, if the City deems this to be in its best
interest.
100.02 RECONNECTION CHARGE. For violations of any of the provisions of this chapter or other
rules and regulations of the Sanitary Sewer System, the City may remove the grinder pump and discontinue
service. If a grinder pump is thereafter reinstalled, the user shall pay a reconnection charge of $500.00 to
reinstall the grinder pump and resume service.
100.03 PAYMENT OF BILLS. All charges for sanitary sewer services to customers not being supplied
water by a public water system shall be payable monthly. All charges shall be payable on the first day of
the month following the period of service and shall be paid at Carlisle City Hall, 195 First Street, Carlisle,
Iowa. If any charge for use of the system is not paid by the 21st day of the month in which it is due and
payable, a charge of one point five percent (1.5%) of the amount of the bill shall be added thereto and
collected therewith. If any bills remain unpaid thirty (30) days following the due date, sanitary sewer
service for the lot, parcel of land, or premises affected may be cut off and may not be restored except upon
satisfactory payment of the delinquent charges.
100.04 CONNECTION CHARGE. Applications for sewer service shall be filed with the City on a
form to be supplied by the City. The application shall state the name of the applicant and the premises to
be served. All applications filed after the commencement of the operation of the system shall be
accompanied by a fee of $6,800.00 for the nonresidents located in the Avon Lake Community. The fee for
the Carlisle residents using the gravity system is set out in a separate connection fee Ordinance. The
connection charge shall be payable to the City of Carlisle, Iowa, at City Hall, 195 First Street, Carlisle,
Warren County, Iowa.
100.05 DEPOSIT. A deposit of $100.00 (or adequate letter of credit) shall be required from all tenants.
The deposit shall be applied to any bill for sewer service delinquent more than thirty (30) days. Upon
disconnection of the sewer service, any balance of such deposit shall be returned to the applicant without
interest.
100.06 28E AGREEMENT REQUIREMENTS. It is hereby made the duty of the City to collect all
money for sewer service and all other charges in connection therewith. A copy of the 28E Agreement
between the City of Carlisle, Iowa, and Polk County, Iowa, may be obtained from the City. Applicable
reproducible fees shall apply.
100.07 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. Except as provided for in Section 92.08 of this Code of
Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally
liable for sewer service charges to the premises. Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent
shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer
for collection in the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
100.08 ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING. All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of
the sewer system shall be paid to and held by the City, separate and apart from all other funds of the City,
and all of said sums and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of said system, as may be
delivered by the Avon Lake users, shall be deposited in a separate fund designated the Revenue Fund
Account. The City shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep proper records, books and
accounts in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewer system
and at regular annual intervals the City shall cause to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern
of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the sewer system. The City shall be required
annually to prepare a budget of the Sanitary Sewer System to show the required revenues and expenses. If
necessary, user charge rates will be adjusted to produce adequate income to retire the indebtedness, meet
operation, maintenance and replacement needs, and establish required reserves.
CHAPTER 102
SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICTS
102.01 Definitions 102.06 Illegal Connections; City Authority
102.02 District Establishment Policy 102.07 Northwest Area Sanitary Sewer Connection
102.03 Lots Outside City Limits Fee District
102.04 Contiguous Parcels 102.08 South Central Area Sanitary Sewer Connection
102.05 Additional Fee Fee District
102.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter:
1. “Benefitted service area” means a designated area to which sanitary sewer service will be
provided by a sanitary sewer utility of a given design and capacity.
2. “Connection” means any act that results in a direct or indirect discharge into the Sanitary
Sewer Utility, including (but not limited to) the connection of a private sewer system to a lateral
sewer or manhole or the connection of a lateral sewer serving a subdivision to a trunk sewer or
manhole.
3. “Lot” means a parcel of land under one ownership. Two or more contiguous parcels under
common ownership may be treated as one lot for the purposes of this chapter if the parcels bear
common improvements or if the Council finds that the parcels have been assembled into a single
unit for the purpose of use or development.
4. “Sanitary Sewer Utility” means and includes sanitary sewer trunk lines and sanitary sewer
interceptors, sanitary sewer force mains, pumping stations and detention basins of the City.
102.02 DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT POLICY.
1. Cost Recovery. The City Council, after public notice and hearing as prescribed by law,
has determined the necessity of establishing sanitary sewer connection fee districts and the
imposition of fees for connection to the Sanitary Sewer Utility upon each person who owns property
in said areas and will be served by connection to the Sanitary Sewer Utility.
2. Intent. It is the intent of the City to utilize connection fees to recover 100% of the original
cost of constructing sanitary sewer utilities to serve the properties in the connection fee districts.
102.03 LOTS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS. For lots outside the City limits, with the application for
connection, owners shall also be required to execute a service contract with the City for their use of the
Sanitary Sewer Utility.
102.04 CONTIGUOUS PARCELS. If the owner of two contiguous parcels affected by this chapter
desires to make a connection to the Sanitary Sewer Utility that will serve only one such parcel, and the
parcels do not bear common improvements and have not been assembled into a single unit for the purpose
of use or development, the owner may make application to the City Council to connect to each such parcel
separately. If the Council finds that the parcels do not bear common improvements and have not been
assembled into a single unit for the purpose of use or development, the original connection fee shall be
calculated and paid only upon the parcel or parcels that will be served by the connection. A new application
must be filed, and a connection fee paid, when the parcel or parcels not served by the original connection
to the Sanitary Sewer Utility are connected.
102.05 ADDITIONAL FEE. Connection fees collected by the City Treasurer shall be used only for the
purpose of operating, or paying debt of, the Sanitary Sewer Utility. The sewer connection fees established
by this section are in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other fees for connection required under the State
Plumbing Code, other provisions of this Code of Ordinances, or City policy. The property owner paying a
connection fee will be responsible for the full cost of providing any necessary sanitary sewer extensions or
services lines from the private property improvements or buildings to the trunk sewers being constructed
as part of the project.
102.06 ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS; CITY AUTHORITY. In the event a connection is made to the
Sanitary Sewer Utility serving the connection fee district without the permit required by this chapter, or
without payment of the connection fees set forth in this chapter, or if any installment payment of such fee
as provided by subsequent resolution of the Council is not made, the City shall disconnect such service
from the Sanitary Sewer Utility until such time as the property owner has received a permit for the
connection and paid the required connection fee. In addition, the City may pursue any other remedy allowed
by law.
102.07 NORTHWEST AREA SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT.
1. The Northwest Area Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District is an area partially within and
outside the City limits of the City, legally described as follows:
SW Quarter of Section 28 lying east of HWY 65, NW Quarter of Section 28 lying
east of HWY 65 and south of Union Pacific Railroad, E Half of Section 28 lying
west of Union Pacific Railroad, W Half of Section 33 lying east of HWY 65, West
9.96 Ac of the NE Quarter of the NE Quarter Section 33, NW Quarter of the NE
Quarter Section 33, SE Quarter of the NW Quarter Section 33 except lot 17 Nova
Park Plat No. 1 and any streets associated with Nova Park Plat No. 1 and the south
206.7 feet ± of the north 456.7feet ± to the east 205.5 feet ± to the east line of Section
33, SW Quarter of the NW Quarter Section 33, SE Quarter of Section 33, SW
Quarter Section 34 north of the North River, NW Quarter of Section 34 south of
Nova Park Plat No. 1, E Half of Section 34 west of Avon Drive, all in Township
78N, Range 23 west of the 5th P.M., in the County of Polk, State of Iowa; and
N Half of Section 3 north of the North River, N Half of the SE Quarter of Section 4
except the E 1/8 of the N Half of the SE Quarter of Section 4, NW Quarter of Section
4 lying north of the North River, SW Quarter of Section 4 lying north of the North
River, NW Quarter of Section 5 lying south of HWY 5, NE Quarter of Section 4
except for the following: that part of the NE Quarter, NE Quarter of said Section 4
lying south of the North River and the NE Quarter, SE Half, NE Quarter of said
Section 4 and the N Half, SE Quarter, SE Quarter, NE Quarter of said Section 4
and SE Quarter, SE Quarter, SE Quarter, NW Quarter of said Section 4, all in
Township 77N, Range 23 west of the 5th P.M. in the County of Warren, State of
Iowa.
2. Cost and Size of Benefitted Service Area. The lots within the Northwest Area Sanitary
Sewer Connection Fee District constitute a benefitted service area to be served by connecting to
the Sanitary Sewer Utility. The cost of the Project related to the Northwest Area Connection Fee
District was $2,549,407.85; and the Northwest Area Connection Fee District contains
approximately 997.32 acres. As used in this section, “project” means all costs incurred in the
design, construction and financing of City sewer utilities necessary to provide sanitary sewer
service to the Northwest Area Connection Fee District, including (but not limited to) the cost of
labor, materials, engineering fees, legal fees, and financing closing costs related to the construction
of a complete and operational sanitary sewer collection system, including (but not limited to)
approximately 6,945 LF of 21-inch sewer, 115 LF of 21-inch directional bore sewer, 8,423 LF of
8-inch force main, 1 main pump station; and construction of a trunk sanitary sewer system,
including (but not limited to) approximately 990 LF of 12-inch sewer, 2,607 LF of 15-inch sewer,
65 LF of 15-inch directional bore sewer, 1,335 LF of 18-inch sewer, 365 LF of 18-inch directional
bore sewer, 671 LF of 4-inch service lines, and 14 standard manholes (Alternate 1); and
construction of a trunk sanitary sewer system, including (but not limited to) approximately 1,998
LF of 15-inch sewer, 380 LF of 15-inch bore and case sewer, and 7 standard manholes (Alternate
2).
3. Connection Fees. There is imposed on all lots within the Northwest Area Connection Fee
District, for which a sewer connection fee has not previously been paid, a fee for connection to the
Sanitary Sewer Utility. The connection fee shall be equal to cost of bringing the project to the
Northwest Area Connection Fee District on a per-acre basis, calculated in accordance with the
actual acreage of the lot seeking to connect or the linear footage of sewer main adjacent to the lot.
The connection fee shall be as follows:
Connections in Fiscal
Year
Connection Fee (per acre) Cost per Linear Foot
2013/2014 $2,121.80 $29.71
The amounts are to increase by three percent annually, effective July 1 of each year. All
connections during said fiscal year shall base the connection fee upon this adjusted amount.
4. Payment Options. Before any connection is made to the Sanitary Sewer Utility to serve a
lot in the Northwest Area Connection Fee District, the owner of the lot or lots to be served by the
connection shall file an application, on a form provided by the City, with the Building and Zoning
Office. Upon approval of the application, Building and Zoning shall advise the applicant of the
connection fee to be paid. Payment of the connection fee shall be in accordance with one of the
following options:
A. Option A. Lump sum payment due at time of issuance of connection permit.
B. Option B. Ten-year payment schedule of connection fee plus interest (3%). Partial
payments hereunder shall first be applied to pay accrued interest.
5. Permit Issued. Upon determination of the payment of the connection fee to the City, the
City shall issue a connection permit. Upon completion of the connection the owner of the lot or
lots being connected shall notify Building and Zoning, and the City shall, at its discretion, inspect
the connection.
102.08 SOUTH CENTRAL AREA SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE DISTRICT.
1. A piece of land in the southern part of the City, bounded on the north by Highway 5, on
the west by a line running parallel to and 1,000 feet west of the centerline of Scotch Ridge Road,
and bounded on the east by a line running north-south beginning approximately 1,200 feet east of
the intersection of Scotch Ridge Road and Highway 5 and extending south of Highway 5
approximately one mile. This land is more particularly described as:
The West Half of the East Half of Section 10, except for the south 20 acres thereof,
the West Half of the SW Quarter of Section 3 lying south of Highway 5, the West
Half of the SE Quarter of the SW Quarter of Section 3 lying south of Highway 5, the
West Half of the East Half of the NW Quarter of Section 10, the NW Quarter of the
SE Quarter of the SW Quarter of Section 10, the N Half of the SW Quarter of the
SW Quarter of Section 10, the North Half of the SE Quarter of Section 9, the South
Half of the NE Quarter of Section 9, the NE Quarter of the NE Quarter of Section
9, and the East Half of the SE Quarter of Section 4 lying south of Highway 5, all in
Township 77 North, Range 23 West of the 5th P.M. Warren County, Iowa.
2. Sanitary Sewer Connection Fees. Sanitary sewer connection fees are hereby established
and shall be imposed on owners of properties within the South Central Area Sanitary Sewer
Connection Fee District at the time of application to connect their properties to said sanitary sewer
collection facilities as follows:
A. From the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section through December
2013, a sanitary sewer connection fee of $415.00 per residential, single-family detached
lot, $132.00 per residential dwelling unit of multi-family dwelling units and $1,316.00 per
acre for commercial, industrial, governmental or other purpose nonresidential use lot of
property served by the sanitary sewer facilities shall be imposed. Thereafter, the
connection fee shall be adjusted as of January 1 of each year according to the following
schedule:
EFFECTIVE
DATE
SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE
Per
Single-Family Lot
Per Multi-Family
Residential
Dwelling Unit
Per Acre
(Commercial,
Industrial,
Governmental)
January 1, 2014 $432.00 $137.00 $1,368.00
January 1, 2015 $449.00 $142.00 $1,423.00
January 1, 2016 $467.00 $148.00 $1,480.00
January 1, 2017 $485.00 $154.00 $1,539.00
EFFECTIVE
DATE
SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION FEE
Per
Single-Family Lot
Per Multi-Family
Residential
Dwelling Unit
Per Acre
(Commercial,
Industrial,
Governmental)
January 1, 2018 $505.00 $160.00 $1,600.00
January 1, 2019 $525.00 $166.00 $1,665.00
January 1, 2020 $547.00 $173.00 $1,731.00
January 1, 2021 $568.00 $180.00 $1,800.00
January 1, 2022 $591.00 $187.00 $1,872.00
January 1, 2023 $615.00 $195.00 $1,959.00
January 1, 2024 $640.00 $203.00 $2,037.00
January 1, 2025 $665.00 $210.00 $2,119.00
B. The sanitary sewer connection fee schedule herein shall also apply to any
properties outside the South Central Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District, which use or
derive benefit from any of the sanitary sewer facilities constructed for the South Central
Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District. The appropriate fee shall be imposed at the time
of determination that a benefit is derived by the property.
C. The determination that a property is to be connected to the sanitary sewer
collection facilities shall occur, and the appropriate connection fee shall be paid, prior to
the time of release of a final plat for recordation or issuance of a building or plumbing
permit, whichever occurs first.
D. The owner of any single-family residence that is located on a parcel in excess of
one acre and existing or under construction on the effective date of this section may apply
for connection upon annexation to the City, subdivision of said parcel into a single
residence parcel one acre in size and an outlot, and payment of a single-acre connection
fee. Any future development of said parcel shall require a revised application for
connection and payment of the sanitary sewer connection fee as established in the above
fee schedule.
E. The owner of any parcel being used as a public or nonprofit recreational or park
facility upon the effective date of this section may apply for connection upon annexation
to the City and payment of a single-acre sanitary sewer connection fee. Any future
development of said parcel shall require a revised application for connection and payment
of the sanitary sewer connection fee as established herein.
F. The sanitary sewer connection fee for existing single-family residences on land
that cannot be subdivided further, due to restrictions imposed by applicable zoning laws or
regulations, is hereby set at $315.00.
3. Effect of Schedule. The sanitary sewer connection fees herein shall remain in force and
effect until such time that the City Council adopts a resolution to adjust the sanitary sewer
connection fees applicable to the South Central Area Sanitary Sewer Connection Fee District.
Nothing herein is intended to restrict the City Council from an adjustment of the sanitary sewer
connection fee schedule to reflect future construction costs.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 575 -
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
105.01 Purpose 105.07 Littering Prohibited
105.02 Definitions 105.08 Open Dumping Prohibited
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required 105.09 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard 105.10 Waste Storage Containers
105.05 Open Burning Restricted 105.11 Prohibited Practices
105.06 Open Burning Prohibited
105.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Solid Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection, and
disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the City from such hazards to
their health, safety and welfare as may result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
1. “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from public
and private places.
2. “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit, or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
3. “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a structure
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities that are used or are intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
4. “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable
waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving and consuming
of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal, excluding useful
industrial by-products, and includes all such substances from all public and private
establishments and from all residences.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
5. “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The
term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, and yard trimmings.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
6. “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials, or debris.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
7. “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person residing in,
renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in any premises, and as
between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter
imposed shall be joint and several.
8. “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings, market and
industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry or semisolid form.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 576 -
9. “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiplefamily
dwelling.
10. “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a result of
residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on the premises or
deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires, trade wastes and any
locally recyclable goods or plastics.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
11. “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and
non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery, or litter of any kind.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
12. “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it does not
produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
13. “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances (including
all real and personal property connected with such facilities) that are acquired,
purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved, extended, maintained, or
operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid waste without creating a significant
hazard to the public health or safety, and which are approved by the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
14. “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded
solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities. Solid waste may include
vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa. Solid waste does not
include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
A. Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
B. Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes have
been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
C. Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
D. Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or Federal standards.
E. Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as
a discarded material.
105.03 SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED. It is the duty of each owner to provide for
the sanitary disposal of all refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a
nuisance. Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than thirty
(30) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 577 -
105.04 HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD. It is unlawful for any person to permit to
accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of
solid waste that constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.
105.05 OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED. No person shall allow, cause, or permit open
burning of combustible materials, where the products of combustion are emitted into the open
air without passing through a chimney or stack, without first obtaining a permit and
conducting such burning in accordance with the International Fire Code.
105.06 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED. No person shall allow, cause, or permit the
open burning of any combustible materials, including (but not limited to) yard or landscape
waste, leaves, and tree limbs, except that the following shall be permitted:
1. Fire pits.
2. Fires used for recreational cooking purposes, i.e., camp fires or barbecues.
3. Fires related to scouting activities.
4. Fires celebrating school pep rallies.
5. Any fires used for recreational purposes shall comply with the following
requirements:
A. The fire must be used for cooking, heating, recreation or ceremonies.
B. The fire must be contained within a fire ring or a device sold
commercially for the specific purpose of containing a recreational fire. A fire
ring is a continuous ring made of stone, brick, rock, metal or other noncombustible
material not more than five (5) feet in diameter, which is
designed to contain a recreational fire and impede the spread of fire beyond
the ring. The fire ring will be placed at least 10 feet away from any manmade
structure, tree, brush or high grass.
C. Fuel for a recreational fire shall consist of wood only (including
commercially sold recreational fire logs) and shall be two inches in diameter
or larger. This requirement shall not apply to twigs or other kindling
reasonably necessary for the initial lighting of the fire.
D. Fuel shall be no longer than three (3) feet in length.
E. Fuel within the acceptable fire ring shall not set higher than three (3)
feet above the base of the fire.
F. Recreational fires shall not be used for disposal of yard waste, leaves
and/or twigs.
6. Burning of trees after clearing for construction with a permit issued by the
Council.
7. Fires for prairie burns with permit issued by the Council.
8. Training fires set for the purpose of bona fide training of public or industrial
employees in firefighting methods, provided that written notification is delivered to
the City Administrator at least ten working days before such action commences. All
asphalt, roofing, and materials containing asbestos shall be removed prior to the
training fire.
9. Customary burning of logs and other wood products in residential fireplaces.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 578 -
105.07 LITTERING PROHIBITED. No person shall discard any litter onto or in any
water or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized
collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such purpose.
When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall be
responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor
vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08 OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED. No person shall dump or deposit or permit the
dumping or depositing of any solid waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or stream
of water at any place other than a sanitary disposal project approved by the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources, unless a special permit to dump or deposit solid waste
on land owned or leased by such person has been obtained from the Director of the State
Department of Natural Resources. However, this section does not prohibit the use of rubble at
places other than a sanitary disposal project. “Rubble” means dirt, stone, brick, or similar
inorganic materials used for beneficial fill, landscaping, excavation, or grading at places other
than a sanitary disposal project. Rubble includes asphalt waste only as long as it is not used in
contact with water or in a flood plain. For purposes of this section, rubble does not mean
gypsum or gypsum wallboard, coal combustion residue, foundry sand, or industrial process
wastes unless those wastes are approved by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301, Sec. 455B.307 and IAC, 567-100.2)
105.09 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE. No person shall deposit in a solid waste
container or otherwise offer for collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall
be transported and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of
Natural Resources. As used in this section, “toxic and hazardous waste” means waste
materials, including (but not limited to) poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics,
pathological waste, flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful waste that requires
special handling and that must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the environment
and protect the public health and safety.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
(IAC, 567-102.13[2] and 400-27.14[2])
105.10 WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS. Every person owning, managing,
operating, leasing, or renting any premises, dwelling unit or any place where refuse
accumulates shall provide and at all times maintain in good order and repair portable
containers for refuse in accordance with the following:
1. Container Specifications. Waste storage containers shall comply with the
following specifications:
A. Residential. Solid waste collection for residential properties will be
provided solely by the contracting service provided by the City. Contractor
will provide one container per household. Should the container need to be
replaced, a new container will be provided by the contractor. A replacement
charge, if any, shall be determined by the contractor. Any items that cannot
fit inside the container must be separately tagged with stickers provided by
the City at a separate fee determined by the contractor.
(Ord. 709 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
B. Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or
renting any commercial premises where an excessive amount of refuse
accumulates and where its storage in portable containers as required above is
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 579 -
impractical, shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved by the
City.
2. Storage of Containers. Residential solid waste containers shall be stored upon
the residential premises. Commercial solid waste containers shall be stored upon
private property, unless the owner has been granted written permission from the City
to use public property for such purposes. The storage site shall be well drained and
fully accessible to collection equipment, public health personnel, and fire inspection
personnel. All owners of residential and commercial premises shall be responsible for
proper storage of all garbage and yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or
scattered around neighboring yards and streets.
3. Location of Containers for Collection. Containers for the storage of solid
waste awaiting collection shall be placed outdoors at some easily accessible place by
the owner or occupant of the premises served.
4. Nonconforming Containers. Solid waste placed in containers that are not in
compliance with the provisions of this section will not be collected.
105.11 PROHIBITED PRACTICES. It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers not
owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of such containers.
2. Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection
equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties as
such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the City, or those of any other
authorized waste collection service.
3. Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed for high
temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid, or gaseous combustible
refuse is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid residues contain
little or no combustible material, as acceptable to the Environmental Protection
Commission.
4. Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste that has been placed out for
collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste collector.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 580 -
[The next page is 585]
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
106.01 Collection Service 106.06 Right of Entry
106.02 Collection Vehicles 106.07 Contract Requirements
106.03 Loading 106.08 Collection Fees
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.09 Lien for Nonpayment
106.05 Bulky Rubbish
106.01 COLLECTION SERVICE. The City shall provide by contract for the collection of solid waste,
except bulky rubbish as provided in Section 106.05, from residential premises only. The owners or
operators of commercial, industrial, or institutional premises shall provide for the collection of solid waste
produced upon such premises.
106.02 COLLECTION VEHICLES. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation
of garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such materials shall be leak-proof,
durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution, or
insect breeding and shall be maintained in good repair.
(IAC, 567-104.9[455B])
106.03 LOADING. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any solid waste
shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not fall, leak, or spill therefrom, and shall
be covered to prevent blowing or loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked
up immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly
cleaned.
106.04 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION. All solid waste shall be collected from residential
premises at least once each week and from commercial, industrial and institutional premises as frequently
as may be necessary, but not less than once each week.
106.05 BULKY RUBBISH. Bulky rubbish that is too large or heavy to be collected in the normal
manner of other solid waste may be collected by the collector upon request in accordance with procedures
established by the Council.
106.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private
property for the purpose of collecting solid waste. As required by this chapter, however, solid waste
collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential buildings.
106.07 CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS. No person shall engage in the business of collecting,
transporting, processing or disposing of solid waste from residential premises for the City without first
entering into a contract with the City. This section does not prohibit an owner from transporting solid waste
accumulating upon premises owned, occupied or used by such owner, provided such refuse is disposed of
properly in an approved sanitary disposal project. Furthermore, a contract is not required for the removal,
hauling, or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation activities, provided that all such
materials are conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of
the material being transported is spilled upon any public right-of-way.
106.08 COLLECTION FEES. The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter
are declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and there shall be levied and
collected fees for the same, in accordance with the following:
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449)
1. Fee for Collection. The fee for solid waste collection and disposal service, used or
available, is $10.00 per month for each residential dwelling unit.
(Ord. 719 – May 17 Supp.)
2. Payment of Bills. All fees are due and payable under the same terms and conditions
provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in Section 92.05 of this Code of
Ordinances. Solid waste collection service may be discontinued in accordance with the provisions
contained in Section 92.06 if the combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions
contained in Section 92.09 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
106.09 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. Except as provided for in Section 92.08 of this Code of
Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof are jointly and severally
liable for fees for solid waste collection and disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute
a lien upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in
the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.01 Grant of Franchise 110.08 Relocation for Private Developer
110.02 State Code Restrictions and Limitations 110.09 Indemnification
110.03 Excavations 110.10 Information Provided to City
110.04 Relocation of Property 110.11 Standards of Operation
110.05 Restoration of Property 110.12 Franchise Fee
110.06 Vacating Streets 110.13 Termination of Franchise
110.07 Subsequent Relocations
110.01 GRANT OF FRANCHISE. There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy
Company, an Iowa corporation, hereinafter called the “Company,” and its successors and
assigns the nonexclusive right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain, and operate
in the City a gas distribution system, to furnish natural gas along, under, and upon the streets,
avenues, alleys, and public places to serve customers within and without the City and to
furnish and sell natural gas to the City and its inhabitants. For the term of the franchise, the
Company is granted the right of eminent domain, the exercise of which is subject to Council
approval, upon application by the Company. The franchise shall remain in effect for a period
of 25 years, from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.†
110.02 STATE CODE RESTRICTIONS AND LIMITATIONS. The rights and
privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and limitations of Chapter 364 of the
Code of Iowa.
110.03 EXCAVATIONS. The Company shall have the right to excavate, subject to
providing the City with prior notification, in any public street for the purpose of laying, relaying,
repairing or extending gas pipes, mains, conduits, and other facilities, provided that the
same shall be so placed as not to unreasonably interfere with the construction of any water
pipes, drain, or sewer or the flow of water therefrom, which have been or may hereafter be
located by authority of the City.
110.04 RELOCATION OF PROPERTY. Excluding facilities located in private
easements (whether titled in the Company exclusively or in the Company and other entities),
in accordance with Iowa law, including the Company’s tariff on file with and made effective
by the Iowa Utilities Board, as may subsequently be amended, the Company shall, at its cost
and expense, locate and relocate its existing facilities or equipment in, on, over or under any
public street or alley in the City in such manner as the City may reasonably require for the
purposes of facilitating the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the street or
alley. If the City has a reasonable alternative route for the street, alley, or public
improvements, or an alternative construction method, which would not cause the relocation of
the Company installations, the City shall select said alternative route or construction method.
The City shall be responsible for surveying and staking the right-of-way for City projects that
require the Company to relocate Company facilities. If requested, the City shall provide, at no
cost to the Company, copies of its relocation plan and profile and cross-section drawings. If
tree removals must be completed by the City as part of the City’s project and are necessary,
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 606, adopting a natural gas franchise for the City, was passed and
adopted on January 11, 2010.
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
whether or not utility facilities must be relocated, the City, at its own cost, shall be responsible
for said removals. If the timing of the tree removals does not coincide with the Company
facilities relocation schedule and Company must remove trees that are included in the City’s
portion of the project, the City shall either remove the trees at its cost or reimburse the
Company for the expenses incurred to remove said trees. If project funds from a source other
than the City are available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities, the City shall use its
best efforts to secure said funds and provide them to the Company to compensate the
Company for the costs of relocation.
110.05 RESTORATION OF PROPERTY. In making excavations in any streets,
avenues, alleys, and public places for the installation of gas pipes, conduits or apparatus, the
Company shall not unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets and shall replace the surface,
restoring it to the condition that existed prior to excavation. The Company shall not be
required to restore or modify public right-of-way, sidewalks, or other areas in or adjacent to
the Company project to a condition superior to its immediately previous existing condition or
to a condition required for the City to comply with City, State or Federal rules, regulations, or
law.
110.06 VACATING STREETS. Vacating a street, avenue, alley, public ground, or public
right-of-way shall not deprive the Company of its right to operate and maintain existing
facilities on, above, or beneath the vacated property. Prior to abandoning or vacating any
street, avenue, alley, or public ground where the Company has natural gas facilities, the City
shall grant the Company a utility easement for said facilities. If the City fails to grant the
Company a utility easement for said facilities prior to abandoning or vacating a street, avenue,
alley, or public ground, the City shall, at its cost and expense, obtain easements for existing
Company facilities.
110.07 SUBSEQUENT RELOCATIONS. The Company shall not be required to
relocate, at its cost and expense, Company facilities in the public right-of-way that have been
relocated at Company expense at the direction of the City in the previous five years.
110.08 RELOCATION FOR PRIVATE DEVELOPER. Pursuant to relocation of the
Company facilities, as may be required by Sections 110.03 through 110.07 of this chapter, if
the City orders or requests the Company to relocate its existing facilities or equipment in order
to facilitate the project of a commercial or private developer or non-public entity, the City
shall reimburse or the City shall require the developer or non-public entity to reimburse the
Company for the cost of such relocation as a precondition to relocation of its existing facilities
or equipment. The Company shall not be required to relocate in order to facilitate such private
project at its expense.
110.09 INDEMNIFICATION. Company shall indemnify and save harmless the City from
any and all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses on account of injury or damage to
any person or property, caused or occasioned, or allegedly caused or occasioned, in whole or
in part, by Company’s negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation or
maintenance of the gas utilities authorized by the franchise, provided, however, that the
Company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify and save harmless the City for any costs
or damages arising from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees or agents.
110.10 INFORMATION PROVIDED TO CITY. Upon reasonable request, the
Company shall provide the City, on a project specific basis, information indicating the
horizontal location, relative to boundaries of the right-of-way, of all equipment that it owns or
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
over which it has control and which is located in City right-of-way. The Company and City
recognize the information provided will, under current Iowa law, constitute public records, but
that nonetheless, some information provided will be confidential under State or Federal law or
both. Therefore, the City shall not release any information with respect to the location or type
of equipment that the Company owns or controls in the right-of-way and which may constitute
a trade secret or which may otherwise be protected from public disclosure by State or Federal
law. Furthermore, the City agrees that no documents, maps, or information provided to the
City by the Company shall be made available to the public or other entities if such documents
or information are exempt from disclosure under the provisions of the Freedom of Information
Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Critical Energy Infrastructure requirements
pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, and Chapter 22 of the Code of Iowa, as such
statutes and regulations may be amended from time to time.
110.11 STANDARDS OF OPERATION. The Company shall construct, operate and
maintain its facilities in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board
or its successors. During the term of the franchise, the Company shall furnish natural gas in
the quantity and quality consistent with applicable Iowa laws and regulations.
110.12 FRANCHISE FEE. The City reserves the right to impose a franchise fee pursuant
to the Code of Iowa.
1. The City shall be solely responsible for identifying customers subject to or
exempt from paying the City-imposed franchise fee. The City shall be solely
responsible for notifying the Company of its corporate limits, including, over time,
annexations or other alterations thereto, and customers that it wishes to subject to or –
to the extent permitted by law – exempt from paying the franchise fee. The City shall
provide to the Company, by certified mail, copies of annexation ordinances in a timely
manner to ensure appropriate franchise fee collection from customers within the
corporate limits of the City. The Company shall have no obligation to collect
franchise fees from customers in annexed areas until and unless such ordinances have
been provided to the Company by certified mail. The Company shall commence
collecting franchise fees in the annexed areas no sooner than 60 days after receiving
annexation ordinances from the City.
2. The City agrees to modify the level of franchise fees imposed only once in
any 24-month period. Any such ordinance exempting certain types or classes of
customers, increasing, decreasing, modifying or eliminating the franchise fee shall
become effective, and billings reflecting the change shall commence on an agreed
upon date which is not less than 60 days following written notice to the Company by
certified mail. The Company shall not be required to implement such new ordinance
unless and until it determines that it has received appropriate official documentation
of final action by the Council.
3. The City shall indemnify the Company from claims of any nature arising out
of or related to the imposition and collection of the franchise fee. In addition, the
Company shall not be liable for collecting franchise fees from any customer originally
or subsequently identified, or incorrectly identified, by the City as being subject to the
franchise fee or being subject to a different level of franchise fees or being exempt
from the imposition of franchise fees.
4. The Company shall remit franchise fee revenues to the City no more
frequently than on or before the last business day of the month following each
calendar quarter. The Company shall provide City with notice at least 30 days in
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
advance of any changes made in the collection schedule, including any alterations in
the calendar quarters or any other changes in the remittance periods.
5. The City recognizes that the costs of franchise fee administration are not
charged directly to the City and agrees it shall, if required by the Company, reimburse
the Company for any initial or ongoing costs incurred by the Company in collecting
franchise fees that Company in its sole opinion deems to be in excess of typical costs
of franchise fee administration.
6. The Company shall not, under any circumstances, be required to return or
refund any franchise fees that have been collected from City customers and remitted
to the City. In the event the Company is required to provide data or information in
defense of the City’s imposition of franchise fees or the Company is required to assist
the City in identifying customers or calculating any franchise fee refunds for groups of
or individual customers, the City shall reimburse the Company for the expenses
incurred by the Company to provide such data or information.
7. The obligation to collect and remit any fees imposed pursuant to this chapter
is modified or repealed if:
A. Any other person is authorized to sell natural gas at retail to City
customers and the City imposes a franchise fee or its lawful equivalent at zero
or a lesser rate than provided in this ordinance, in which case the obligation of
Company to collect and remit franchise fee shall be modified to zero or the
lesser rate.
B. The City adds additional territory by annexation or consolidation and
is unable or unwilling to impose the franchise fee upon all persons selling
natural gas at retail to customers within the additional territory, in which case
the franchise fee imposed on the revenue from sales by Company in the
additional territory shall be zero or equal to that of the lowest fee being paid
by any other retail seller of natural gas within the City.
C. Legislation is enacted by the Iowa General Assembly or the Supreme
Court of Iowa issues a final ruling regarding franchise fees or the Iowa
Utilities Board issues a final non-appealable order (collectively, “final
franchise fee action”) that modifies, but does not repeal, the ability of the City
to impose a franchise fee or the ability of Company to collect from City
customers and remit franchise fees to City. Within 60 days of final franchise
fee action, the City shall notify Company and the parties shall meet to
determine whether this chapter can be revised, and, if so, how to revise the
franchise fee on a continuing basis to meet revised legal requirements. After
final franchise fee action and until passage by the City of revisions to the
franchise fee ordinance, Company may temporarily discontinue collection and
remittance of the franchise fee if in its sole opinion it believes it is required to
do so in order to comply with revised legal requirements.
8. The other provisions of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Company shall be completely relieved of its obligation to collect and remit to the City
the franchise fee as, effective as the date specified below, with no liability therefor
under any of the following circumstances as determined to exist, in the sole discretion
of Company:
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
A. Any of the imposition, collection, or remittance of a franchise fee is
ruled to be unlawful by the Supreme Court of Iowa, effective as of the date of
such ruling or as may be specified by that Court.
B. The Iowa General Assembly enacts legislation making imposition,
collection, or remittance of a franchise fee unlawful, effective as of the date
lawfully specified by the General Assembly.
C. The Iowa Utilities Board, or its successor agency, denies the
Company the right to impose, collect, or remit a franchise fee, provided such
denial is affirmed by the Supreme Court of Iowa, effective as of the date of
the final agency order from which the appeal is taken.
9. The City shall not, pursuant to Chapter 480A.6 of the Code of Iowa, impose
or charge Company right-of-way management fees for permits for Company
construction, maintenance, repairs, excavation, pavement cutting, or inspections of
Company work sites and projects or related matters.
110.13 TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE. Either the City or the Company may
terminate the franchise if the other party shall be materially in breach of its provisions. Upon
the occurrence of a material breach, the non-breaching party shall provide the breaching party
with notification by certified mail specifying the alleged breach. The breaching party shall
have 60 days to cure the breach, unless it notifies the non-breaching party, and the parties
agree upon a shorter or longer period for cure. If the breach is not cured within the cure
period, the non-breaching party may terminate the franchise. A party shall not be considered
to be in breach of the franchise if it has operated in compliance with State or Federal law. A
party shall not be considered to have breached the franchise if the alleged breach is the result
of the actions of a third party or the other party.
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
[The next page is 617]
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC UTILITY
111.01 Purpose 111.05 Rates
111.02 Policy Direction 111.06 Adjustment
111.03 Superintendent 111.07 Electrical Resources Pooling Agreement
111.04 Service Rules and Regulations
111.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the operation of the municipally-owned
electric system.
111.02 POLICY DIRECTION. The Mayor and Council shall establish appropriate rules and
regulations governing the operation and maintenance of the electric system.
111.03 SUPERINTENDENT. The Council shall appoint a superintendent, who shall be responsible for
execution of policies governing the system, as established by the Council.
111.04 SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS. The rules, regulations, and fees for electric service
are contained in the Service Rules of the Municipal Electric Utility, an official copy of which was adopted
by resolution of the Council and is on file in the office of the Clerk. The rules, regulations, and service fees
contained therein shall apply to all users of the municipal electric system.
111.05 RATES. The rates for electric service are as follows:
1. Definition of Summer and Winter Rates. Summer rates shall be billed in June, July, August
and September. Winter rates shall be billed in October, November, December, January, February,
March, April and May.
All rates and the bills for services rendered there under may be adjusted from month to month to
reflect base costs of “Power Production Cost Adjustment” or “Energy Cost Adjustment” or any
other similar costs charged to the City by its power supplier.
All rates may be increased by the amount of any new or increased governmental tax imposed and
levied on production, transmission, distribution for sale of electricity or other cost variation that is
in excess of 10% of the expense included in the rate base for power and transmission costs and the
City Council believes is in the best interest of the Utility to include in a 12-month adjustment clause.
2.
A. Residential Rates. Monthly charges for electric service for single occupancy
residential consumption shall be:
Beginning April 1, 2017:
Item Summer Rate Winter Rate
Service Charge $15.00/mo. $15.00/mo.
First 1,000 kWh $0.1423/kWh $0.1423/kWh
Additional kWh $0.1423/kWh $0.1273/kWh
B. Residential Electric Heat Rates. When an electric space heating rate has been
applied for and electric space heating has been installed which conforms to the utility’s
specifications and is the sole source of heat for the premises, monthly charges shall be:
Beginning April 1, 2017:
Item Summer Rate Winter Rate
Service Charge $15.00/mo. $15.00/mo.
First 1,000 kWh $0.1423/kWh $0.1263/kWh
Additional kWh $0.1423/kWh $0.0980/kWh
3.
A. General Service (previous Commercial) Rates: Monthly charges for electric
service for commercial consumption shall be:
Beginning April 1, 2017:
Item Summer Rate Winter Rate
Service Charge $25.00/mo. $25.00/mo.
First 4,000 kWh $0.1430/kWh $0.1330/kWh
Additional kWh $0.1430/kWh $0.1130/kWh
B. General Service Heat (previous Commercial Electric Heat) Rates: When an
electric space heating rate has been applied for and electric space heating has been installed
which conforms to the utility’s specifications and is the sole source of heat for the premises,
monthly charges shall be:
Beginning April 1, 2017:
Item Summer Rate Winter Rate
Service Charge $25.00/mo. $25.00/mo.
First 4,000 kWh $0.1430/kWh $0.1316/kWh
Additional kWh $0.1430/kWh $0.1116/kWh
C. General Service Demand (previous Commercial Demand Metered) Rates: For any
customer whose normal total demand is 40 KW or more, provided the entire requirements
are taken through one meter, not applicable to resale, standby, temporary, supplemental,
auxiliary or shared service, the monthly charges shall be:
Beginning April 1, 2017:
Item Summer Rate Winter Rate
Service Charge $55.00/mo. $55.00/mo.
kW of demand $14.00/kW $11.00/kW
All kWh $0.0998/kWh $0.0898/kWh
D. Security Lighting (Dusk to Dawn Lighting) Rates: To any Customer to light an
area of an existing meter service location agreeable to the Electric Utility, for which Utility
lamps with photocell dusk-to-dawn control will be installed on Utility owned poles. The
monthly charges shall be:
Beginning April 1, 2017:
Item kWh/Mo. applied
to any adjustment clause
Total Charge
including base energy
100 Watt HPSV 40 $11.00
150 Watt HPSV 60 $12.90
250 Watt HPSV 100 $16.85
E. Street Lighting Rate: To any governmental agency to light streets, highways, or
other public right-of-ways where the energy is delivered from metered service under the
applicable General Service Rate, for which Utility lamps with photocell dusk-to-dawn
control are installed on Utility owned poles. The monthly charges for maintenance of such
light fixtures shall be:
Beginning April 1, 2017:
Item Charge
100 Watt HPSV $4.40
150 Watt HPSV $6.15
250 Watt HPSV $9.05
50 Watt LED $3.25
(Ord. 703 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
4. Municipal Service Rate. Monthly charges for electrical service to the City and all its
intergovernmental departments shall be billed at the General Service Rate. This rate and the bill
for service rendered thereunder may be adjusted from month to month to reflect base costs of
“Power Production Cost Adjustment” or “Energy Cost Adjustment” charged to the City by its
power supplier. This rate may be increased by the amount of any new or increased governmental
tax imposed and levied on transmission, distribution, production or sale of electricity.
111.06 ADJUSTMENT. (Repealed by Ord. 674 – Mar. 16 Supp.)
111.07 ELECTRICAL RESOURCES POOLING AGREEMENT.
1. Agreement. The City Council hereby finds and declares it to be in the public interest of
the customers of the City’s electric utility that the City become a party to Electrical Resources
Pooling Agreement with the Municipal Energy Agency of Nebraska as a Bulk Power Participant.
It is hereby ordered and directed that the City, acting through its Mayor and City Clerk, execute the
Electrical Resources Pooling Agreement as a Bulk Power Participant, a copy of said Agreement
being on file at City Hall and made a part hereof. The City does hereby adopt and approve each of
the objectives, terms and conditions set forth in the Electrical Resources Pooling Agreement.
2. Service Schedule K. (Repealed by Ord. 672 – Mar. 16 Supp.)
3. Service Schedule M. The City Council hereby finds and declares it to be in the public
interest and in the interest of the customers of the City’s electric utility that the City adopt and
execute Service Schedule M, Total Power Requirements Power Purchase Agreement, to the
Electrical Resources Pooling Agreement with the Municipal Energy Agency of Nebraska (MEAN).
It is hereby ordered and directed that the City, acting through its Mayor and City Clerk, execute
Service Schedule M, Total Power Requirements Power Purchase Agreement, to the Electrical
Resources Pooling Agreement. The City does hereby adopt and approve each of the objectives,
terms and conditions set forth in Service Schedule M. The City acknowledges that certain of the
generating facilities used by MEAN to provide electricity to the City have been financed with taxexempt
bonds and the use of the electric output of such generating facilities is restricted by federal
tax regulations. In order to permit MEAN to comply with such federal tax regulations, the City
agrees to use all of the electricity delivered to it by MEAN solely to serve customers in its longterm
service area pursuant to generally applicable and uniformly applied rates and charges. “Longterm
service area” means any area that the City has provided electric service to for at least ten years.
Any other use, resale or remarketing of the electricity delivered by MEAN to the City must be
approved in writing by MEAN.
[The next page is 625]
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
121.01 Definitions 121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required 121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application 121.08 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees 121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
121.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1. “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or containing tobacco,
that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether by chewing, absorbing, dissolving,
inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not
include cigarettes, tobacco products, or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug or
device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
2. “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or any substitute
for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of tobacco or any substitute for tobacco
being flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or
cover made of paper or any other material. However, this definition is not to be construed to include
cigars.
3. “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes or tobacco products are sold, stored
or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
4. “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for consumption, or
possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption, cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor
products, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales, or who engages in the
business of selling tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products to
ultimate consumers.
5. “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement, or storage from
which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the product, prior to purchase,
without assistance from the retailer or employee of the retailer, in removing the product from a
restricted access location.
6. “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots; stogies; periques;
granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug
and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings
and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be
suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does
not mean cigarettes.
7. “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not contain
nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic,
chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from
a solution or other substance. “Vapor product” includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device, and any cartridge or other
container of a solution or other substance, which may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe,
or similar product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a drug or
device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of a retail permit,
to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products at retail and no retailer shall
distribute, sell, or solicit the sale of any cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products
within the City without a valid permit for each place of business. The permit shall, at all times, be
publicly displayed at the place of business so as to be easily seen by the public and the persons
authorized to inspect the place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
2. Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a retailer
of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products at any place of
business without first having received a permit as a retailer for each place of business owned or
operated by the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a retail tobacco permit. However,
if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette permit and that permit is suspended, revoked, or expired, the retailer
shall not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, during such
time.
121.03 APPLICATION. A completed application on forms furnished by the State Department of
Revenue or on forms made available or approved by the Department and accompanied by the required fee
shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed at least five (5) days prior to the last
regular meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal application is not timely filed, and a special Council
meeting is called to act on the application, the costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.04 FEES. The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING: FEE:
July, August or September $ 75.00
October, November or December $ 56.25
January, February or March $ 37.50
April, May or June $ 18.75
121.05 ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION. Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a
permit shall be issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business for which it is issued
and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate
of any application for a permit, and any permit issued, to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the
Department of Commerce within thirty (30) days of issuance.
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
121.06 REFUNDS. A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from the City,
except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of refunds as provided in Section 453A.13
or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.07 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. No person shall sell, give, or otherwise supply any tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to any person under eighteen
(18) years of age. The provision of this section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, and cigarettes from a vending machine. If
a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written
notice and hearing, and in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation, assess the following:
1. For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount of three
hundred dollars ($300.00). Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under this subsection shall
result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of fourteen (14) days.
2. For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil
penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or the retailer’s permit shall
be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days. The retailer may select its preference in the penalty
to be applied under this subsection.
3. For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil
penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of 30
days.
4. For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall be assessed a civil
penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of sixty
(60) days.
5. For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s permit shall be revoked.
The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy of the notice to the place
of business as it appears on the application for a permit. The notice shall state the reason for the
contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
121.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED. Except for the sale of cigarettes through a cigarette
vending machine as provided in Section 453A.36(6) of the Code of Iowa, a retailer shall not sell or offer
for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes through the
use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09 PERMIT REVOCATION. Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as
provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter for a
violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is
revoked, a new permit shall not be issued to the permit holder for any place of business, or to any other
person for the place of business at which the violation occurred, until one year has expired from the date of
revocation, unless good cause to the contrary is shown to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation
or suspension of a retail permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within
thirty (30) days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose 122.10 Time Restriction
122.02 Definitions 122.11 Revocation of License
122.03 License Required 122.12 Hearing
122.04 Application for License 122.13 Record and Determination
122.05 License Fees 122.14 Appeal
122.06 Bond Required 122.15 Effect of Revocation
122.07 License Issued 122.16 Rebates
122.08 Display of License 122.17 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.18 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
122.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against fraud, unfair
competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors,
and transient merchants.
122.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or offers for sale for
immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house or upon the public street.
2. “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to house or
upon the public street any contribution or donation or any order for goods, services, subscriptions
or merchandise to be delivered at a future date.
3. “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or itinerant
merchandising business and in the course of such business hires, leases or occupies any building
or structure whatsoever, or who operates out of a vehicle that is parked anywhere within the City
limits. Temporary association with a local merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of
such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer,
trader, or auctioneer does not exempt any person from being considered a transient merchant.
122.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the business of a
transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license as herein provided is in violation of this
chapter.
122.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. An application in writing shall be filed with the Clerk for a
license under this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name, permanent and local
address, and business address if any. The application shall also set forth the applicant’s employer, if any,
and the employer’s address, the nature of the applicant’s business, the last three places of such business and
the length of time sought to be covered by the license. An application fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be
paid at the time of filing such application to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein.
122.05 LICENSE FEES. The following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk prior to the issuance of
any license.
1. Solicitors. In addition to the application fee for each person actually soliciting (principal
or agent), a fee for the principal of ten dollars ($10.00) per year.
2. Peddlers or Transient Merchants.
A. For one day .......................................................... $ 25.00
B. For one week ........................................................ $ 50.00
C. For up to six (6) months ....................................... $100.00
D. For one year or major part thereof ....................... $200.00
122.06 BOND REQUIRED. Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant, an
applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a bond with the Secretary of State
in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of Iowa.
122.07 LICENSE ISSUED. If the Clerk finds the application is completed in conformance with the
requirements of this chapter, the facts stated therein are found to be correct, and the license fee paid, a
license shall be issued immediately.
122.08 DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Each solicitor or peddler shall keep such license in possession at all
times while doing business in the City and shall, upon the request of prospective customers, exhibit the
license as evidence of compliance with all requirements of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall
display publicly such merchant’s license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are
not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing the application.
122.10 TIME RESTRICTION. All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses
are in force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
122.11 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing,
the Clerk may revoke any license issued pursuant to this chapter for the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the application for
the license or in the conduct of the business.
2. Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise conducted the
business in an unlawful manner.
3. Endangered Public Welfare, Health, or Safety. The licensee has conducted the business in
such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order, or morals.
The Clerk shall send the written notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local address. The notice shall
contain particulars of the complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or State statutes
allegedly violated, and the date, time, and place for hearing on the matter.
122.12 HEARING. The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any complainants
shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint and notice. Should the licensee,
or authorized representative, fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination
of the complaint.
122.13 RECORD AND DETERMINATION. The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and
conclusions of law, and shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record the Clerk finds
clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or State law.
122.14 APPEAL. If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a part of the
record the reasons for such revocation or refusal. The licensee, or the applicant, shall have a right to a
hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify, or affirm the
decision of the Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall carry out the
decision of the Council.
122.15 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being
eligible for any license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of the revocation.
122.16 REBATES. Any licensee, except in the case of a revoked license, shall be entitled to a rebate of
part of the fee paid if the license is surrendered before it expires. The amount of the rebate shall be
determined by dividing the total license fee by the number of days for which the license was issued and
then multiplying the result by the number of full days not expired. In all cases, at least five dollars ($5.00)
of the original fee shall be retained by the City to cover administrative costs.
122.17 LICENSE EXEMPTIONS. The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.
1. Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for, or selling subscriptions to newspapers.
2. Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl Scout, 4-H
Clubs, Future Farmers of America, and similar organizations.
3. Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for sale their own
products.
4. Students. Students representing the Carlisle Community School District conducting
projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
5. Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit additional business or
make special sales.
6. Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or institutions for
the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional use.
122.18 CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS. Pursuant to the case of Watch
Tower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc. v. Village of Stratton, 536 U.S. 150 (2002), authorized
representatives of religious organizations are not required to register or obtain a permit from the City prior
to engaging in their house-to-house ministry and/or solicitation on behalf of their ministry. Authorized
representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations desiring to solicit money or distribute literature are
exempt from the operation of Sections 122.04 and 122.05. However, all such organizations are required to
submit in writing to the Clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are sought, names
and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period during which such activities are
to be carried on, and whether any commissions, fees, or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the
amount thereof. If the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit organization, the
Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license containing the above information to the applicant. In the event
the Clerk denies the exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the decision
to the Council, as provided in Section 122.14 of this chapter.
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
123.01 House Mover Defined 123.08 Public Safety
123.02 Permit Required 123.09 Time Limit
123.03 Application 123.10 Removal by City
123.04 Bond Required 123.11 Protect Pavement
123.05 Insurance Required 123.12 Overhead Wires
123.06 Permit Fee 123.13 Exceptions
123.07 Permit Issued
123.01 HOUSE MOVER DEFINED. A “house mover” means any person who undertakes to move a
building or similar structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the building or structure
is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies, or any other specialized moving equipment.
123.02 PERMIT REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of house mover
as herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building or similar structure to be
moved.
123.03 APPLICATION. Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing to the Clerk.
The application shall include:
1. Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and if a corporation the names
and addresses of its principal officers.
2. Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and future site of the
building or similar structure to be moved.
3. Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, street superintendent, and
public utility officials. The route approved shall be the shortest route compatible with the greatest
public convenience and safety.
123.04 BOND REQUIRED. The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the minimum sum
of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to issue such bonds in the State.
The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any damage done to the City or to public property,
and payment of all costs incurred by the City in the course of moving the building or structure.
123.05 INSURANCE REQUIRED. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance indicating
that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the duration of the permit covering the
applicant and all agents and employees for the following minimum amounts:
1. Bodily Injury – $100,000 per person; $300,000 per accident.
2. Property Damage – $100,000 per accident.
123.06 PERMIT FEE. A permit fee of $500.00 shall be payable at the time of filing the application
with the Clerk. A permit fee of $125.00 shall be payable at the time of filing an application for moving a
garage. A separate permit shall be required for each house, garage, building, or similar structure to be
moved.
123.07 PERMIT ISSUED. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance certificate,
and payment of the required fee, the Clerk shall issue a permit.
123.08 PUBLIC SAFETY. At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain flag persons at the closest
intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure.
At all times when the building or structure is at rest upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property the
permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or lights at the intersections or channels of traffic to the
sides, behind and ahead of the building or structure.
123.09 TIME LIMIT. No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure to remain
upon any street or other public way for a period of more than twelve (12) hours without having first secured
the written approval of the City.
123.10 REMOVAL BY CITY. In the event any building or similar structure is found to be in violation
of Section 123.09 the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and assess the costs thereof
against the permit holder and the surety on the permit holder’s bond.
123.11 PROTECT PAVEMENT. It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind over any
pavement, unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved are at least one inch in
width for each one thousand (1,000) pounds of weight of such building. If there is any question as to the
weight of a house or building, the estimate of the City as to such weight shall be final.
123.12 OVERHEAD WIRES. The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all telephone,
cable television and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and replaced in good order, and
shall be liable for the costs of the same.
123.13 EXCEPTIONS. No permit or bond shall be required for the moving of any small, one-story
building not over 12 feet high, such as garages, accessory buildings and the like, when such buildings do
not exceed 300 square feet of floor area and have one dimension not exceeding 12 feet; provided, such
building shall be loaded upon a pneumatic-tired truck or a truck and not more than one pneumatic-tired
two-wheel trailer. Before moving any such building, the person moving the building shall notify the Police
Chief or the police officer on duty, and shall use the highest degree of care so that no damage results to any
person or property. In case damage to persons or property results from such moving, the City shall in no
case be held liable for such damage.
CHAPTER 124
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
124.01 Tax Imposed 124.03 Collection
124.02 Definitions 124.04 Allocation of Tax
124.01 TAX IMPOSED. There is imposed a seven percent (7%) hotel and motel tax upon the sales
price from the renting of sleeping rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in a hotel, motel, inn, public
lodging house, rooming house, manufactured or mobile home which is tangible personal property, or tourist
court or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for rent, whether
with or without meals, except the sales price from the renting of sleeping rooms in dormitories and memorial
unions at all universities and colleges located in the State.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.1)
124.02 DEFINITIONS. “Renting” and “rent,” as used in this chapter, include any kind of direct or
indirect charge for the use of sleeping rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters. However, the tax imposed
in this chapter does not apply to the sales price from the renting of a sleeping room, apartment or sleeping
quarters while rented by the same person for a period of more than thirty-one (31) consecutive days.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.1)
124.03 COLLECTION. The tax imposed in this chapter shall be remitted by the person or company
liable for same to the State Director of Revenue in the manner required by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.1)
124.04 ALLOCATION OF TAX. The allocation of the tax shall be as follows: 65 percent for Park
Capital Expenditures and 35 percent to the General Fund Budget.
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing 135.09 Excavations
135.03 Placing Debris On 135.10 Maintenance of Parking or Terrace
135.04 Playing In 135.11 Failure to Maintain Parking or Terrace
135.05 Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley 135.12 Dumping of Snow
135.06 Use for Business Purposes 135.13 Driveway Culverts
135.07 Washing Vehicles
135.01 REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES. It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw
down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other article or things,
or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing
unsafe or dangerous places in said street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface or injure
any street or alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03 PLACING DEBRIS ON. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or alley
any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, leaves, grass, any
petroleum products or oil, or any other debris or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or
vehicle or which, if washed into the storm sewer, could contaminate waterways or clog the storm sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04 PLAYING IN. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets or alleys,
except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05 TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY. It is unlawful for any person to
travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs, or flares
placed thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police officer or member of the Fire
Department.
135.06 USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES. It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or
permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and merchandise of any kind upon any
street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering same for sale, without permission of
the Council.
135.07 WASHING VEHICLES. It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street, or
alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any vehicle of any kind
when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does not prevent any person from washing or
cleaning his or her own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.
135.08 BURNING PROHIBITED. No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish, or other
combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09 EXCAVATIONS. No person shall dig, excavate, or in any manner disturb any street, parking,
or other portion within the street right-of-way except as hereinafter provided or as provided in other sections
of this Code of Ordinances:
1. Permit; Application. No excavation shall be commenced without first obtaining a permit.
A written application for such permit shall be filed with the City. The application shall give an
exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in front of or along which it is desired
to excavate, state the purpose and for whom and by whom the excavation is to be made, and who
will be responsible for the refilling of said ditch and restoration of the street surface.
2. Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner that will cause the
least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter on
the street.
3. Barricades and Lighting. Adequate barricades and warning lights meeting standards
specified by the City shall be so placed as to protect the public from hazard. Any costs incurred by
the City in providing or maintaining adequate barricades or warning lights shall be paid to the City
by the permit holder.
4. Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City, at the
expense of the property owner.
5. Inspection. All work shall be subject to inspection by the City. Backfill shall not be
deemed completed, and no resurfacing of any improved street or alley surface shall begin, until
such backfill is inspected and approved by the City. The permit holder shall provide the City with
notice at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time when inspection of backfill is desired.
6. Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be discontinued or
left open and unfinished for a period of twenty-four (24) hours or if the work is improperly done,
the City has the right to finish or correct the excavation work, and the expense shall be charged to
the permit holder and/or property owner.
7. Property Owner’s Responsibility. All costs and expenses incident to the excavation shall
be borne by the permit holder and property owner. The permit holder and owner shall indemnify
the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
8. Notification. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of the excavation,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, the person performing the excavation shall
contact the Statewide Notification Center and provide the center with the information required
under Section 480.4 of the Code of Iowa.
135.10 MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE. It shall be the responsibility of the abutting
property owner to maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines upon the
public streets, except that the abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes timely mowing, trimming
trees and shrubs, and picking up litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
135.11 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE. If the abutting property owner does
not perform an action required under the above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the same manner as a
property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12 DUMPING OF SNOW. It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or cause to be
thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or driveways onto the traveled
way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley
or to create a hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the
business district it is absolutely necessary to move the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such
accumulation shall be removed promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt
removal of such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.13 DRIVEWAY CULVERTS. The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any
culvert deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s property, and before
installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City. In the event repairs are needed at any
time with respect to culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make such repairs, and,
in the event the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to make the repairs. If the property owner
fails to reimburse the City for the cost of said repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and
specially assessed against the property as by law provided.
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose 136.10 Failure to Repair or Barricade
136.02 Definitions 136.11 Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice, and Accumulations 136.12 Encroaching Steps
136.04 Responsibility for Maintenance 136.13 Openings and Enclosures
136.05 City May Order Repairs 136.14 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
136.06 Sidewalk Construction Ordered 136.15 Defacing
136.07 Permit Required 136.16 Debris on Sidewalks
136.08 Sidewalk Standards 136.17 Merchandise Display
136.09 Barricades and Warning Lights 136.18 Sales Stands
136.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on sidewalks, to
place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair, replacement, or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the
abutting property owner and to minimize the liability of the City.
136.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the sidewalk when it is
hardening.
2. “Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more of the following
characteristics:
A. Vertical separations equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more.
B. Horizontal separations equal to one (1) inch or more.
C. Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more and at least four (4)
inches in diameter.
D. Spalling over fifty percent (50%) of a single square of the sidewalk with one or
more depressions equal to one-half (½) inch or more.
E. Spalling over less than fifty percent (50%) of a single square of the sidewalk with
one or more depressions equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more.
F. A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no part thereof has a
piece greater than one square foot.
G. A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
H. A change from the design or construction grade equal to or greater than threefourths
(¾) inch per foot.
3. “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the particular area in
which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
4. “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete is placed at one
time, using the same mixture throughout.
5. “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any sidewalk and
includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification required herein. For all other purposes,
“owner” includes the lessee, if any.
6. “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
7. “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or suburban areas.
8. “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair, replacement, or
removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling or depositing of material in the public
right-of-way in connection therewith.
9. “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing the surface of the
sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS. It is the responsibility of the
abutting property owners to remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from sidewalks. If a property
owner does not remove snow, ice, or accumulations within 48 hours, the City may do so and assess the
costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])
136.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE. It is the responsibility of the abutting property
owners to repair, replace or reconstruct, or cause to be repaired, replaced or reconstructed, all broken or
defective sidewalks and to maintain in a safe and hazard-free condition any sidewalk outside the lot and
property lines and inside the curb lines or traveled portion of the public street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
136.05 CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS. If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks
as required, the Council may serve notice on such owner, by certified mail, requiring the owner to repair,
replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time and if such action is not completed within the
time stated in the notice, the Council may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2d & e])
136.06 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED. The Council may order the construction of
permanent sidewalks upon any street or court in the City and may specially assess the cost of such
improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 384 of the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.38)
136.07 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall remove, reconstruct, or install a sidewalk unless such
person has obtained a permit from the City and has agreed in writing that said removal, reconstruction, or
installation will comply with all ordinances and requirements of the City for such work. A written
application for such permit shall be filed with the City.
136.08 SIDEWALK STANDARDS. Sidewalks repaired, replaced, or constructed under the provisions
of this chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following standards:
1. Cement. Portland cement shall be the only cement used in the construction and repair of
sidewalks.
2. Construction. Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction.
3. Sidewalk Base. Concrete may be placed directly on compact and well-drained soil. Where
soil is not well drained, a three-inch sub-base of compact, clean, coarse gravel or sand shall be laid.
The adequacy of the soil drainage is to be determined by the City.
4. Sidewalk Bed. The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the constructed sidewalk will be
at established grade.
5. Length, Width and Depth. Length, width and depth requirements are as follows:
A. Residential sidewalks shall be at least five (5) feet wide and four (4) inches thick,
and each section shall be no more than four (4) feet in length, except that all new or
replacement sidewalks in existing neighborhoods shall conform to the width of the
previously existing sidewalks, provided the minimum width of new or replacement
sidewalks in existing neighborhoods shall not be less than four (4) feet.
B. Business District sidewalks shall extend from the property line to the curb. Each
section shall be four (4) inches thick and no more than six (6) feet in length.
C. Driveway areas shall be not less than six (6) inches in thickness.
6. Location. Residential sidewalks shall be located with the inner edge (edge nearest the
abutting private property) on the property line, unless the Council establishes a different distance
due to special circumstances.
7. Grade. Curb tops shall be on level with the centerline of the street, which is the established
grade.
8. Elevations. The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an elevation even with the curb at the
curb or not less than one-half (½) inch above the curb for each foot between the curb and the
sidewalk.
9. Slope. All sidewalks shall slope one-quarter (¼) inch per foot toward the curb.
10. Finish. All sidewalks shall be finished with a broom finish or wood float finish.
11. Curb Ramps and Sloped Areas for Persons with Disabilities. If a street, road, or highway
is newly built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed at each
intersection of the street, road, or highway with a sidewalk or path. If a sidewalk or path is newly
built or reconstructed, a curb ramp or sloped area shall be constructed or installed at each
intersection of the sidewalk or path with a street, highway, or road. Curb ramps and sloped areas
that are required pursuant to this subsection shall be constructed or installed in compliance with
applicable Federal requirements adopted in accordance with the Federal Americans with
Disabilities Act, including (but not limited to) the guidelines issued by the Federal Architectural
and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 216C.9)
136.09 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS. Whenever any material of any kind is deposited
on any street, avenue, highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or when
any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all persons having an interest therein, either
as the contractor or the owner, agent, or lessee of the property in front of or along which such material may
be deposited, or such dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at each end of such sidewalk
and at each end of any pile of material deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning
lights or flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades both at
night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using the street for any of the purposes
specified in this chapter shall be liable for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any
wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or employees or for any misuse of the
privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to comply with provisions hereof.
136.10 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE. It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting
the sidewalk, or the owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City immediately in the event of failure or
inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to install or erect necessary barricades as required
by this chapter.
136.11 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. No person shall knowingly or
willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of
being improved or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove or
destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any
sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.12 ENCROACHING STEPS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to
any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution of the Council.
136.13 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES. It is unlawful for a person to:
1. Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar or basement
by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk with a railing without
permission by resolution of the Council.
2. Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating, or cover to any vault on any sidewalk except
while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
3. Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on or within six
(6) feet of any sidewalk.
136.14 FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on
any sidewalk or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.15 DEFACING. It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint, or writing on any
sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.16 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk
any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or any other debris, or
any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
136.17 MERCHANDISE DISPLAY. It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk,
any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere with the free and
uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case shall more than three (3) feet of the
sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such purposes.
136.18 SALES STANDS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or stand for
the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any sidewalk without first obtaining a
written permit from the Council.
CHAPTER 137 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
CHAPTER 137
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
137.01 Power to Vacate 137.04 Findings Required
137.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 137.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys
137.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing 137.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
137.01 POWER TO VACATE. When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest
of the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds, the Council may do so by
ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])
137.02 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. Any proposal to vacate a street, alley, portion
thereof, or any public grounds shall be referred by the Council to the Planning and Zoning Commission for
its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by the Council. The Commission shall submit
a written report including recommendations to the Council within thirty (30) days after the date the proposed
vacation is referred to the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
137.03 NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING. The Council shall cause to be published a notice of
public hearing of the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
137.04 FINDINGS REQUIRED. No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be
vacated unless the Council finds that:
1. Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public ground proposed to be vacated
is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore, its maintenance at public expense is no longer
justified.
2. Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property abutting on
the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
137.05 DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS. When in the judgment of the Council
it would be in the best interest of the City to dispose of a vacated street or alley, portion thereof or public
ground, the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of Section 364.7, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
137.06 DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED. The City may not dispose of real property by gift except to
a governmental body for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] & 364.7[3])
CHAPTER 137 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from repeal, have been adopted
vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public grounds and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
38 July 22, 1940
40 October 5, 1942
41 May 1, 1944
46 June 22, 1948
58 May 25, 1957
59 August 5, 1957
78 August 7, 1961
92 September 4, 1962
104 June 15, 1964
Unnumbered October 14, 1968
130 November 11, 1968
146 August 4, 1969
161 February 22, 1971
Unnumbered January 8, 1973
Unnumbered November 12, 1973
227 September 8, 1975
242A November 14, 1977
Unnumbered December 14, 1981
289 August 23, 1982
290 October 25, 1982
292 May 23, 1983
Unnumbered January 23, 1984
301 September 10, 1984
CHAPTER 137 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
307 May 28, 1985
311 July 8, 1985
312 July 22, 1985
316 December 9, 1985
Unnumbered October, 1986
Unnumbered November 24, 1986
347 May 8, 1989
363 November 13, 1989
409 October 12, 1992
411 November 23, 1992
423 September 26, 1994
424 January 11, 1993
451 July 24, 1997
535 January 26, 2004
594A February 9, 2009
611 May 24, 2010
645 June 11, 2012
651 October 22, 2012
660 January 27, 2014
CHAPTER 138
STREET GRADES
138.01 Established Grades 138.02 Record Maintained
138.01 ESTABLISHED GRADES. The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been
heretofore established by ordinance, are hereby confirmed, ratified, and established as official grades.
138.02 RECORD MAINTAINED. The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and
furnish information concerning such grades upon request.
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances not codified herein, and specifically saved from repeal, have been
adopted establishing street and/or sidewalk grades and remain in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. ADOPTED
31 1938
279 March 23, 1981
324 March 9, 1987
349 June 12, 1989
427 May 8, 1995
443 May 6, 1996
600 August 10, 2009

CHAPTER 139
NAMING OF STREETS
139.01 Naming New Streets 139.04 Official Street Name Map
139.02 Changing Name of Street 139.05 Revision of Street Name Map
139.03 Recording Street Names
139.01 NAMING NEW STREETS. New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the
following:
1. Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are natural extensions of
existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing street.
2. Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a subdivision or platting
procedure, shall be named by resolution.
3. Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
139.02 CHANGING NAME OF STREET. The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a
street.
139.03 RECORDING STREET NAMES. Following official action naming or changing the name of
a street, the Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and County Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
139.04 OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP. Streets within the City are named as shown on the Official
Street Name Map, which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The
Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, and bearing the seal of the City
under the following words: “This is to certify that this is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section
139.04 of the Code of Ordinances of Carlisle, Iowa.”
139.05 REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP. If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
changes are made in street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official Street Name Map promptly
after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry on the Official Street Name Map as
follows: “On (date), by official action of the City Council, the following changes were made in the Official
Street Name Map: (brief description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
145.01 Enforcement Officer 145.05 Conduct of Hearing
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Posting of Signs
145.03 Unsafe Building 145.07 Right to Demolish; Municipal Infraction
145.04 Notice to Owner 145.08 Costs
145.01 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Mayor is responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
145.02 GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE. All buildings or structures that are structurally
unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to
human life, or that in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health, or public welfare, by
reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this
chapter, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall
be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in
this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a])
145.03 UNSAFE BUILDING. “Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home meeting any or
all of the following criteria:
1. Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because
of (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement, or
instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv)
the deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially
or completely collapse.
2. Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
3. Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used
for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction, or otherwise,
is determined by any health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such condition
that it is likely to cause sickness or disease.
4. Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated condition,
deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief to be a fire
hazard.
5. Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the
demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is
abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion
thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
145.04 NOTICE TO OWNER. The enforcement officer shall examine or cause to be examined every
building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous or damaged and, if such is found to be an
unsafe building as defined in this chapter, the enforcement officer shall give to the owner of such building
or structure written notice stating the defects thereof. This notice may require the owner or person in charge
of the building or premises, within forty-eight (48) hours or such reasonable time as the circumstances
require, to commence either the required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building
or structure or portions thereof, and all such work shall be completed within ninety (90) days from date of
notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the enforcement officer. If necessary, such notice shall also require
the building, structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the required
repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the enforcement officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1. Notice Served. Such notice shall be served by sending by certified mail to the owner of
record, according to Section 364.12[3h] of the Code of Iowa, if the owner is found within the City
limits. If the owner is not found within the City limits such service may be made upon the owner
by registered mail or certified mail. The designated period within which said owner or person in
charge is required to comply with the order of the enforcement officer shall begin as of the date the
owner receives such notice.
2. Hearing. Such notice shall also advise the owner that he or she may request a hearing
before the Council on the notice by filing a written request for hearing within the time provided in
the notice.
145.05 CONDUCT OF HEARING. If requested, the Council shall conduct a hearing in accordance
with the following:
1. Notice. The owner shall be served with written notice specifying the date, time and place
of hearing.
2. Owner’s Rights. At the hearing, the owner may appear and show cause why the alleged
nuisance shall not be abated.
3. Determination. The Council shall make and record findings of fact and may issue such
order as it deems appropriate.†
145.06 POSTING OF SIGNS. The enforcement officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to
such building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. CITY OF CARLISLE,
IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the required demolition, removal or repairs are completed.
Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the enforcement officer and no person shall
enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the building.
145.07 RIGHT TO DEMOLISH; MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. In case the owner fails, neglects,
or refuses to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate, or to demolish and remove the building or
structure or portion thereof, the Council may order the owner of the building prosecuted as a violator of
the provisions of this chapter and may order the enforcement officer to proceed with the work specified in
such notice. A statement of the cost
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Suggested forms of notice and of a resolution and order of the Council for the administration
of this chapter are provided in the APPENDIX to this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this
procedure. We recommend you review the situation with your attorney before initiating procedures and follow his
or her recommendation carefully.
of such work shall be transmitted to the Council. As an alternative to this action, the City may utilize the
municipal infraction process to abate the nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
145.08 COSTS. Costs incurred under Section 145.07 shall be paid out of the City treasury. Such costs
shall be charged to the owner of the premises involved and levied as a special assessment against the land
on which the building or structure is located, and shall be certified to the County Treasurer for collection
in the manner provided for other taxes. In addition, the City may take any other action deemed appropriate
to recover costs incurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
146.01 Definitions 146.03 Foundation Requirements
146.02 Conversion to Real Property
146.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)
1. “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure built under the authority of 42 U.S.C.
Sec. 5403 which was constructed on or after June 15, 1976, and is required by Federal law to display
a seal from the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
2. “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field, or tract of land under common
ownership upon which ten or more occupied manufactured homes are harbored, either free of
charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any building, structure or enclosure used or intended
for use as part of the equipment of the manufactured home community.
3. “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured or
constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways and
so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human
habitation by one or more persons; but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not
registered as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle built before June
15, 1976, which was not built to a mandatory building code and which contains no State or Federal
seals.
4. “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which three (3) or more
mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any of these homes, are placed on
developed spaces and operated as a for-profit enterprise with water, sewer or septic, and electrical
services available.
The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is not to be construed to include
manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents, or other structures temporarily maintained by any
individual, educational institution, or company on its own premises and used exclusively to house said
entity’s own labor or students. The manufactured home community or mobile home park shall meet the
requirements of any zoning regulations that are in effect.
146.02 CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY. A mobile home or manufactured home that is
located outside a manufactured home community or mobile home park shall be converted to real estate by
being placed on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for real estate taxes except in the following
cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26 & Sec. 435.35)
1. Retailer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on private property as part of a
retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place for human habitation.
2. Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home that is located outside of
a manufactured home community or mobile home park as of January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and
taxed as real estate, but is exempt from the permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until
the home is relocated.
146.03 FOUNDATION REQUIREMENTS. A mobile home or manufactured home located outside
of a manufactured home community or mobile home park shall be placed on a permanent frost-free
foundation system that meets the support and anchorage requirements as recommended by the manufacturer
or required by the State Building Code. The foundation system must be visually compatible with permanent
foundation systems of surrounding residential structures. Any such home shall be installed in accordance
with the requirements of the State Building Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.10 & 414.28)
CHAPTER 147
COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
147.01 Purpose and General Policy 147.08 Application Process
147.02 Definitions 147.09 Noise and Emission Standards
147.03 Local Regulation and Compliance with the 147.10 Placement of Facilities and Related Lease Fees
Telecommunications Act of 1996 147.11 Abandonment
147.04 Lease Required 147.12 Termination
147.05 Fee Required 147.13 Home Rule
147.06 Limit on Term 147.14 New Technologies
147.07 Priorities and Placement Requirements
147.01 PURPOSE AND GENERAL POLICY. The Council finds that in order to ensure public safety
and provide efficient delivery of services by the City and others wishing to utilize wireless communication
technologies, in order to protect public and private investments, ensure the health, safety, and welfare of
the population, to provide for the regulation and administration of the orderly location of antenna arrays
and towers and to secure the rights of the City to a return on its investment on public property, it is necessary
for the City to establish uniform rules and policies. This chapter is to be interpreted in light of these findings
for the benefit of the citizens of the City.
147.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Antenna” means a device, dish or array used to transmit or receive telecommunications
signals.
2. “Communications tower” means a tower, pole, or similar structure which supports a
telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purposes above ground in a fixed location,
free standing, guyed or on a building.
3. “Height” of a communications tower is the distance from the base of the tower to the top
of the structure.
4. “Telecommunications” means the transmission, between or among points specified by the
user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or content of the information
as sent and received.
147.03 LOCAL REGULATION AND COMPLIANCE WITH THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS
ACT OF 1996. The Telecommunications Act of 1996 prohibits the City from establishing policies that
discriminate against one or a group of providers in favor of another or another group of providers or
potential providers. The following objectives shall be applied consistently to all telecommunications
providers that request a location on City property for their communications towers and antennas:
1. To minimize the overall number of towers located in the City, providers may be required
to participate in collocation agreements.
2. To ensure that new towers will be safe and blend into their environment, providers will
propose designs consistent with site characteristics.
3. To minimize placement of wireless equipment in highly populated areas, residential
locations will be considered as a last resort.
4. To ensure revenues from site leases of City-owned and controlled land and structures
reflect fair compensation for use of City property and administration of this chapter.
147.04 LEASE REQUIRED. No person or other entity shall use any public property without first
obtaining a lease from the City.
147.05 FEE REQUIRED. No lease for the use of public property shall be granted without requiring
the lessee thereof to pay a reasonable and competitively neutral fee for the use of that public property.
147.06 LIMIT ON TERM. No lease for the use of public property shall be granted for a term of more
than 25 years.
147.07 PRIORITIES AND PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
1. Priority. Priority of the use of City-owned land for communications antennas and towers
will be given to the following entities in descending order of priority:
A. All functions of the City.
B. Public safety agencies that are not a part of the City, including law enforcement,
fire and ambulance services, and private entities with a public safety agreement with the
City.
C. Other governmental agencies for uses that are not related to public safety, entities
providing licensed commercial communications services, including cellular, personal
communications services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized
mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the general
public for business and/or personal use.
2. Placement. The placement of communications antennas or towers on City-owned property
must comply with the following requirements:
A. The antenna or tower will not interfere with the purpose for which the City-owned
property is intended.
B. The antenna or tower will have no adverse impact on surrounding private property.
C. The applicant will produce proof of adequate liability insurance for potential
damage antennas or towers could reasonably cause to City property and facilities and
commit to a lease agreement which includes equitable compensation for the use of public
land and other necessary provisions and safeguards. The fee shall be established by the
Council (Section 147.10) and shall reflect potential expenses and risks to the City and other
appropriate factors.
D. The applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or other security
acceptable to the City to cover the cost of antenna or tower removal.
E. The antennas or towers will not interfere with other uses that have a higher priority
as discussed in the paragraphs above.
F. Upon reasonable notice, the antennas or towers may be required to be removed at
the user’s expense.
G. The applicant must reimburse the City for any costs that it incurs because of the
presence of the applicant’s antenna or tower.
H. The user must obtain all necessary land use approval.
I. The applicant will cooperate with the City’s objective to promote collocations and
thus limit the number of separate antenna sites requested.
147.08 APPLICATION PROCESS.
1. All applicants who wish to locate a communications antenna or tower on City-owned or
private property must submit to the Clerk a completed application accompanied by a fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) and the following documents, if applicable:
A. One copy of typical specifications for proposed structures and antennas, including
description of design characteristics and material.
B. A site plan drawn to scale showing property lines, tower location, tower height,
guy wires and anchors, existing structures, photographs or elevation drawings depicting
typical design of proposed structures, parking, fences, landscape plan, and existing land
uses on adjacent property. A site plan is not required if the antenna is to be mounted on an
approved existing structure.
C. A current map or update for an existing map on file showing locations of
applicant’s antennas, facilities, existing towers and proposed towers which are reflected in
public records, serving any property within the City.
D. A report from a structural engineer showing the tower antenna capacity by type
and number, and a certification that the tower is designed to withstand winds in accordance
with ANS/EIA/TIA 222, latest revision, standards.
E. Identification of the owners of all antennas and equipment to be located on the site.
F. Written authorization from the site owner for the application.
G. Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has been issued.
H. A line of sight analysis showing the potential visual and aesthetic impacts on
adjacent residential districts.
I. A written agreement to remove the tower and/or antenna within 180 days after
cessation of use.
J. Additional information, as required, to determine that all applicable zoning
regulations are met.
K. Any communications facilities located on the roof of an antenna support structure
must be set back at least one foot from the edge of the roof of the structure. This setback
requirement does not apply to: (i) communications facilities located above the roof of the
structure if the facilities are appropriately screened from view through the use of panels,
walls, fences or other screening techniques approved by the City; or (ii) camouflage
antennas that are mounted to the exterior of the antenna support structures below the roof,
but do not protrude more than 24 inches from the side of such an antenna support structure.
2. Applicant must also show evidence that all of the following conditions that are applicable
are met:
A. Applicant must show that the proposed communications tower, antenna, or
accessory structure will be placed in a reasonably available location that will minimize the
visual impact on the surrounding area and allow the facility to function in accordance with
minimum standards imposed by applicable communications regulations and applicant’s
technical design requirements.
B. Applicant must show that a proposed antenna and equipment cannot be
accommodated and function as required by applicable regulations and applicant’s technical
design requirement without unreasonable modifications on any existing structure or tower
under the control of the applicant.
C. Applicant for a permit in a residential district must show that the area cannot be
adequately served by a facility placed in a nonresidential district for valid technical reasons.
D. Prior to consideration of a permit for location on private property, which must be
acquired, applicant must show that available publicly owned sites (and available privately
owned sites occupied by a compatible use) are unsuitable for operation of the facility under
applicable communications regulations and applicant’s technical design requirements.
E. Applicant must provide the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners
of other towers or useable antenna support structures within a one-half mile radius of the
proposed new tower site, including City-owned property, and written documentation that
the applicant: (i) made diligent but unsuccessful efforts for a minimum of 40 days prior to
the submission of the application to install or collocate the applicant’s telecommunications
facilities on towers or useable antenna support structures owned by the City and other
persons located within a one-half mile radius of the proposed tower site; or (ii) written
technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed tower or facilities cannot be installed
or collocated on another person’s tower or support structure within a one-half mile radius
of the proposed tower and must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage
requirements of the applicant’s wireless communications system.
F. Applicants must show that a new tower is designed to accommodate additional
antenna equal in number to applicant’s present and future requirements.
G. Applicant must show that all applicable health, nuisance, noise, fire, building, and
safety code requirements are met.
H. All towers and communications facilities shall be of camouflage design standards.
Examples of camouflage facilities include (but are not limited to) architecturally screened
roof, roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements,
telecommunications towers designed to blend into the surrounding environment or to look
other than a tower, such as light poles, power poles and trees. At a minimum, all towers
not requiring FAA painting or markings shall have an exterior finish which is galvanized
or painted dull blue, gray or black.
I. Applicant must show by certificate from a registered engineer that the proposed
facility will contain only equipment meeting FCC rules, and must file with the Clerk a
written indemnification of the City and proof of liability insurance or financial ability to
respond to claims up to $1,000,000.00 in the aggregate, which may arise from operation of
the facility during its life, at no cost to the City, in form approved by the City Attorney.
J. Land use regulations, visibility, fencing, screening, landscaping, parking access,
lot size, exterior illumination, sign, storage, and all other general zoning district
regulations, except setback and height, shall apply to the use. Setbacks on all sides shall
be a distance equal to the height of the tower. The following height conditions apply:
Residential (R-1a, R-1, R-2, R-3, P.R., P.U.D., U.D.) – Free-standing tower with height
not exceeding 100 feet is a permitted conditional use; height exceeding 100 feet requires
special exception.
Commercial (C-1a, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4) – Free-standing or guyed tower with height not
exceeding 180 feet is a permitted conditional use; height exceeding 180 feet requires
special exception.
Industrial (M-1, M-2) – Free-standing or guyed tower with height not exceeding 360 feet
is a permitted conditional use; height exceeding 360 feet requires special exception.
Other (A-1) – Free-standing or guyed tower with height not exceeding 500 feet is a
permitted conditional use; height exceeding 500 feet requires special exception.
K. A tower must be a minimum distance equal to one and one-half the height of the
tower from property designated historic or architecturally significant, and must be set back
from all lot lines distances equal to the district setback requirements or 25% of the tower
height, whichever is greater.
All responses to applications for siting of telecommunications towers and facilities shall be in writing and
shall be made within thirty (30) days after all application materials are received.
147.09 NOISE AND EMISSION STANDARDS.
1. Noise. No equipment shall be operated at towers and telecommunications facilities so as
to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under WAC 173-60, except during
emergencies or periodic routine maintenance that requires the use of a back-up generator, where
the noise standards may be exceeded temporarily.
2. Emissions. The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 gives the FCC sole jurisdiction
to regulate radio frequency emissions. Facilities that meet the FCC standards shall not be
conditioned or denied on the basis of emissions impacts. Applicants for tower sites shall be
required to provide information on the projected power density of the facility and how this meets
the FCC standards.
147.10 PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES AND RELATED LEASE FEES. The placement and
maintenance of communications antennas or towers on City-owned sites, such as water towers and parks,
will be allowed when the following additional requirements are met.
1. Water Tower or Reservoir Sites. The City’s water tower and reservoir represent a large
public investment in water pressure stabilization and peak capacity reserves. Therefore, its
protection is of prime importance. As access to the City’s water storage system increases, so does
the potential for contamination of the public water supply. For these reasons, the placement of
communications towers or antennas on water towers or reservoir sites will be allowed only when
the following requirements are met:
A. The applicant must have written approval from the Public Works Director each
time access to the facility is desired. This will minimize the risk of contamination to the
water supply.
B. There is sufficient room on the structure and/or the grounds to accommodate the
applicant’s facility.
C. The presence of the facility will not increase the water tower or reservoir
maintenance cost to the City.
D. The presence of the facility will not be harmful to the health or safety of the
workers maintaining the water tower or reservoir.
A minimum fee of $500.00 per month will be assessed for placing facilities on a City water tower.
2. Parks. The presence of certain communications antennas or towers represents a potential
conflict with the purpose of certain City-owned parks and recreational facilities. Towers shall be
prohibited in designated conservation areas. Communications antennas or towers will be
considered only in the following parks after the recommendation of the Park Board and approval
of the Council.
A. Public parks of a sufficient scale and character that are adjacent to an existing
commercial or industrial use.
B. Commercial recreational areas and major ball fields.
C. Park maintenance facilities.
A minimum fee of $500.00 per month will be assessed for placing facilities on park property.
147.11 ABANDONMENT. In the event the use of any communications tower has been discontinued
for a period of 180 consecutive days, the tower shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the
date of abandonment shall be made by the Clerk who shall have the right to request documentation and/or
affidavits from the communications tower owner/operator regarding the issue of tower usage. Upon such
abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower shall have an additional 180 days within which to: (i)
reactivate the use of the tower or transfer the tower to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the
tower; or (ii) dismantle and remove the tower. At the earliest, 181 days from the date of abandonment,
without reactivating or upon completion of dismantling and removal, any special exception and/or variance
approval for the tower shall automatically expire.
147.12 TERMINATION. The Council may terminate any lease if it is determined that any one of the
following conditions exist.
1. A potential user with a higher priority cannot find another adequate location and the
potential use would be incompatible with the existing use.
2. A user’s frequency broadcast unreasonably interferes with other users of higher priority,
regardless of whether or not this interference was adequately predicted in the technical analysis.
3. A user violates any of the standards in this chapter or the conditions attached to the City’s
lease agreement.
Before taking action, the City will provide notice to the user of the intended termination and the reasons for
it, and provide an opportunity for a hearing before the Council regarding the proposed action. This
procedure need not be followed in emergency situations.
147.13 HOME RULE. This chapter is intended to be and shall be construed as consistent with the
reservation of local authority contained in the 25th Amendment to the Iowa Constitution granting cities
Home Rule powers. To such end, any limitation on the power of the City contained herein is to be strictly
construed and the City reserves to itself the right to exercise all power and authority to regulate and control
its local affairs and all ordinances and regulations of the City shall be enforced against the holders of any
lease.
147.14 NEW TECHNOLOGIES. Should, within the term of any lease, developments within the field
for which the grant was made to the holder of the lease present the opportunity to the holder of the lease to
be more effective, efficient and economical through the use of a substance or material other than those for
which the lease was originally made, the holder of the lease may petition the Council, which, with such
requirements or limitations as it deems necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare, may allow
the use of such substances under the terms and conditions of the lease.
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
150.01 Definitions 150.03 Building Numbering Plan
150.02 Owner Requirements
150.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
2. “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision thereof.
150.02 OWNER REQUIREMENTS. Every owner shall comply with the following numbering
requirements:
1. Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to the principal
building from the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
2. Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed and maintained
on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous place to the street in figures not less
than two and one-half (2½) inches in height and of a contrasting color with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
3. Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein provided, or fails to
do so for a period of thirty (30) days after being notified in writing by the City to do so, the City
may proceed to place the assigned number on the principal building and assess the costs against the
property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03 BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN. Building numbers shall be assigned in accordance with the
building numbering plan on file in the office of the Clerk.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 881 -
CHAPTER 151
TREES
151.01 Definition 151.04 Trimming Trees to Be Supervised
151.02 Planting Restrictions 151.05 Disease Control
151.03 Duty to Trim Trees 151.06 Inspection and Removal
151.01 DEFINITION. For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street,
avenue, or highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the
curb line or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or highway lying between the
lot line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02 PLANTING RESTRICTIONS. No tree shall be planted in any parking or street
except in accordance with the following:
1. Permit Required. No person shall plant a tree in any city parking/right-of-way
without first completing a permit application and receiving permission from the city.
2. Alignment. All trees planted in any street shall be planted in the parking
midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. In the event a curb line
is not established, trees shall be planted on a line ten (10) feet from the property line.
3. Spacing. Trees shall not be planted on any parking that is less than nine (9)
feet in width, or contains less than eighty-one (81) square feet of exposed soil surface
per tree. Trees shall not be planted closer than twenty (20) feet from street
intersections (property lines extended) and ten (10) feet from driveways. If it is at all
possible trees should be planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk
and the curb.
4. Prohibited Trees. No person shall plant in any street any fruit-bearing tree or
any tree of the kinds commonly known as cottonwood, poplar, box elder, Chinese
elm, evergreen, willow, black walnut, or ash.
(Ord. 713 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
151.03 DUTY TO TRIM TREES. The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep
the trees on, or overhanging the street, trimmed so that all branches will be at least fifteen (15)
feet above the surface of the street and eight (8) feet above the sidewalks. If the abutting
property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on the abutting property
owner requiring that such action be taken within five (5) days. If such action is not taken
within that time, the City may perform the required action and assess the costs against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e])
151.04 TRIMMING TREES TO BE SUPERVISED. Except as allowed in Section
151.03, it is unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in a street or public place unless
the work is done under the supervision of the City.
151.05 DISEASE CONTROL. Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub that may
harbor serious insect or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to
be a nuisance.
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 882 -
151.06 INSPECTION AND REMOVAL. The Council shall inspect or cause to be
inspected any trees or shrubs in the City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased or
damaged, and such trees and shrubs shall be subject to the following:
1. City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on any public
property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of private property, the
Council may cause such condition to be corrected by treatment or removal. The
Council may also order the removal of any trees on the streets of the City which
interfere with the making of improvements or with travel thereon.
2. Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that any such
condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or to adjoining
property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the Council shall notify by
certified mail the owner, occupant or person in charge of such property to correct such
condition by treatment or removal within sixty (60) days of said notification. If such
owner, occupant, or person in charge of said property fails to comply within 60 days
of receipt of notice, the Council may cause the condition to be corrected and the cost
assessed against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h])
[The next page is 825]
CHAPTER 155
BUILDING CODE
155.01 Short Title 155.03 Adoption of Building Codes
155.02 Administrative Provisions
155.01 SHORT TITLE. This chapter shall be known as the Carlisle, Iowa, Building Code, may be cited
as such, and will be referred to herein as the “Building Code.”
155.02 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS. Administration of this chapter shall be as provided in
this section and in the following sections of the several codes named, which are hereby adopted by
reference, to provide procedures for local enforcement of the codes, constituting the Carlisle, Iowa,
Building Codes. The Building Official shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval of the City
Council, for the enforcement of the Building, Electrical, Plumbing, Mechanical, Fire, Housing, Existing
Buildings, and Property Maintenance Codes, and such other ordinances as shall be assigned to said official,
and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the Mayor and City Council. The Building
Official shall be accountable for the issuance of all applicable permits under this chapter and shall have the
power to render interpretations of this Code and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to
this Code, subject to approval of the Council, as said official may deem necessary in order to clarify the
application of the provisions of this Code. Such rules, regulations, and interpretations shall be in conformity
with the intent and purpose of this Code.
155.03 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES. The following Codes are hereby adopted as, and
constitute, the Building Code of the City, to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance
of buildings or structures within the City, and the same are, by this reference, incorporated herein as fully
and completely as if set forth in full herein.
1. The International Building Code, 2006 Edition, as published by the International Code
Council.
A. Sec. 101.1. Title. Insert “City of Carlisle, Iowa.”
B. Sec. 101.4.1. Electrical. Delete “ICC Electrical Code” and insert “National
Electrical Code, 2008 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association.”
C. Sec. 104.11. Alternative methods. After paragraph insert “The Iowa
Administrative Code 661, Chapter 16, Div. VI, Part 2 Manufactured Home Construction
is hereby adopted for installation of mobile (manufactured) homes.”
D. Sec. 108.2. Fees. After “in accordance with the” insert “resolution setting fees as
established by City of Carlisle.”
E. Sec. 108.3. Valuations. At the end of last sentence delete period and insert “using
the latest Building Valuation Data Sheet.”
F. Sec. 1612.3. Insert “City of Carlisle, Iowa.”
G. Sec. 1612.3. Insert date of latest flood map.
2. The International Mechanical Code and Appendix Chapters, 2006 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council.
A. Sec. 101.1. Title. Insert “City of Carlisle, Iowa.”
B. Sec. 106.6.2. Fee schedule. Insert “as set by the City of Carlisle trade permit.”
C. Sec. 108.4. Penalties. Insert “per Municipal Infractions as listed in the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Carlisle.”
D. Sec. 108.5. Stop work. Insert “$500.00.”
E. Delete Appendix B.
3. The International Plumbing Code and Appendix Chapters, 2006 Edition, as published by
the International Code Council.
A. Sec. 101.1. Title. Insert “City of Carlisle, Iowa.”
B. Sec. 106.6.2. Fee schedule. Insert “as set by the City of Carlisle trade permit.”
C. Sec. 108.4. Penalties. Insert “per Municipal Infractions as listed in the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Carlisle.”
D. Sec. 108.5. Stop work. Insert “$500.00.”
E. Sec. 305.6.1. Insert “42 inches” in two places.
F. Sec. 904.1. Insert “12 inches.”
G. Delete Appendix A.
4. State of Iowa § 661 Iowa Administrative Code Chapter 504, including the National
Electrical Code and Appendix Chapters, 2008 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection
Association with amendments:
A. Permit fees for electrical work shall be according to the fees established by the
City of Carlisle trade permit.
5. The International Fire Code and Appendix Chapters, 2006 Edition, as published by the
National Fire Protection Association.
A. Sec. 101.1. Title. Insert “City of Carlisle, Iowa.”
B. Sec. 109.3. Penalties. Insert “per Municipal Infractions as listed in the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Carlisle.”
C. Sec. 111.4. Stop work. Insert “$500.00.”
6. The International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council.
A. Sec. 101.1. Title. Insert “City of Carlisle, Iowa.”
B. Sec. 303.14. Screens. Insert “April 15” and “September 15.”
C. Sec. 602.3. Heat. Delete “during the period from (date) to (date).”
D. Sec. 602.4. Work spaces. Delete “during the period from (date) to (date).”
7. The International Residential Code for One- & Two-Family Dwellings and Appendix
Chapters, 2006 Edition, as published by the International Code Council.
A. Sec. R101.1. Title. Insert “City of Carlisle, Iowa.”
B. Sec. R104.11. Alternative methods. After paragraph insert “The Iowa
Administrative Code 661, Chapter 16, Div. VI, Part 2, Manufactured Home Construction
is hereby adopted for installation of manufactured (mobile) homes.”
C. Sec. R108.2. Permit fees. After “in accordance with the,” insert “attached
schedule as established by Carlisle for the regular Building Permit Fee Schedule.”
D. Delete Appendix F.
E. Delete Appendix L.
F. Delete Appendix P.
G. R105.5 – 12-Month Expiration. Every permit issued under the provisions of this
Code shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issue, unless the application is
accompanied by a construction schedule of specific longer duration, in which instance the
permit may be issued for the term of the construction schedule, with approval of the
Building Official. If the work has not been completed by the expiration date of the permit,
no further work shall be done until the permit shall have been renewed by the owner or his
or her agent and by payment of the renewal fee as established by resolution of the City
Council, and provided no changes have been made in plans or location. No permit shall
be renewed more than once. The fee for the extension shall be a $75.00 re-inspection fee
if the project is at the finish (drywall and trim installed) stage and 50% of the original
building permit fee if the project is at the rough-in stage (drywall and trim not installed).
H. Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria. Table R301.2(1),
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria, is hereby amended by modifying said table as
follows:
TABLE R301.2(1)
Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria
Ground
Snow
Load
Wind
Speed
MPH
Seismic
Design
Category
Subject to Damage From: Winter
Design
Temp.
Ice
Barrier
Required
Flood
Hazards Air
Freezing
Index
Mean
Annual
Temp.
Weathering
Frost
Line
Depth
Termite Decay
NFIP
Adoption
30 PSF 90 A Severe 42?
Moderate-
Heavy
Slight-
Moderate
-5º F No 1982 1833 48.6º F
I. Replace Table R403.1 with the following:
TABLE R403.1
Foundations For Stud Bearing Walls
Number of Stories
Thickness of
Foundation Walls
Minimum Width
of Footing
Thickness of
Footing
Minimum Depth
of Foundation
Below Natural
Surface of Ground
and Finish Grade
1 8 inches 16 inches 8 inches 42 inches
2 8 inches 16 inches 8 inches 42 inches
3 10 inches 18 inches 12 inches 42 inches
8. International Fuel Gas Code and Appendix Chapters, 2006 Edition, as published by the
International Code Council.
A. Sec. 101.1. Title. Insert “City of Carlisle, Iowa.”
B. Sec. 105.5.2. Fee Schedule. Insert “as set by the City of Carlisle trade permit fees
schedule as attached for the Mechanical and Plumbing permit fee.”
C. Sec. 108.4. Penalties. Insert “per Municipal Infractions as listed in the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Carlisle.”
D. Sec. 108.5. Stop work. Insert “$500.00” (amount in two places).
9. The International Existing Building Code and Appendix Chapters, 2006 Edition, as
published by the International Code Council.
A. Sec. 101.1. Title. Insert “City of Carlisle, Iowa.”
B. Sec. 108.2. Permit fees. Delete after “established” and insert “for the various
disciplines herein adopted.”
CHAPTER 156
RETAINING WALLS, TERRACES
AND SLOPING YARDS
156.01 Purpose 156.04 Permits to Be Issued
156.02 Design 156.05 Projects Subsequent to Construction
156.03 Requirements
156.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate retaining walls, terraced areas,
and sloping yards within the City and to provide for inspection relative to the construction of
said retaining walls, terraces, and sloping yards.
156.02 DESIGN. All retaining walls, terraced areas, and sloping yards within the City shall
be constructed and graded in accordance with requirements to be set forth in each individual
instance with reference to said project by the City or its designated agent or engineer.
156.03 REQUIREMENTS. The requirements as set forth herein may include sketches,
designs, or plans and specifications or other information deemed necessary for the construction
of retaining walls, terraces, or sloping yards so as to meet said requirements as set forth by the
duly appointed representatives or employees of the City, to review the plans, specifications, and
requirements with reference to the construction of retaining walls, terraced areas, or sloping
yards and to conduct inspections relative to the same.
1. Prior to the construction of any of the aforesaid, it is required that written
application be made with reference to such construction, and there shall be included
with said application either plans, specifications, or written stated intentions with
reference to said project.
2. The City may require additional information if deemed necessary for proper
construction in the opinion of the representative of the City.
3. There shall be required to be paid in the event that a retaining wall or terrace is
constructed, an inspection fee in the sum of $50.00. Said inspection shall consist of
phases; that is, an initial inspection prior to construction, a second inspection with
reference to the foundation required, if any, and a final inspection with reference to the
completion of said project.
4. The City may withhold or revoke any permit relative to the construction of
retaining walls, terraced areas, or sloping yards when, in its opinion, the same does not
meet the requirements as set forth by the City during any phase of construction.
156.04 PERMITS TO BE ISSUED. A permit shall be issued for retaining walls and
terraced areas; however, no written permit shall be required with reference to sloping yards
greater than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical. No occupancy permits shall be issued
until compliance with this chapter has been made, unless, in the opinion of the City irreparable
damage will result by withholding said occupancy permit, and that it would be in the best
interests of all parties that the same be issued.
156.05 PROJECTS SUBSEQUENT TO CONSTRUCTION. This chapter shall be
deemed in full force and effect with reference to completed projects upon which retaining walls,
CHAPTER 156 RETAINING WALLS, TERRACES
AND SLOPING YARDS
terraces, or sloping yards are requested at any time subsequent to the initial building. This
chapter is also applicable to reconstruction of existing retainer walls, terraces, and sloping yards.
CHAPTER 156 RETAINING WALLS, TERRACES
AND SLOPING YARDS
CHAPTER 157
SWIMMING POOLS
157.01 Definition 157.04 Permit Required
157.02 Location 157.05 Barrier Requirements
157.03 Requirements
157.01 DEFINITION. A “swimming pool” is any structure intended for swimming, recreational
bathing, or wading and which has the capacity of containing water over 24 inches deep. This includes inground,
above-ground, and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas and fixed-in-place wading pools.
157.02 LOCATION. All swimming pools located in residential districts shall be located in conformity
with all setback requirements for accessory uses in the zoning district in which the pool is located.
157.03 REQUIREMENTS. No person shall maintain or use a swimming pool unless it conforms to the
requirements of this chapter, and in the event that any swimming pool is found not to comply with the terms
of this chapter, it shall constitute a nuisance within the definition of Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances
and the City may invoke remedies and penalties provided in said chapter.
157.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. No person shall construct or make any alteration, addition, remodeling, or other
improvements to a swimming pool without a permit. Swimming pools shall be maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. A person seeking a permit shall make an application to the Clerk for such permit. The
plans and specifications and plot plan, as well as other pertinent explanatory date, shall be submitted
with each application.
3. If the plans and specifications and plot plans meet the requirements of this chapter, a permit
fee of $15.00 for an above-ground pool, three feet or less in height, or a fee of $50.00 for all other
types of pools, shall be paid to the Clerk. Upon approval by the Council, the Clerk shall issue a
permit.
4. The materials used in lining swimming pools shall be light in color, impervious to water,
and provide a tight tank with smooth and easily cleaned surfaces. Sand or dirt bottoms are
prohibited.
5. All cross connections between the City water supply or the sewer system in the plumbing
of a swimming pool shall be constructed in accordance with the 2006 International Building Code.
6. Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less
than six (6) feet in height and at least four (4) feet from each side of the pool. The fence or wall
shall be non-climbable and shall be constructed sufficiently strong and of such structural design as
to make the pool inaccessible to small children. There shall not be a distance greater than ten (10)
feet between fence posts.
7. All gates or doors opening to the swimming pool shall be equipped with self-closing and
self-latching devices with locking provisions for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all
times when not in actual use.
8. All electrical construction shall be installed in accordance with the International Building
Code.
9. This chapter shall apply to all existing and new swimming pools. All existing swimming
pools shall comply within sixty (60) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified by this
chapter (December 9, 2004).
157.05 BARRIER REQUIREMENTS. All residential swimming pools shall comply with Appendix
“G” of the International Building Code (Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs) requirements with the
exception of a swimming pool with a power safety cover or a spa with a locked safety cover which complies
with the standards set out in Appendix “G” of the International Building Code.
CHAPTER 158
POST-CONSTRUCTION
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
158.01 Purpose 158.06 Corrective Action by City
158.02 Definitions 158.07 Responsibility
158.03 Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan 158.08 Violations
158.04 Maintenance 158.09 Appeal
158.05 Inspection
158.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a set of water quality policies to provide
reasonable guidance for the regulation of storm water runoff for the purpose of protecting water resources
within the Volunteer Creek Watershed from degradation. The regulation of storm water runoff discharges
from land development and other construction activities is essential in order to control and minimize runoff
rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and non-point source pollution associated with
storm water runoff. These regulations are in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and
safety.
158.02 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this section certain words or phrases are defined as follows:
1. “Applicant” means a person, firm, or entity applying for a permit or development approval
to develop, grade, or construct any improvement within the corporate limits of the City.
2. “Approval” means formal, written consent by the Council or authorized representative of
the City.
3. “Best management practices” (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practice, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the
pollution of waters of the United States. Common BMPs are described in the Iowa Storm Water
Management Manual and Iowa Statewide Urban Designs and Specifications (SUDAS). The BMPs
covered are not meant to be a comprehensive list of acceptable BMPs.
4. “Drainage, detention, or overland flowage easement” means a legal right granted by a
landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for storm water management.
5. “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” (NPDES) is the program for issuing,
modifying, revoking, terminating, monitoring, and enforcing permits under the Clean Water Act
(Sections 301, 318, 402 and 405) and the United States Code of Federal Regulations Title 33,
Sections 1317, 1328, 1342 and 1345.
6. “Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan” (PCSWMP) means a set of plans and
specifications approved by the Council or authorized representative during the approval of the site
plan, construction drawing, and plat that defines the system of BMPs that are to be constructed and
maintained on the site.
7. “Property” means land located in the City, whether or not improved with buildings or other
structures.
8. “Property owner” means a person who, alone or with another person or other persons, holds
legal title to property; however, where property has been sold on contract to a person who has the
present right to possess the property and the contract has been filed for record in the office of the
County Recorder, the person so purchasing the property, whether alone or with another person or
other persons, is the property owner and the person retaining bare legal title to the property as
security for the balance of the purchase price.
9. “Regional detention facility” means a wet or dry detention basin that is designed to accept
storm water runoff from two or more sites and complies with all City, State, or Federal permit
requirements as they apply to storm water management requirements for those sites.
10. “Storm water” means storm water runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage.
11. “Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan” (SWPPP) is a plan as defined in the Iowa NPDES
storm water general permit.
12. “SUDAS” means the current Iowa Statewide Standard Urban Design and Specifications
for Public Improvements.
13. “Iowa Storm Water Management Manual” means the current manual for BMPs for storm
water management.
158.03 POST-CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. Every property
owner or applicant in the Volunteer Creek Watershed shall design, install, and maintain Post-Construction
Storm Water Management Plan (PCSWMP) facilities and/or practices as approved by the Council or
authorized representative during the site plan, construction drawing, or platting process. A State-licensed
professional engineer or landscape architect shall design PCSWMP facilities in conformance with the
current guidelines established in the State Storm Water Management Manual, SUDAS, or other documents
determined to be applicable to the City. PCSWMP facilities shall be designed with appropriate BMPs, such
as grass swales, buffer strips, rain gardens, permeable paving,
bio-retention and other similar types of infiltration basins, and riparian areas. The BMPs shall be designed
with conservation sensitive design (CSD) strategies to improve water quality, reduce erosion, and reduce
sediment loading. The BMPs shall promote continuity with and not negatively affect previously approved
PCSWMPs that are upstream or downstream of the property owner’s or applicant’s property. In order to
ensure that the PCSWMP facilities are constructed in accordance with the approved design, the property
owner or applicant shall provide to the City an as-built plan detailing dimensions and elevations as well as
certification that the approved facilities were installed and are operating properly. The as-built plans shall
be completed by a State-licensed professional engineer or landscape architect and submitted to the City
prior to the acceptance of any improvements or issuance of any improvements or issuance of any certificate
of occupancy. The property owner or applicant may satisfy the peak flow rate requirements of the
PCSWMP by ensuring the conveyance of storm water discharge from the property to the regional detention
facility.
158.04 MAINTENANCE. It is the property owner’s duty to ensure that the site is periodically inspected
and maintained in accordance with the approved PCSWMP. Periodic inspections shall be completed as
needed and in no case less than one time per year. Inspections shall be documented and shall be retained
for at least three years. Copies of the inspection documentation shall be made available to the City upon
request.
158.05 INSPECTION. The City shall be permitted to enter and inspect any property subject to
regulation as often and as necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. The City may conduct site
visits at any time to determine compliance with the approved PCSWMP. Additionally, the City may request
that a property owner verify, through the preparation of an as-built plan completed by a State-licensed
professional engineer or landscape architect, that the PCSWMP facilities contain appropriate capacities and
operational characteristics as originally designed and approved. In the event that a site is found not to be
in compliance with the PCSWMP, the City will communicate in writing to the property owner a list of
deficiencies that identifies the area or incident of noncompliance. The property owner shall have 14 days
from the date of notice to provide a written response that outlines the steps and implementation timelines
for corrective action. The property owner shall have 30 days from the date of notice to complete the
corrective action necessary to bring the site back into compliance with the approved PCSWMP. Following
the review of the property owner’s written response, if extenuating circumstances exist that make
implementation of the necessary corrective action difficult to complete within the specified time period, the
City may grant, at its sole discretion, a reasonable extension of time to complete the corrective action.
Failure to allow access to the property, provide a written response, or undertake corrective action shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
158.06 CORRECTIVE ACTION BY CITY. If the property owner fails to take corrective action in
the time period prescribed in the previous section, the City may do so by its own crews or by persons under
its hire and assess against the property owner the City’s cost therefor. Said costs shall include salaries and
benefits earned by City employees during such corrective action, a charge for the City machinery used, and
such other costs and expenses as the City actually incurred. To the extent allowed by State law, such costs
and expenses may be assessed against the property owner and collected in the same manner as property
taxes.
158.07 RESPONSIBILITY. The failure of City officials to observe or foresee hazardous or unsightly
conditions, or to impose other or additional conditions or requirements, or to deny or revoke permits or
approval, or to stop work in violation of this chapter shall not relieve the property owners of the
consequences of their actions or inactions or result in the City, its officers, or agents being liable for the
same. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, every applicant bears final and complete
responsibility for compliance with the NPDES General Permit Number 2 and any other requirements of
State or Federal law or administrative rule.
158.08 VIOLATIONS. Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil action
including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial, the City
shall be entitled to recover its attorneys’ fees and cost from a person who is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.
158.09 APPEAL. Administrative decisions by City staff and enforcement actions of the enforcement
officer may be appealed by the applicant to the board of adjustment pursuant to the following rules:
1. The appeal must be filed in writing with the City Clerk within five business days of the
decision or enforcement action.
2. The written appeal shall specify in detail the action appealed from, the errors allegedly
made by the enforcement officer giving rise to the appeal, a written summary of all oral and written
testimony the applicant intends to introduce at the hearing, including the names and addresses of
all witnesses the applicant intends to call, copies of all documents the applicant intends to introduce
at the hearing, and the relief requested.
3. The enforcement officer shall specify in writing the reasons for the enforcement action, a
written summary of all oral and written testimony the applicant intends to introduce at the hearing,
including the names and addresses of all witnesses the enforcement officer intends to call, and
copies of all documents the enforcement officer intends to introduce at the hearing.
4. The City shall notify the applicant and the enforcement officer by ordinary mail and shall
give public notice in accordance with Iowa Code Annotated (ICA) Chapter 21 of the date, time,
and place for the regular meeting of the Board of Adjustment at which the hearing on the appeal
shall occur. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date not less than four but not more than 20 days
after filing of the appeal. The rules of evidence and procedure, and the standard of proof to be
applied, shall be the same as provided by ICA Chapter 17A. The applicant may be represented by
counsel at the applicant’s expense. The enforcement officer may be represented by the City
Attorney or by an attorney designated by the City at City’s expense.
The decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be rendered in writing and may be appealed to the Iowa
District Court.
CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
165.01 Title 165.08 Map Replacement
165.02 Interpretation of Standards 165.09 Zoning of Annexed Areas
165.03 Definitions 165.10 Complaints Regarding Violations
165.04 Districts 165.11 Schedule of Fees
165.05 Boundaries 165.12 Architectural Design Requirements
165.06 Site Plan Requirements 165.13 Comprehensive Plan
165.07 Changes and Amendments
165.01 TITLE. Chapters 165 through 172 may be known and cited and referred to as the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Carlisle, Iowa, and are referred to herein as the Zoning
Regulations.
165.02 INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS. In their interpretation and application,
the provisions of these Zoning Regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements; where
the Zoning Regulations impose a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other
provisions of law or by other rules or regulations or ordinances, the provisions of the Zoning
Regulations shall control.
165.03 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of the Zoning Regulations, certain terms or words
used herein shall be interpreted as set out below. The words “used” and “occupied” include the
words “intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied.” The word “lot” includes the
words “plot” or “parcel” and all other words or phrases used to denote an individual building
site that complies with the minimum provisions of the Zoning Regulations.
1. “Accessory use or structure” means a use or structure subordinate to the
principal use of a building on the lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the
use of the principal building.
2. “Adult uses” includes adult amusement or entertainment, adult book store, or
adult gift shop, adult hotel or motel, adult photo studio, adult theater and adult massage
parlor, as defined herein.
A. “Adult amusement or entertainment” means an amusement or
entertainment that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on acts or
material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical area, as defined herein, including, but not limited to,
topless or bottomless dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female
impersonators or similar entertainment.
B. “Adult book store or adult gift shop” means an establishment having as
a substantial and significant portion of its stock in trade books, magazines, and
other periodicals or goods and items held for sale, which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein.
C. “Adult hotel or motel” means a building with accommodations used
for the temporary occupancy of one or more individuals and is an establishment
wherein a substantial and significant portion of the materials presented are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined herein, for observation by the individuals therein.
D. “Adult massage parlor” means any building, room, place, or
establishment where manipulated massage or manipulated exercise is practiced
for pay upon the human body with an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, by anyone not a duly licensed
physician, osteopath, chiropractor, registered nurse or practical nurse operating
under a physician’s direction, licensed massage therapist, aesthetician, physical
therapist, chiropodist, registered speech pathologist or physical or occupational
therapist who treats only patients recommended by a licensed physician and
operates only under such physician’s direction, whether with or without the use
of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, and includes Turkish bath
houses. The term does not include a regular licensed hospital, medical clinic
or nursing home, duly licensed beauty parlors or barber shops.
E. “Adult photo studio” means an establishment which, upon payment of
a fee, provides photographic equipment and/or models for the purpose of
photographing specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, as
defined herein.
F. “Adult theater” means a theater wherein a substantial and significant
portion of the materials presented are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on acts or material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined herein, for observation by
patrons herein.
3. “Alley” means a public way, other than a street, 26 feet or less in width,
affording secondary means of access to abutting property. An alley is not considered a
public thoroughfare.
4. “Apartment hotel” means a building designed for or containing both individual
guest rooms or suites of rooms and rooms or suites of rooms for dwelling units.
5. “Basement” means a story having more than one-half of its height below grade.
A basement is not counted as a story for the purpose of height regulation, providing the
finished floor level directly above is not more than six feet above grade. (See
“basement, walkout,” “cellar,” and “story.”)
6. “Basement, walkout” means a basement having a portion of its finished floor
not more than four feet below the finished yard grade at any of its exterior walls and
having not less than two-thirds of the vertical height of an exterior wall, which has a
ground level exit to the outside, above ground. A walkout basement shall be considered
the ground floor level of the building and shall be counted as a story.
7. “Bed and breakfast” means a lodging service that provides overnight or shortterm
accommodations to guests or visitors, usually including provision of breakfast.
Bed and breakfasts are usually located in large residential structures or adjacent
structures on the same parcel that have been adapted for this use. For the purpose of
this definition, bed and breakfasts are always owned and operated by the resident owner
of the structure, including no more than eight units, and accommodate each guest or
visitor for no more than seven consecutive days during any one-month period. A bed
and breakfast may only be located in a residential, commercial or agricultural zone.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
8. “Billboard” means any structure, regardless of the base or materials used in
construction of the same, that is erected, maintained or used for public display of
posters, painted signs, wall signs, whether the structure is placed on the wall or painted
on the wall itself, pictures or other pictorial reading matter which advertises a business
or attraction which is not carried on or manufactured in or upon the premises upon
which said sign or billboard is located.
9. “Block” means all that property frontage along one public thoroughfare lying
between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, railroad right-of-way,
waterway, golf course, campus, park or other similar open space.
10. “Board” means the Board of Adjustment of the City.
11. “Boarding house” means a building other than a hotel where, for compensation,
meals and lodging are provided for four or more persons, but does not include rest
homes.
12. “Boundary of district” means the centerline of a street or right-of-way or the
centerline of the alleyway between the rear or side property lines or, where no alley or
passageway exists, the rear or side property lines of all lots bordering on any district
limits or any district boundary shown on the maps adopted as a part of the Zoning
Regulations.
13. “Building” means any structure having a roof supported by walls or by columns
intended for enclosure, shelter, or housing of persons, animals or chattel. When any
portion thereof is entirely separated by walls in which there are no communicating doors
or windows or any similar opening, each portion so separated shall be deemed a separate
building.
14. “Building, height of” means the vertical distance from the average finished
ground grade at the building line to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to
the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
15. “Building line” means the extreme overall dimensions of a building as
determined from its exterior walls and as staked on the ground, including all areas
covered by vertical projection to the ground of overhang of walls or any part of a
primary structural support or component, which is nearest to the property line.
16. “Building site” means the ground area of one lot; or the ground area of two or
more lots that have been combined for the use of one building or permitted group of
buildings, together with all open spaces required by the Zoning Regulations.
17. “Cellar” means a story having not more than one-half of its height below grade,
which is inaccessible to the outside except by stairway, and in which the air vents or
ventilation windows are not more than 18 inches in height and four square feet in each
area.
18. “Centerline, public thoroughfare” means a line running parallel with the
thoroughfare right-of-way and which is half the distance between the extreme edges of
the official right-of-way width.
19. “Cocktail lounge, cabaret” means any place of business, other than a night club,
located in and accessory to a hotel, motel, or restaurant, where liquor, beer or wine is
sold for consumption on the premises, where music or other entertainment is limited to
a piano bar or other one-person performance and dancing is prohibited. (See also
“Tavern.”)
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
20. “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
21. “Conditional permit” means a permit issued in view of specified conditions,
limitations, or restrictions and which is subject to review or cancellation by the issuing
department.
22. “Court” means an open, unoccupied, unobstructed space, except for trees,
shrubs, statuary or other articles normally considered accessory to landscaping, and
which is bounded on two or more sides by a building on the same lot.
23. “Crown of road” means the grade at the centerline of the pavement within a
public thoroughfare, or where no pavement exists, grade at the right-of-way centerline.
24. “District” means a section or sections of land area, depicted on the Official
Zoning Map, within which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises
or the height and area of buildings and premises are uniform.
25. “Dump” means premises used for the disposal of clean-type fill or refuse, such
as dirt, rocks, cans, tree branches, and similar materials but not including organic matter
of any type such as garbage or dead animals or portions thereof.
26. “Dwelling” means any stationary, permanent building, or portion thereof,
which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, but not including a tent,
cabin, trailer or trailer coach.
A. “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms in a dwelling, multiple
dwelling or apartment hotel used for occupancy by one family as a home or
residence for living or sleeping purposes and in which the cooking and sanitary
facilities are designed for the use of one family only.
B. “Dwelling, one-family” means a detached building, on a building site,
designed for and used exclusively for residential purposes by one family and
containing one dwelling unit.
C. “Dwelling, two-family” means a building designed for and used
exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other
and containing two dwelling units.
D. “Dwelling, multiple” means a building or buildings on a common lot
designed for and used for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other and containing three or more dwelling units.
27. “Factory-built home” means any dwelling that qualifies pursuant to the
following requirements:
A. Mobile Dwelling. A vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon
the public streets and highways and so designed, constructed, or reconstructed
as will a single-family dwelling and containing water supply, waste disposal,
heating and electrical conveniences.
B. Chassis. A mobile dwelling that is built on a chassis.
C. Travel Trailer. A mobile dwelling which is not a travel trailer or other
form or recreational vehicle.
D. Conversion. A factory-built home shall be construed to remain a
factory built home, subject to all regulations and requirements applying to
factory built homes as established within this division, whether or not
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
appurtenances, including any hitch, wheel or axle, are removed, and regardless
of the foundation provided for such home.
E. Manufactured Home. A factory built home may be classified as a
manufactured home, provided that the requirements established for a
manufactured home have been satisfied.
28. “Garage, mechanical” means a structure in which major mechanical repair or
rebuilding of motor powered vehicles is performed for commercial gain and in which
the storage, care and minor servicing are accessory uses.
29. “Garage, private” means an accessory building or an accessory portion of the
main building, designed and/or used for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned or
operated by the occupants of the main building. A private garage, of less than three-car
capacity, may be rented for the private vehicles of persons not residents on the premises.
30. “Gas station” means a structure designed or used for the retail sale or supply of
fuels, lubricants, air, water, and other operating commodities or accessories for motor
vehicles and including the customary space and facilities for the installation of such
commodities or accessories on or in such vehicles, but not including space or facilities
for the storage, painting, repair, refinishing, body work or other major servicing of
motor vehicles.
31. “Grade” means:
A. For buildings having walls adjoining one street only, the elevation of
the regularly established sidewalk grade at the center of the wall adjoining the
street.
B. For buildings having walls adjoining more than one street, the average
elevation of the regularly established sidewalk grades at the center of walls
adjoining the streets.
C. For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of
the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
Any wall approximately parallel to and not more than five feet from a street
line is considered as adjoining the street.
32. “Half-story” means a story with at least two of its opposite sides situated in a
sloping roof, the floor area of which does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area of the
floor immediately below it.
33. “Home occupation” means any occupation or profession conducted solely by
resident occupants in their places of abode, involving primarily service and not the sale
of commodities upon the premises, provided that not more than one-quarter of the area
of not more than one floor level of the building may be used in pursuit of the occupation
and not more than one person other than the occupants of the building may be employed.
34. “Junk” means old and dilapidated automobiles, trucks, tractors, and other such
vehicles and parts thereof, wagons and other kinds of vehicles and parts thereof, scrap,
used building material, scrap contractors’ equipment, tanks, casks, cans, barrels, boxes,
drums, piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery, rags, paper, excelsior, hair,
mattresses, beds or bedding or any other kind of scrap or waste material which is stored,
kept, handled or displayed for barter, resale, reuse, salvage, stripping or trade. (See also
“trash.”)
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
35. “Junk yard” means any area where junk is bought, sold, exchanged, baled or
packed, disassembled or handled, including house wrecking yards, used lumber yards
and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking or structural steel materials
and equipment; but not including areas where such uses are conducted entirely within
a completely enclosed building and not including the processing of used, discarded or
salvaged material necessary as a part of manufacturing operations.
36. “Kennel” means an area for the keeping of any animal, regardless of number,
for sale, breeding, boarding or treatment purposes, except in an animal hospital, dog
beauty parlor or pet shop, as permitted by law, or for keeping of four or more animals,
six months or older, on premises used for residential purposes or for keeping of more
than one animal on vacant property or on property used for business or commercial
purposes.
37. “Lot” means, for zoning purposes as covered in the Zoning Regulations, a
parcel of real property of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements
for use, coverage and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are
required in the Zoning Regulations. Such lot shall have frontage on a dedicated street,
and may consist of any one of the following:
A. A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record
and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record;
B. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds, provided that in no
case of division or combination shall any residential lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of the Zoning Regulations;
C. A portion of lot of record;
D. Single lot of record.
38. “Lot lines” are:
A. Front. The line separating the front of the lot from the street. In the
case of a corner lot, that part of the lot having the narrowest frontage on any
street is considered the front lot line.
B. Rear. The rear lot line is that boundary that is opposite and most distant
from the front lot line. In the case of an interior triangular or gore-shaped lot,
it means a straight line, 10 feet in length, which:
(1) Is parallel to the front lot line or its cord;
(2) Intersects the two other lot lines at points most distant from the
front lot line.
C. Side. Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
39. “Lot measurements” are:
A. Area. The gross area, exclusive of streets or other public right-of-ways,
within the boundary lines of a lot.
B. Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines as measured perpendicular to the midpoint of the mean front lot line. In
the case of an interior triangular or gore-shaped lot, the depth is the horizontal
distance between the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
C. Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines as measured
perpendicular to the line compromising the lot depth at its point of intersection
with the required minimum front setback. Where the lot width is decreasing
from front to rear, the horizontal distance between the side lot lines as described
above shall be measured at its point of intersection with the required minimum
rear setback.
40. “Lot of record” means a lot that is part of a subdivision, the deed of which is
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and
bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
41. “Lot types” are:
A. Corner Lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, and
having the street right-of-way abut the front and one or more side lines of the
lot.
B. Double Frontage Lot. A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on
more than one street or public thoroughfare, which streets do not intersect one
another.
C. Interior Lot. A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on but one
street or public thoroughfare.
D. Key Lot. A key lot is a lot so subdivided as to have its side lines
coincide with the rear lot lines of adjacent lots on either or both sides of the
aforesaid key lots.
E. Reversed Frontage Lot. A corner lot, the side street line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first interior lot to its rear.
42. “Manufactured home” means any dwelling that qualifies pursuant to the
following requirements:
A. Permanency. Any factory-built, single-family dwelling that is
manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Section 5403,
Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, and which is
not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved
other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which does not
have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles.
B. Factory-Built Home. A factory-built home, as defined in this section,
shall not be considered a manufactured home, unless it has been constructed
pursuant to all applicable standards established in the Federal Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards and it has been converted to real
property and is taxed as a site-built dwelling as is provided in Chapter 135D of
the Code of Iowa.
C. Effect. For purposes of this chapter, any dwelling that is a
manufactured home, as defined in this section, shall be considered the same as
a single-family detached dwelling.
43. “Modular home” means any single-family dwelling unit that is manufactured
in whole or in components at a place other than the location where it is to be
permanently located, and which is assembled in whole or in components at the location
where it is to be permanently located; and which rests on a permanent foundation or
slab; and which does not have wheels or axles affixed as a part of its normal
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
construction; and which does not require a license by any agency as a motor vehicle,
special equipment, trailer motor home, or factory-built home.
44. “Mobile home park” means any lot or portion of a lot upon which two or more
trailers or mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located,
regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
45. “Nonconforming use” means the use of a building or of land or any portion
thereof which was lawfully established and maintained but which, because of the
application of the Zoning Regulations to it, no longer conforms to the use regulations
of the zone in which it is located.
46. “Non-profit institution” means a non-profit establishment maintained and
operated by a society, corporation, individual, foundation or public agency for the
purpose of providing charitable, social, educational or similar services to the public,
groups or individuals. Cooperative non-profit associations performing a service
normally associated with retail sales or trade, such as cooperative groceries, granaries,
equipment sale, etc., are not considered non-profit institutions under these Zoning
Regulations.
47. “Parking space, automobile” means an area, other than a street or alley,
reserved for the parking of an automobile, such space having a dimension not less than
10 feet by 20 feet, plus such additional area as is necessary to afford adequate ingressegress.
Where four or more automobile parking spaces are to be grouped as a common
facility meeting a requirement of these Zoning Regulations, the individual car spaces,
plus the area necessary for driveways, shall total not less than 315 square feet per car
space.
48. “Premises” means any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land, building or buildings,
structure or structures used publicly or privately as a place of business, dwelling or
meeting place.
49. “Principal building” means the building situated or to be placed nearest the
front property line and the use of which conforms to the primary use permitted by the
zoning classification in which it is located.
50. “Public thoroughfare” means any right-of-way under the jurisdiction and
maintenance of the governmental agencies of the Federal, State and Municipal
government, and which may be used by the public in general, and which serves as the
frontage street to the abutting property. (See “street.”)
51. “Resubdivision” means any change in the shape or size of any lot, tract, or
parcel of land previously platted for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale,
rent, lease, building development, anchorages, or other use; or any change in the shape
or size of any lot, tract, or parcel of land previously approved for building purposes,
whether immediate or future, and regardless of whether or not the same is vacant or
improved in whole or in part, for sale, rent, lease, building development, anchorage, or
other use.
52. “Setback” means the minimum horizontal distance between the front, rear, or
side lines of the lot and the front, rear, or side lines of the building, respectively. When
two or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior property line of the lots so
grouped shall be used in determining setbacks.
53. “Sign” means any device designed to inform, attract the attention of persons
not on the premises which the sign is located.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
54. “Special permit” means the authorization of a zoning certificate for an
unclassified or special use of a lot by the City following a review of the application for
use by the Board. A special permit may be issued only for those uses listed under
Chapter 168.
55. “Specified anatomical areas” means less than completely and opaquely covered
human genital, pubic region, buttocks; and a female breast below a point above the top
of the areola; and human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely
and opaquely covered.
56. “Specified sexual activities” means patently offensive acts, exhibitions,
representations, depictions or descriptions of:
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
B. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast;
C. Intrusion, however slight, actual or stimulated, by any object, any part
of an animal’s body, or any part of a person’s body into the genital or anal
openings of any person’s body;
D. Cunnilingus, fellatio, anilingus, masturbation, bestiality, lewd
exhibition of genitals or excretory function, actual or simulated; flagellation,
mutilation or torture, actual or simulated, in a sexual context.
57. “Story” means that portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it. If there is no floor above, then the space
between such floor and the ceiling next above it is considered a story. If the finished
floor level directly above the basement or cellar is more than six feet above grade, such
basement or cellar is considered a story.
58. “Street” means a public thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access
to the abutting property. (See “public thoroughfare.”)
59. “Street line” means a dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous street. (See “lot line, front.”)
60. “Structural alterations” means any replacement or change in the shape or size
of any portion of a building or of the supporting members of a building or structure such
as walls, columns, beams, arches, girders, floor joist, or roof trusses, beyond ordinary
repairs and maintenance.
61. “Structure” means anything constructed or erected with a rigid or fixed location
on the ground, or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground,
including buildings, walls, fences, signs, light standards, towers, tanks, etc.
62. “Subdivision” means a division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into three or
more lots, plats, sites or other subdivisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of sale, rent, lease, building development, right-of-way dedication or other
use.
63. “Tourist cottage” means a single-family dwelling used as one of the units of a
tourist park.
64. “Tourist park” means any lot or plot of real property upon which three or more
single-family camp cottages, or two or more trailers or any combination of tourist
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
cottages or tourist homes or trailers are located and maintained for the accommodation
of transients, whether a charge is or is not made.
65. “Trailer” means any structure used for living, sleeping, business or storage
purposes, having no foundation other than wheels, blocks, skids, jacks, horses or
skirtings, and which is, has been, or reasonably may be, equipped with wheels or other
devices for transporting the structure from place to place, whether by motive power or
other means. The term “trailer” includes camp car and house car.
66. “Travel trailer” means any vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed as a temporary dwelling not exceeding eight feet in width and not exceeding
40 feet in length, exclusive of separate towing unit. The term “travel trailer” includes
pick-up coach, motor home, camp trailer, or other similar mobile and temporary
dwellings commonly used for travel, recreation or vacation quarters.
67. “Travel trailer park” means a parcel of land upon which two or more spaces are
provided, occupied, or intended for occupancy by travel trailers for transient purposes,
not to exceed 30 days.
68. “Variance” means a modification of the specific regulations of these Zoning
Regulations granted by resolution of the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the
terms of the Zoning Regulations for the purpose of assuring that no property, because
of special circumstances applicable to it, shall be deprived of the privileges commonly
enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone.
69. “Yard” means an open space other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except for landscaping or as otherwise provided
in these Zoning Regulations.
A. “Yard, front” means the yard area lying to the front of the principal
building or between the front building line and the front lot line.
B. “Yard, rear” means the yard area lying to the rear of the principal
building or between the rear building line and the rear lot line.
C. “Yard, side” means the yard area lying to the sides of the principal
building or between the side building lines and the side lot lines.
70. “Zone” means any one of the classes of districts established in these Zoning
Regulations.
71. “Zoning Administrator” means the administrative officer designated or
appointed by the City to administer and enforce the regulations contained in these
Zoning Regulations.
72. “Zoning certificate” means the written statement issued by the Zoning
Administrator authorizing buildings, structures or uses consistent with the terms of the
Zoning Regulations and for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the provisions
thereof.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
[The next page is 915]
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
165.04 DISTRICTS. In order to classify, regulate, and restrict the location of trades and industries and
the location of buildings designed for specified uses, to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings
hereafter erected or altered, to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas, and to regulate and
determine the area of yards, courts and other open spaces within and surrounding such buildings, the City
is divided into 15 classes of districts. The use, height, and area regulations are uniform in each class of
district, and said districts shall be known as:
R-1a Single-Family Residential District (low density)
R-1 One- and Two-Family Residential District (medium density)
R-2 Medium Density Residential District (medium density)
R-3 Multi-Family Residential District (high density)
C-1 Limited Commercial District
C-1a Transitional Commercial/Residential District
C-2 Highway Commercial District
C-3 Central Business District
C-4 Planned Office/Commercial Park District
M-1 Light Industrial District
M-2 Heavy Industrial District
A-1 Agricultural District
PUD Planned Unit Development
RM-1 One- and Two-Family Residential/Light Industrial District
MM-1 Modified Light Industrial District
165.05 BOUNDARIES. The boundaries of these districts are indicated upon the Official Zoning Map
of the City, which map is made a part of these Zoning Regulations by reference. The said Official Zoning
Map and all notations, references, and other matters shown thereon shall be as if the notations, references,
and other matters set forth by said map were all fully described herein. The Official Zoning Map shall be
filed in the office of the City Clerk. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. The district boundaries are either lot lines or the centerlines of streets
and alleys, unless otherwise shown, and where the districts designated are bounded approximately by street,
alley, or lot lines and are not dimensioned otherwise, the lot lines or the centerlines of streets and alleys
shall be construed to be the boundaries of the district.
165.06 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
1. Purpose. This section is intended to:
A. Establish a procedure for the City to review proposed improvements within the
specified zoning districts of the City to insure compliance with all applicable zoning,
subdivision, and building regulations.
B. Protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of the City.
C. Establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for development and
redevelopment in order to further the orderly layout, harmonious development of land use,
and most beneficial relationship between uses of land.
D. Insure provisions for engineering of pavement, surface, and subsurface drainage;
erosion control; and orderly and efficient circulation of traffic, water, sanitary sewer, and
other utilities.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
E. Provide for suitable screening of parking, truck loading, refuse disposal, and
outdoor storage from adjacent property.
F. Ensure that infrastructure will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed
development.
G. Prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; assure the adequacy of drainage
facilities; safeguard the water table; and encourage the wise use and management of natural
resources throughout the City in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the
community and the value of the land.
H. Preserve the natural beauty and topography of the City and to ensure appropriate
development with regard to these natural features.
I. Provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land,
including the use of average density in providing for minimum width and area of lots, while
preserving the density of development, as established in these Zoning Regulations.
The proposed development shall conform to all applicable provisions of the Code of Iowa, as
amended, and all applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, as amended.
2. Required. Site Plans are required for:
A. All development or redevelopment of any lot, tract, or parcel of land that includes
unclassified, special and/or conditional uses in single-family and one- and two-family
residential districts and all uses in multiple-family residential, commercial, or industrial
districts.
B. All developments of paved areas or fenced property.
C. Exceptions:
(1) The development does not require any additional parking spaces.
(2) The development does not increase the rate of storm water runoff.
(3) The building or building addition does not exceed 150 square feet.
3. Site Plan Procedure.
A. Submit 10 copies of the site plan to the City Clerk by 4:00 p.m. on the third
Monday of each month. The plans shall be no larger than 24” x 36”. All plans shall be
folded.
B. The City Clerk shall distribute copies of the plan to the City Engineer, Public
Works, Electric, City Administrator, and City Staff for their review and comment.
C. The City will respond in writing to the Applicant within 15 days.
D. The Applicant shall make the revisions to the plans and resubmit 16 copies to the
City Clerk by 4:00 p.m. on the second Monday of the following month.
E. The City Clerk shall forward a copy of the site plan to each member of the Planning
and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, after receiving the
report from the Engineer and the City Staff, review the site plan for conformity and shall
confer with the Applicant on changes deemed advisable in such site plan.
F. The Applicant or agents submitting a site plan shall personally appear before
Planning and Zoning upon notice from the City Staff.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
G. The Commission may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing on the site plan of
the proposed development and prescribe the notice thereof and to whom such notice shall
be given.
H. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its recommendation either for
approval or disapproval of the site plan to the Council.
I. The Council shall, upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, place said recommendation upon the next Council agenda for discussion, and
within 35 days thereafter shall either approve or disapprove the site plan of the proposed
development. The Applicant or agent shall personally appear before the Council upon
notice from the Council when said site plan is scheduled for action by the Council. If said
owner or agent fails to appear as scheduled, the Council shall take no action on said site
plan.
J. No building permit or certificate of zoning compliance for any structure within any
district within which a site plan is required shall be issued until the site plan has been
approved as provided herein.
K. Upon final approval by City Council, the applicant shall file three (3) copies of the
Site Plan with the City Clerk with all the revisions and stipulations as specified by City
Staff and City Council.
L. If the City finds that any construction or proposed construction or occupancy of a
development on a tract of land for which a site plan has been approved will not substantially
comply with the site plan as approved, or if the City finds that the construction and
development of the tract are not being carried out in accordance with the development
schedule filed with the site plan, the City shall suspend all building permits for the
development. Thereafter, all construction will be stopped until such time as the owner of
the project, or said owner’s successor in interest, shall have provided the City with proof
satisfactory to ensure that the site plan will be complied with. The City shall not issue a
certificate of zoning compliance for any structure within the development while the
building permit for the development has been suspended pursuant to this section. Any
person aggrieved by any decision or action of the City under this section may appeal such
action or decision to the Board of Adjustment.
M. If the owner or developer of a tract of land for which a site plan has been approved
determines that an extension of time is necessary or that a modification of the site plan
would provide for a more appropriate or more practicable development of the site, said
owner or developer may apply for an amendment of the site plan. The Planning and Zoning
Commission may grant an extension of time or a modification of a previously approved
site plan if it determines that such modification of the site plan would provide for a more
appropriate development of the site.
N. A meeting between the developer, land owner, representatives of the municipal
electric, water, and sanitary sewer utilities and City Administrator, at which capacity
requirements and costs of utility infrastructure extensions will be disclosed, will be
required before a site plan and building permit can be approved. The developer must
provide evidence of adequate capacity for any needed private utilities, including (but not
limited to) gas, telephone, and cable, prior to approval of a site plan and building permit.
4. Submittal Requirements for Site Plan Review.
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name and address of owner of the record of property.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
C. Name and address of the person or firm preparing the site plan.
D. Legal description and zoning classification of the property (dimensions of the
present lot and lot area, to the nearest tenth of a foot).
E. Address of the property and date of preparation.
F. A vicinity map at a scale of 1” = 500’ or larger, showing the general location of
the property, and the adjoining land uses and zoning.
G. North arrow, graphic scale (not less than 1” = 10’ and no greater than 1” = 60’
unless an alternate scale is approved by the City Staff).
H. Size and location of all existing and proposed buildings, additions, and structures
including:
(1) Setback distance to property lines.
(2) Exact exterior dimensions of each building.
(3) Location of entrances and overhead doors.
(4) Number of dwelling units.
(5) Square footage of each type of use.
I. Zoning designation of the property.
J. Proposed land and building use on the property.
K. Existing and proposed location, size, and grade of sanitary sewer mains and service
lines.
L. Existing and proposed location and size of water mains, service lines, and hydrants.
M. Existing and proposed location of electric lines, phone lines, gas lines, fiber lines,
etc.
N. Existing and proposed location and size of drainage facilities and roof drains.
O. Location, grade, and dimensions of all existing paved surfaces and abutting streets.
P. Existing and proposed location, dimensions, pavement treatment and depth of
pavement for all parking areas, individual parking spaces, drive aisles, driveways, curb
cuts, easements, right-of-ways, walkways, loading areas, dividers, curbs, islands, and other
parking and drive improvements.
Q. Existing and proposed contours at one-foot intervals based on City Datum (USGS
Datum).
R. Location and proposed methods of screening for outdoor trash dumpsters.
S. Locations and type of all existing and proposed signs.
T. Location, size, and type of all proposed outdoor lighting.
U. Location of water bodies, swamps, and flood-prone areas, wetland boundaries, 100-
year flood plain boundary line, and floodway boundary line.
V. Erosion Control Plan to prevent migration of soils off-site.
W. Location of natural features including existing trees and rock.
X. Storm Water Management Plan as per City Staff requirements.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
Y. Landscape Plan:
(1) Open space provided and required.
(2) Location of plants.
(3) Plant list, including the plant species, the quantity of each type of plant,
the size of each plant at the time of planting.
(4) Location and detail of all fences and walls.
Z. Traffic Impact Studies, if deemed necessary by City Staff.
AA. Architectural Drawings:
(1) All exterior wall elevations (floor height, overall building height).
(2) Building floor plans (proposed usage, interior floor area).
(3) State the color and type of building materials of all structures.
BB. Additional information, drawings, or other materials necessary to describe a
proposed project may be requested by the Planning and Zoning Commission or staff. The
applicant may include additional information or materials such as sketches, videos, models,
or photos, if they help explain the proposal.
5. Site Plan Design Standards. The design standards provided herein are to insure the orderly
development of property in such a manner as will ensure the public’s health, safety and general
welfare.
A. Multiple Buildings on Single Lots.
(1) More than one commercial, industrial, hospital, institutional or public
principal building may be erected on a lot, where such uses are permitted, provided
that all setbacks from the property line are observed. The distances between
structures shall be determined as per the provisions of the City’s Building Code.
(2) More than one apartment dwelling is permitted on a single lot where such
uses are permitted, provided that all setbacks from the property line are observed.
B. Sidewalks. (See Section 166.15):
(1) All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
(2) The minimum width of sidewalks in public rights-of-way shall be 5 feet,
and constructed as per the Urban Standard Specifications.
(3) The minimum width of sidewalks in private property (except single- and
multi-family residential zones) shall be 5 feet, and constructed as per the Urban
Standard Specifications.
(4) The minimum depth of sidewalks through driveways shall be 6 inches.
(5) On-site sidewalks shall connect the street to the main entrance of the
primary structure on site.
(6) Where sidewalks cross driveways, parking areas and loading areas, the
crossing shall be clearly identified.
(7) Sidewalks in Industrial Zones may be waived, at the City Council’s
discretion.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
C. Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas. (See Section 166.12):
(1) All residential and commercial property shall be paved with either asphalt
concrete (ACC) or Portland cement concrete (PCC). In addition, all paved areas
shall be constructed with curb and gutter. Prefabricated portable curb stops shall
not be considered an acceptable alternate unless otherwise approved by the City
Council.
(2) In Industrial properties, the area from the front yard to the front face of the
building shall be hard surfaced. The remaining area could be gravel surfaced. If
no building is on the property, then the area from the front yard to the building
setback shall be hard surfaced.
(3) The minimum thickness for gravel parking or storage shall be 6 inches.
Asphalt millings are encouraged in lieu of rock to provide dust control.
(4) The minimum pavement thickness shall be 5 inches of Portland Cement
Concrete or 6 inches of Asphalt. Greater thickness may be required by subsurface
conditions or type of vehicles using the parking area. In all off-street parking areas
where access will be provided for heavy trucks and transit vehicles, the pavement
thickness shall be adequate to accommodate such vehicles, as determined by the
City Engineer.
(5) The minimum access aisle width for one-way traffic shall be 15 feet. The
City Engineer shall approve all one-way traffic circulation within the site.
(6) The minimum access aisle for two-way traffic without parking is 20 feet.
(7) Driveways may not exceed 30 feet in width for two-lane traffic and must
be designed to minimize curb cuts. Multiple lanes of traffic (turn lanes) shall be
reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.
(8) Access driveways on public streets shall be approved by the City Engineer
during the site plan submittal process. An entrance permit is not required by the
City. All entrances onto IDOT roadways shall require an IDOT entrance permit.
Adequate spacing between drives shall be as per the Urban Design Standards and
the recommendations of the City Engineer. Alignment of driveways shall be
encouraged.
(9) All parking areas shall be striped.
(10) All parking areas shall meet the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
D. Fences. (See Section 166.09) It is unlawful for a person to use barbed wire fence
or electric fence to enclose land within the City limits without the consent of the Council
or unless such land consists of 10 acres or more and is zoned agricultural.
E. Outdoor Display of Goods and Storage.
(1) Outdoor display areas must comply with all applicable setback
requirements for buildings.
(2) Outdoor displays of goods and/or storage shall be placed on either ACC
or PCC pavement. Gravel is not allowed.
(3) Outdoor displays may not interfere with pedestrian or automobile traffic.
F. Landscaping and Screening Standards.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) All landscape plans are subject to the review and approval by City Staff.
(2) Appropriate screening shall be provided to shield adjacent residential uses
from the impacts of the parking lot. In addition, a minimum parking setback of 10
feet shall be required adjacent to any “R” District.
(3) Earth berms, hedge walls, fences, and/or trees shall be utilized to shield
views of semi-trailer parking areas.
(4) Adequate landscaping shall be provided and maintained to buffer and
beautify the parking area. Both interior and peripheral landscaping shall be
considered.
(5) The minimum open space for multi-family properties shall be 15% of the
total property area.
(6) Minimum requirements at the time of planting: two trees minimum or one
tree per 1,500 square feet of required open space, whichever is greater.
(7) Shade trees shall be required along the parking lot. The spacing of the
trees shall be one tree per 50 feet. Note that the trees may be grouped together.
(8) Minimum requirements at the time of planting: 6 shrubs, or one shrub per
1,000 square feet of required open space, whichever is greater.
(9) Shrubs and earth berms shall be utilized along the front yard.
(10) Deciduous trees shall have a minimum diameter of 1½ inches.
(11) Conifers shall be a minimum of 6 feet tall.
(12) All landscaping shall be fully developed within two years after the
occupancy of the building. The owner is responsible for replacing any landscaping
within six (6) months of notification from the City or else they will be in violation
of this section.
(13) To reduce erosion, all disturbed open space areas shall have ground cover
of grass that is installed as sod or seed. Landscape rock is allowed subject to the
view of City Staff.
(14) Any storage area, garbage storage, junk storage or loading docks, and
loading areas in any district shall be screened from public street view by a buffer.
G. Garbage Collection Areas. All outdoor garbage collection areas shall be screened
from all public rights-of-way and alleys. The screened garbage collection areas shall be of
similar building material as the primary building. Trash receptacles for pedestrians’ use
are exempt.
H. Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment located on the ground shall be
screened from the street and any abutting residential property. Mechanical equipment on
roofs shall be completely screened from the ground level of any abutting residentially
zoned lot and substantially screened from all adjacent properties. The electric transformer
shall be screened.
I. Lighting. The purpose of the lighting standards are to keep unnecessary direct
light from shining onto abutting properties or streets:
(1) All lighting shall be Sodium Halogen or Metal Halide.
(2) State the wattage for each lighting fixture.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
(3) All lighting fixtures shall be sharp cut-off.
(4) Show all proposed wall packs on the site plan. All wall packs shall be
sharp cut-off.
(5) The maximum pole height in residential and commercial zones shall be 30
feet.
(6) The maximum pole height in industrial zones shall be 35 feet.
(7) All lighting fixtures shall be consistent with the architectural theme of the
development.
(8) Exceptions may be allowed for City Parks, ball fields and other
recreational areas.
J. Grading. A grading permit is not required. However, prior to grading any area
over one acre in size, the owner shall submit to the City Clerk the erosion control plan and
the NPDES permit application.
K. Storm Water Management Standards. Storm water management design shall
include grading, surface, and subsurface improvements that result in no increase in the rate
of runoff when compared to the undeveloped condition of the area to be developed. The
rainfall frequencies that shall be incorporated in the design of the storm water management
plan shall include the 5-year and 100-year storm events. The calculations and design of
the storm water management plan shall be prepared by an engineer licensed to practice in
Iowa.
(1) The storm water management plans shall be as per the Urban Design
Standards Manual.
(2) Storm water detention is required unless otherwise waived by the City
Engineer. Developments shall detain for 100-year developed storm event and
release at the 5-year undeveloped storm event.
(3) The storm water management plan shall illustrate the flow path for a storm
event which exceeds the 100-year storm event.
(4) Bio-swales or filtration swales shall be encouraged for all site plans in lieu
of subsurface drainage improvements. Surface drainage improvements such as
drainage flumes, drainage swales and curb cuts may be allowed if approved by the
City Engineer.
L. Fire Protection.
(1) Buildings shall be required to have fire sprinkler systems according the
Building Code.
(2) Fire hydrants shall be placed to protect buildings on private property.
Hydrants shall be positioned to provide a minimum 150-foot radius coverage of
the building. The City Engineer and Fire Chief may grant exceptions to this
requirement based on size of the building and traffic circulation to the site.
(3) The size of fire water mains shall be 8-inch unless otherwise approved of
by the City Engineer.
M. Sanitary Sewer. Sanitary sewer lines shall be designed so as to not overload
existing public utility lines. The City Engineer may require the applicant to submit studies
of the sanitary sewer system.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
N. Utilities. All electrical, telephone, and cable television transmission shall be
placed underground. The Council may allow certain high voltage power lines above
ground.
O. Vibrations. Every use shall be operated so that continuous, frequent or repetitive
vibrations inherently or recurrently generated may not be perceptible to a person of normal
sensitivities on any point of any property line of the lot on which the use is located.
P. Building Design.
(1) Buildings shall have good scale and maintain or enhance the established
scale of buildings and sites of neighboring buildings.
(2) Building materials shall provide compatible textures and colors as those
of neighboring buildings.
6. Short Form Site Plan. Whenever a person shall place any temporary business structure,
building addition less than 3,000 square feet, parking lot addition of no more than 3,000 square
feet, grading plan, minor landscape plan or utility extension, said person shall cause to be prepared
a short form site plan as otherwise required by this subsection.
A. An applicant shall submit the correct legal description, boundary dimensions, and
the identity of the present record owner of the property along with all of the following:
(1) Existing and proposed dimensions of all site improvements and setbacks
for property lines.
(2) A clearly written description of the existing and proposed use of the
property.
(3) Parking layout (including stall dimensions, aisle widths, driveway widths
and locations), sidewalk layout, and pedestrian flow.
(4) A description of any screening and landscaping.
(5) Existing and proposed utilities and easements, including any sanitary instore
sewers.
(6) Nearest fire hydrant.
B. A person submitting a short form site plan need not submit the short form site plan
to a separate engineering for certification. Nonetheless, the short form site plan is subject
to review by the City Staff and the City Engineer upon the sole discretion of the City Staff.
C. The short form site plan shall be submitted to the City Staff for review and may be
referred upon the sole discretion of City Staff and City Engineer for review and comment.
The City Staff (and the City Engineer if involved) shall have the authority to approve,
reject, or modify the site plan. In the sole discretion of the City Staff, a short form site plan
may be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
7. Site Plan Appeals. See Chapter 171.
8. Site Plan Amendments. Any change to an approved site plan shall be approved by the City
Staff and City Engineer. Substantial changes to the plan may warrant a re-submittal to the Planning
and Zoning Commission.
9. Site Plan Expiration of Approval. All site plan approvals shall expire and terminate 180
days after the date of Council approval unless a building permit has been issued for the construction
provided for in the site plan. The Council may, upon written request by the developer, extend the
time for the issuance of a building permit for 60 days. In the event the building permit for the
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
construction provided for in the site plan expires or is canceled, then such site plan approval shall
thereupon terminate.
10. Reimbursement of Site Plan Review Expenses. All site plan review expenses incurred by
the City, including expenses of the site plan review engineer, shall be billed to the developer or
owner requesting the site plan review.
165.07 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS. The Council may, on its own motion or on petition after
public notice and hearing, as provided by law, and after report by the Commission, amend, supplement, or
change the boundaries or regulations herein or subsequently established. Any owner or owners of property
shall present a petition duly signed and certified, requesting an amendment, supplement, or change in the
regulations prescribed for a district or part thereof; and in addition, shall submit a rezoning application and
pay an application fee in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). Rezoning application forms may be obtained
from the City Clerk. Such petition shall be signed by the owners of at least 50 percent of the area included
in such proposed change and by the owners of 50 percent of the property within 300 feet thereof, and said
petition shall be filed with the City Clerk, who shall refer it to the Commission. The Commission shall
make a report to the Council within 60 days after the date of receipt of such petition. In case the proposed
amendment, supplement, or change is disapproved by the Commission, or in case of a protest against any
proposed amendment or change signed by the owners of 20 percent or more, either of the area of the lots
included in such proposed change or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof, extending the depth
of one lot or not to exceed 200 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, such amendment shall not
become effective except by the favorable vote of at least three-fourths of all the members of the Council.
(See EDITOR’S NOTE at the end of this chapter for ordinances amending the zoning map.)
165.08 MAP REPLACEMENT. In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of use, the Council may, by resolution, adopt a new Official
Zoning Map, which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may
correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such correction shall
have the effect of amending the original Zoning Ordinance or any subsequent amendment thereof. The
new Official Zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, under
the following words:
This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning
Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced), as part of Ordinance No. ______
of the City of Carlisle, Iowa.
165.09 ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS. Any land annexed to the City after the effective date of
these Zoning Regulations shall be zoned R Residential until the Commission and Council shall have studied
the area and adopted a final zoning plan for the area in accordance with Sections 165.07 and 165.08 hereof.
Said final zoning plan shall be adopted within six (6) months of the date of annexation.
165.10 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS. Whenever a violation of the Zoning
Regulations occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such
complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, who shall
record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon, as provided in these
Zoning Regulations.
165.11 SCHEDULE OF FEES. The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, expenses,
and a collection procedure for certificates, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The
schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the City Clerk and be altered or amended only by the City
Council.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
165.12 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
1. Purpose. This section is intended to:
A. Provide for the administration and enforcement of architectural design.
B. Establish minimum standards for the design and construction of buildings and
related structures in all districts.
C. Consider the importance of the quality of architecture and building construction to
the preservation and enhancement of building and property values, the prevention of the
physical deterioration of buildings, the promotion of the image of the community and the
general welfare of the City.
2. General Regulations. As part of the submittal for site plan approval within any zoning
district, excluding the R-1a Single-Family Residential District, the R-1 One- and Two-Family
Residential District, and single-family homes and two-family structures (duplexes) in the R-2
Medium Density Residential District, architectural plans, including detailed wall and roof
elevations and a description of proposed structural and exterior materials, shall be submitted for
review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council.
3. Design Standards.
A. Building Orientation. All buildings shall be designed and oriented so as to mitigate
the visual and aural impact of their service areas, loading areas, nonresidential overhead
doors and similar features on surrounding properties and public rights-of-way.
(1) Buildings shall not expose service areas and equipment (transformers,
generators, compressors, etc.), loading areas, nonresidential overhead doors, and
similar features to the public rights-of-way or to adjacent residential property.
(2) If it is not feasible to design and orient service areas and equipment
(transformers, generators, compressors, etc.), loading areas, nonresidential overhead
doors, and similar features so as not to face a public right-of-way or adjacent
residential property, appropriate screening walls or fences with similar design
features to the building (material, shape, color, etc.), additional landscape buffering
or additional setbacks shall be required.
B. Architectural Elements.
(1) Buildings other than one- and two-family buildings which are proposed in
residential districts (utility structures, schools, churches, etc.) shall incorporate
residential design elements (pitched roofs, dormers, cupolas, or other similar roof
elements) into the building design in order to minimize the aesthetic impact of the
nonresidential uses.
(2) Buildings proposed in commercial districts that are adjacent to residential
developments shall incorporate an articulated roofline, giving emphasis to
architectural elements that will help visually divide the mass of a large building into
smaller, more identifiable pieces. Flat roof buildings shall be discouraged and shall
only be allowed on a favorable recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Roof and wall elevations in the C-3 Central Business District shall
reflect the existing historic community architecture in the district.
(3) Commercial buildings shall incorporate architectural design elements,
materials, and colors into the side and rear building elevations similar to those used
in the front building elevation.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
(4) Commercial buildings shall incorporate façade modulation in all building
elevations, either by physical offsets or by the use of color, pattern, or texture in
order to preserve building scale and reduce the negative aesthetic impact of long,
large, expansive wall surfaces.
(5) Roof-mounted mechanical, communications, or other similar equipment
shall be screened from public view by the use of parapet walls or other roof
structures. If a parapet wall or other roof structure cannot feasibly screen the roofmounted
equipment, point-in-place or other appropriate screening with similar
design features to the building, including material, shape, and color shall be
required.
C. Exterior Materials Selection.
(1) In R-3 Multi-Family Residential districts, primarily residential
construction materials, such as brick, stone, wood, lap siding and architectural
shingles, shall be utilized. At a minimum, 25 percent of such materials shall be
incorporated into the exterior surfaces, exclusive of glazed surfaces, of each
building face.
(2) In C-1 Limited Commercial, C-1a Transitional Commercial/Residential
and C-2 Highway Commercial, C-3 Central Business, and C-4 Planned
Office/Commercial Park districts, all construction materials shall be dominated by
permanence and strength in proportion to the aesthetic characteristics of the
building’s bulk and shape. At a minimum, in C-1, C-1a and C-2 districts, 60
percent of such materials shall be incorporated into all exterior surfaces, exclusive
of glazed surfaces, and in C-3 and C-4 districts, 100 percent of such materials shall
be incorporated into all exterior surfaces, exclusive of glazed surfaces. Acceptable
materials shall include brick, stone, or other similar substantial material. Pre-cast,
tilt-up concrete panels are acceptable, provided additional architectural detailing is
provided along the public faces of the building.
(3) The use of metal panels or sheet metal will not be considered an acceptable
material for any primary or accessory building in any residential or commercial
district. Metal panels may be used on the walls of buildings in M-1, M-2, MM-1
and RM-1 districts that do not face or that are not visible from a public right-ofway.
Contrary to the above, standing seam metal colored roofing material may be
used in any zoning district.
D. Exterior Colors. The building’s exterior color scheme shall utilize primarily muted
neutral or earth tone type colors. The primary use of bright, intense, or extreme colors shall
be prohibited in all districts, although these colors may be used for specifically approved
architectural detailing.
4. Waiver of Requirements. The City Council reserves the right to waive or modify to a lesser
restriction any provision or requirement contained in this section in any redevelopment of property
within the City, provided there is a favorable recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission and provided said waiver or modification does not adversely affect the intent of these
regulations to adequately safeguard the general public and the surrounding property. Exceptions
will only be considered for those areas where special circumstances warrant a change and whereby
the modification or waiver is determined to be in the best interest of the general public.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
165.13 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The 2009 Comprehensive Plan is hereby adopted as the official
Comprehensive Plan of the City. The Comprehensive Plan shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and
shall be identified as the official Comprehensive Plan of the City.
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL PROVISIONS
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances have been adopted amending the Official Zoning Map referred to in
Section 165.05 of this chapter and have not been included as a part of this Code of Ordinances but
have been specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect.
ORDINANCE NO. DATE ADOPTED ORDINANCE NO. DATE ADOPTED
403 July 21, 1992
404 July 27, 1992
406 August 24, 1992
430 September 11, 1996
446 October 14, 1996
485 August 9, 1999
516 July 8, 2002
517 August 12, 2002
521 November 25, 2002
529 August 25, 2003
541 June 14, 2004
547 August 23, 2004
548 August 23, 2004
549 September 13, 2004
571 February 26, 2007
589 August 11, 2008
593A January 26, 2009
593B January 26, 2009
594 December 8, 2008
627 April 25, 2011
686 October 12, 2015
700 March 28, 2016
714 February 13, 2017
723 June 26, 2017
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 939 -
CHAPTER 166
ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
166.01 Conformance Required 166.09 Fences, Walls and Vision Clearance
166.02 Continuing Existing Uses 166.10 Required Yard Cannot Be Reduced
166.03 Nonconforming Uses in Any R District 166.11 Building Lines on Approved Plats
166.04 Nonconforming Uses in Any District Other Than 166.12 Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas
an R District 166.13 Pending Applications for Building Permits
166.05 Buildings to Have Access 166.14 Signs and Billboards
166.06 Accessory Buildings and Garages 166.15 Sidewalk and Concrete Approach Requirements
166.07 Corner Lots 166.16 Storm Shelters
166.08 Front Yard 166.17 Building Standards
166.01 CONFORMANCE REQUIRED. Except as hereinafter specified, no building or
structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered –
nor shall any building or land be used – which does not comply with all of the district
regulations established by the Zoning Regulations for the district in which the building or land
is located.
166.02 CONTINUING EXISTING USES. The lawful use of a building existing at the
time of the enactment of the Zoning Regulations may be continued even though such use may
not conform with the regulations of the Zoning Regulations for the district in which it is
located. Any use in existence at the adoption hereof which was not an authorized
nonconforming use under previous Zoning Ordinances shall not be authorized to continue as a
nonconforming use pursuant to these Zoning Regulations or amendments thereto.
166.03 NONCONFORMING USES IN ANY R DISTRICT. No building or land
devoted to a use not permitted by the Zoning Regulations in a Residential District in which
such building or land is located, except when required by law, shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered unless the use thereof is changed
to a use permitted in the district in which such building, structure or premises is located,
except as follows:
1. Substitution. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a
building or structure may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or of
a more restricted classification. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to
more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to
a less restricted use.
2. Discontinuance. In the event that a nonconforming use of any building,
structure, or land is discontinued for a period of two years, the use of the same shall
conform thereafter to the uses permitted in the district in which it is located. The use
of land upon which no building or structure is erected or constructed which does not
conform to the provisions of the Zoning Regulations and the use of land upon which
no building is erected or constructed which becomes nonconforming by reason of a
subsequent change in the Zoning Regulations shall be discontinued within one year
from the date of the change.
3. Replacing Damaged Buildings. Any nonconforming building or structure
damaged more than 60 percent of its then fair market value, as determined by a
qualified appraiser, exclusive of the foundations at the time of damage by fire, flood,
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 940 -
explosion, war, riot, or act of God, shall not be restored or reconstructed and used as
before such happening; but if less than 60 percent is damaged above the foundation, it
may be restored, reconstructed, or used as before, provided that it is done within six
months of such happening.
166.04 NONCONFORMING USES IN ANY DISTRICT OTHER THAN AN R
DISTRICT.
1. Structural Alterations and Enlargements. Any building or structure in any
district other than an R District devoted to a use made nonconforming by the Zoning
Regulations may be structurally altered or enlarged in conformity with the lot area, the
lot frontage, and yard and height requirements of the district in which situated,
provided such enlargement or alteration or construction shall be limited to buildings
on land owned of record by the owner of the land devoted to the nonconforming use
prior to the effective date of the Zoning Regulations. In the event of such structural
alterations or enlargement of buildings, the premises involved may not be used for any
nonconforming use other than the use existing on the effective date of the Zoning
Regulations, other provisions of the Zoning Regulations notwithstanding.
2. Discontinuance. In the event that a nonconforming use of any building or
premises is discontinued for a period of two years, the use of the same shall conform
thereafter to the uses permitted in the district in which it is located. The use of land
upon which no building or structure is erected or constructed which does not conform
to the provisions of the Zoning Regulations, and the use of land upon which no
building is erected or constructed, which becomes nonconforming by reason of a
subsequent change in the Zoning Regulations, shall be discontinued within two years
from the date of the change.
3. Replacing Damaged Buildings. Any nonconforming building or structure
damaged more than 70 percent of its then fair market value, as determined by a
qualified appraiser, exclusive of the foundations at the time of damage by fire, flood,
explosion, war, riot, or act of God, shall not be restored or reconstructed and used as
before such happening; but if less than 70 percent is damaged above the foundation, it
may be restored, reconstructed, or used as before, provided that it is done within six
months of such happening. This subsection shall be in no way construed so as to limit
the replacement, restoration, or reconstruction of a nonconforming residential use,
building, or structure damaged in excess of 70 percent of its fair market value prior to
damage, provided that such replacement, restoration, or reconstruction can be
completed within 18 months of such happening.
166.05 BUILDINGS TO HAVE ACCESS. Every building hereafter erected or
structurally altered in any R-1, R-1a, R-2 or R-3 District shall be on a lot or parcel having a
frontage of not less than 40 feet on a public street or road.
166.06 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND GARAGES. No accessory building or
structure that exceeds six (6) feet in height shall be erected in a required yard or court, except
as provided hereinafter.
1. An accessory building or structure that is located entirely within the principal
building area of the lot (the lot minus the required yards and courts), whether or not
attached to the principal building, shall be subject to the regulations applicable to the
principal building.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 941 -
2. Accessory buildings, except buildings housing animals or fowl, may be
erected as a part of the principal building or may be connected thereto by a breezeway
or similar structure; provided, said building shall comply with all yard requirements
for a principal building.
3. The garage for any principal building may be located in a rear or side yard
area, providing, however, that such garage building shall comply with the following
requirements:
A. The garage, including eaves and overhangs, shall be set back no less
than three feet from a lot line and shall be located no closer than 30feet to any
garage or principal building that is located on the opposite side of an abutting
alley.
B. The garage building shall be considered an extension of the principal
building and shall comply with all minimum yard requirements for the
principal building other than the above exception.
C. The garage building shall not exceed one story or 15 feet in height.
4. An accessory structure that is adaptable to underground construction (such as
a bomb or tornado shelter, garage, wine cellar, etc.) may be constructed beneath the
ground surface of any yard area, providing said structure shall comply with the
following requirements:
A. No portion of the structure shall be located less than two feet,
measured horizontally, from any lot line from which a minimum surface yard
area is required.
B. The surface area covering the structure shall be finished in a manner
natural to the landscape so as to entirely conceal the underground structure.
C. No portion of the grade of the finished surface area above the
structure may exceed a two-foot height increase above the normal finished
grade of any required yard.
D. Ingress-egress to the underground structure shall be located within the
allowable surface building area of the lot and shall not be located in any
required yard area.
5. An accessory building or structure, regardless of height, which is constructed
above the normal ground surface in any required yard area shall not occupy more than
30 percent of the yard area in which it is located; however, this regulation shall not be
interpreted to prohibit the construction of a two-car garage, not to exceed 550 square
feet gross building area.
6. A detached accessory building or structure shall be constructed at least 10 feet
from the principal building.
166.07 CORNER LOTS. For corner lots, platted after the effective date of the Zoning
Regulations, the street side yard shall be equal in width to the minimum required side yard for
the district in which it is located, plus 20 feet; e.g., for a minimum required side yard of 10
feet, the minimum required street side yard shall be not less than 30 feet; provided, however,
this regulation shall not be interpreted as to require a side street yard of greater width than the
minimum required front yard width. For corner lots, platted after the effective date of the
Zoning Regulations, the minimum required lot width shall be increased by an amount not less
than 20 feet so as to allow for the additional required street side yard; e.g., for a minimum
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 942 -
required lot width of 60 feet, the minimum required width of a corner lot shall be not less than
80 feet. On corner lots platted and of record at the time of the effective date of the Zoning
Regulations, the same regulations shall apply except that this regulation shall not be so
interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of the corner lot facing an intersecting street and
of record, or as shown by existing contract of purchase at the time of the effective date of the
Zoning Regulations, to less than 28 feet or to prohibit the erection of an accessory building.
On any corner lot, the depth of a front yard or side street yard abutting a major street shall be
measured from the proposed right-of-way lines shown on the Official Major Thoroughfare
Plan.
166.08 FRONT YARD. In any R District, there shall be a minimum front yard required as
stated in the yard requirements for that particular district; provided, however, in no case shall
the front yard depth be less than three-fourths of the smallest front yard depth of an existing
building in the same block, located within 200 feet of either side lot line; provided, however,
this regulation shall not be interpreted as to require a greater setback than double the minimum
required front yard for the district in which it is located; and provided, however, this
regulation shall not be interpreted as to permit a setback that is less than the minimum
required front yard for the district in which it is located. The front yard depth of any lot
abutting a major street shall be measured from the proposed right-of-way lines shown on the
Official Major Thoroughfare Plan.
166.09 FENCES, WALLS AND VISION CLEARANCE.
1. On a corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow
in such a manner as to impede vision between a height of two and one-half feet and
ten feet above the centerline grades of the area described as follows: that area
bounded by the street right-of-way lines of a corner lot and a straight line joining
points on said right-of-way lines 25 feet from the point of intersection of said right-ofway
lines. This regulation does not apply to the C-2 District.
2. In any district, fences and walls not exceeding six feet in height are permitted
within the limits of side and rear yards. Only a picket-style or ornamental fence, not
exceeding four feet (4') in height, is permitted within the limits of front yards. In the
case of retaining wall supporting embankments, the above requirements shall apply
only to that part of the wall above the ground surface of the retained embankment.
(Ord. 671 – Mar. 16 Supp.)
A. In any district where a fence or wall is required by a section of the
Zoning Regulations, the Subdivision Regulations or other regulations of the
Code of Ordinances, to serve as a screening wall, buffer wall, or other
separating or protective wall, the restrictions of subsection 1 above shall be
subject to the requirements of the said specific regulations.
B. Grade for determining the maximum height above grade for fences
and walls:
(1) For a fence or wall along a street right-of-way, grade shall be
the highest point of the pavement lying between the intersection of
the centerline and a projection of the side lot lines.
(2) For a fence or wall between the front lot line and the front
building line, grade shall be prorated between the grade at the front
lot line and the grades at the building.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 943 -
(3) For a fence or wall along the rear lot line or between the front
building line and rear lot line, grade shall be the grade at the building,
or natural grade at the fence line, whichever is the higher.
C. Fences and walls on a corner lot shall comply with the vision
clearance requirements of subsection 1 above.
3. Fences shall be built wholly on the owner’s property unless it is otherwise
agreed to by the owner of the adjacent property.
4. All newly constructed fences may be required to provide immediate access for
utility servicing, by means of a seven-foot gate or an easily removable section of
fence. The determination will be made by the City after doing a site investigation of
existing easements. In addition, any new fence construction will not be permitted
within three feet of a transformer door without installing a three-foot access gate.
5. Fences located in R-1a, R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, C-1a, C-2, C-3 and C-4 Districts
must be constructed of materials commonly used in fence construction. Woven wire,
electric, sheet metal, barbed wire, cloth, plastic sheeting, snow fencing, temporary or
emergency fence material or salvage material will not be permitted for new fences.
Any material other than commonly used fencing lumber, stone, or chain link must be
approved. Hedges can be used as barriers or for landscaping purposes, provided no
traffic hazards are created and no street signs are obscured from any direction of travel
on any City street, intersection, driveway, sidewalk, or alley. Hedges and bushes shall
not be planted any closer than three feet to any property line or easement line without
approval.
166.10 REQUIRED YARD CANNOT BE REDUCED. No lot shall be reduced in size
so as to make the width or total area of the lot or any yard or any other open space less than
the minimum required by the Zoning Regulations. No part of a yard or other open space
provided about any building or structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
the Zoning Regulations shall be included as part of a yard or other open space required under
the Zoning Regulations for another building or structure. Off-street parking and loading areas
may occupy all or part of any required yard or open space except as otherwise specified in the
Zoning Regulations.
166.11 BUILDING LINES ON APPROVED PLATS. Whenever the plat of a land
subdivision approved by the Commission and on record in the Office of the County Recorder
shows a setback building line along any frontage for the purpose of creating a front yard or
side street yard line, the building line thus shown shall apply along such frontage in place of
any other yard line required in the Zoning Regulations unless specific yard requirements in the
Zoning Regulations require a greater setback.
166.12 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING AREAS. It is the intent of this
section to prevent traffic congestion and to provide for proper traffic safety by preserving the
public thoroughfares for the unimpaired movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
Therefore, it is recognized that the requirements of this section are minimum and that in
certain uses of land, these requirements may be inadequate. Where review of the site plans
and intended land use indicate, through the application of proven standards or experienced
statistics, that the requirements herein are inadequate for the specific land use adaptation, a
greater requirement for off-street parking space is justified and may be required to preserve
the intent of this section.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 944 -
1. Off-Street Loading Space Required. In any district except the C-3 Central
Business District, in connection with every building or part thereof hereafter erected,
having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet or more and which is to be occupied by
manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, retail store, wholesale store,
market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning, or other uses similarly
requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall
be provided and maintained on the same lot with such building at least one off-street
loading space for each 20,000 square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area
so used in excess of 10,000 square feet.
A. Each loading space shall be not less than 10 feet in width and 40 feet
in length.
B. Such space may occupy all or any part of any required yard or court
space; provided, however, not less than 20 percent of required yard areas shall
remain open green landscape.
2. Off-Street Parking Area Required. In all districts, except the C-3 Central
Business District, in connection with every industrial, commercial, business, trade,
institutional, recreational, or dwelling use and similar uses, space for parking and
storage of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule;
however, no parking area required hereunder shall be less than 1,000 square feet in
area except in the case of dwellings and retail stores and shops under 500 square feet.
A. Automobile sales and service garages – one parking space for every
300 square feet of floor area and one parking space for every four persons
regularly employed on the premises.
B. Banks and business and professional offices – one parking space for
every 200 square feet of floor area and one parking space for each office in
the principal building, or one and one-quarter parking spaces for each person
regularly employed on the premises, whichever is greater.
C. Bowling alley – five spaces for each alley and one space for every
five spectator seats.
D. Churches – one parking space for every four seats and one parking
space for each classroom.
E. Dance halls, assembly halls – one parking space for every 100 square
feet of floor area or one parking space for every four seats of maximum
seating capacity, whichever is greater.
F. One- and two-family dwellings – two parking spaces for each
dwelling unit, exclusive of private garages.
G. Multi-family dwellings – two parking spaces for each of the first 12
dwelling units and one and one-quarter parking spaces for each additional
dwelling unit. One garage parking space for each dwelling unit may be
counted as a portion of the parking requirement, or each garage parking space
may be counted as a portion of the parking requirement when a separate
visitor parking area equal to one parking space for each dwelling unit is
provided.
H. Funeral homes, mortuaries – 15 parking spaces or one parking space
for every four seats in the principal auditorium or four parking spaces for each
service or viewing room, whichever is greatest. In addition, one parking
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 945 -
space for every two persons regularly employed on the premises shall be
provided.
I. Furniture, appliance and other retail stores displaying large and bulky
merchandise – one parking space for every 400 square feet of floor area.
J. Hospitals, sanitariums and rest homes – one parking space for every
four patient beds and one parking space for every two persons regularly
employed on the premises.
K. Hotels, motels, lodging houses – one parking space for each room or
suite of rooms offered for tourist accommodations and one parking space for
every two persons regularly employed on the premises.
L. Industrial or manufacturing plants – one parking space for every two
employees on the maximum working shift; or one parking space for every
1,000 square feet of floor area up to 10,000 square feet and then one parking
space for every additional 1,500 square feet thereafter, whichever is greater.
M. Restaurants, taverns, night clubs or similar places dispensing food,
drink or refreshments – one parking space for every 50 square feet of floor
area devoted to patron use within the establishment. In addition, one parking
space must be provided for every four persons regularly employed or intended
to be regularly employed on the premises.
N. Retail stores, supermarkets, drug and sundry stores, department
stores, etc. – for all stores, one parking space for every 250 square feet of
floor area.
O. Schools and other places of education or instruction:
(1) Elementary, junior high and other places for under driving
age students – one parking space for each person regularly employed
on the premises. In addition, one parking space for every 20 student
desks or classroom seating facilities.
(2) High Schools – one parking space for each person regularly
employed on the premises. In addition, one parking space for every
10 student desks or classroom seating facilities.
(3) Colleges, trade schools and other places of young adult
learning – one parking space for each person regularly employed on
the premises. In addition, one parking space for every four student
desks or classroom seating facilities.
(4) Parking spaces required by subparagraphs (1), (2) and (3)
above shall be in addition to requirements for sports arenas,
auditorium, etc.
P. Sports arenas, theaters, auditoriums and other similar places of public
assembly – one parking space for every four persons of maximum standing
and seating capacity.
Q. Wholesale establishments or warehouses – one space for each person
regularly employed on the premises.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 946 -
3. In case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is not
specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use that is mentioned and to which
said use is similar shall apply.
4. Where a lot does not abut on a public or private alley or easement of access,
there shall be provided an access drive not less than 10 feet in width in the case of a
dwelling, and not less than 20 feet in width in all cases leading to the loading or
unloading spaces and parking or storage areas required hereunder in such manner as to
secure the most appropriate development of the property in question. Except where
provided in connection with a use permitted in a residential district, such easement of
access or access drive shall not be located in any residential district.
5. Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area,
including a commercial parking lot, shall be developed and maintained in accordance
with the following requirements:
A. No part of any parking space shall be closer than five feet to any
established street right-of-way or alley line. In case the parking lot adjoins an
R District, it shall be set back at least five feet from the R District boundary
and shall be effectively screen planted.
B. Any off-street parking area, including any commercial parking lot for
more than two vehicles shall be surfaced with an asphaltic or Portland cement
binder pavement or such other surface as shall be approved by the City
Engineer so as to provide a durable and dustless surface; shall be so graded
and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulation within the area;
and shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for orderly and safe loading
or unloading and parking and storage of self-propelled vehicles.
C. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area, including
any commercial parking lot, shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away
from adjoining premises in any R District.
6. Off-street parking facilities for all uses, except one- and two-family dwellings
fronting on a residential street, shall be designed so as to permit entrance and exit by
forward movement of the vehicle. The backing or backward movement of vehicles
from an off-street parking facility onto a major thoroughfare, including all
thoroughfares designated on the Official Major Thoroughfares Plan as other than
residential streets, is strictly prohibited.
166.13 PENDING APPLICATIONS FOR BUILDING PERMITS. Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated
use of any building, or part thereof, for which approvals and required building permits have
been granted before the enactment of the Zoning Regulations, the construction in conformance
with such plans shall have been started prior to the effective date of the Zoning Regulations
and completion thereof carried on in a normal manner and not discontinued for reasons other
than those beyond the builder’s control.
166.14 SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS. The purpose of this section is to permit such signs
as will not, by reason of their size, location, construction, or manner of display, endanger life
and limb, confuse or mislead traffic, obstruct vision necessary for traffic safety, or otherwise
endanger the public morals, health or safety; and further, to regulate such permitted signs in
such a way as to create land use patterns compatible with other major land use objectives and
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 947 -
to prevent such signs from causing annoyance or disturbance to the citizens and residents of
the City.
1. Definitions. The following words and terms as used in this section shall be
deemed to mean and be construed as follows, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise.
A. “Awning” means any structure made of cloth or metal with a metal
frame attached to a building and projecting over a public or private
thoroughfare or public easement, when the same is so erected as to permit its
being raised to position flat against the building when not in use.
B. “Billboard” means any structure, regardless of the base materials used
in construction of the same, that is erected, maintained or used for public
display of posters, painted signs, wall signs (whether the structure is placed on
the wall or painted on the wall itself), pictures, or other pictorial reading
matter that advertises a business or attraction that is not carried on or
manufactured in or upon the premises upon which said billboard is located.
C. “Canopy” means any structure, other than an awning, made of cloth
or metal with metal frames attached to a building and projecting over a public
or private thoroughfare or public easement, and carried by a frame supported
by the ground or sidewalk.
D. “Marquee” means any hood or awning of permanent construction
projecting from the wall of a building and extending over a public or private
thoroughfare or public easement.
E. “Off-premises,” as used in this section, means the purpose is to
advertise, identify, and/or direct attention to a profession, business, service,
activity, product, campaign, or attraction that is not carried on, sold, offered,
or manufactured in or upon the premises.
F. “On-premises,” as used in this section, means the primary purpose is
to advertise, identify, and/or direct attention to a profession, business, service,
activity, product, campaign, or attraction that is carried on, sold, offered, or
manufactured in or upon the premises.
G. “Sign” means and includes every sign, billboard, free-standing sign,
wall sign, or roof sign, as well as other signs of every description and
character as defined herein and includes any announcement, declaration,
demonstration, display, illustration, or insignia used to advertise or promote
the interests of any person or firm when the same is placed out of doors in
view of the general public.
H. “Sign area” means that area of a sign’s exposed facing, determined by
the Building Inspector using actual dimensions where practical, or
approximate dimensions when irregularity of a sign shape warrants. Such
area shall be measured from the extreme points or edges of the sign, painted
background, or the peripheral encasement or structural trim which forms part
of the sign proper or the display; provided however, the area of a sign
composed of characters or words attached directly to a building’s wall surface
shall be the smallest rectangle that encloses the whole group of characters or
words.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 948 -
I. “Sign, bulletin board” means a sign containing a surface area upon
which is displayed the name of a religious institution, charitable organization,
school, library, community center, or similar institution and the
announcement of its services or activities.
J. “Sign, directional” means a sign for the purpose of control of all
modes of traffic located on private property.
K. “Sign, directory” means an identification sign containing the name of
a building, complex, or center, and the names and addresses of two or more
businesses are part of the same sign structure.
L. “Sign, free standing” means any sign that is supported by one or more
uprights or braces in or upon the ground and not attached to any building or
wall, and includes pole and ground signs, as regulated by this chapter.
M. “Sign, ground” means an on-premises statue, memorial, or work of art
or an on-premises, free standing sign (other than a pole sign) which is
supported in or upon the ground and not attached to any building or wall.
N. “Sign, identification” means an on-premises sign that displays no
more than the name, address, crest or insignia, occupation or profession of an
occupant of the premises, name of any building on the premises, or the trademark
of the occupant.
O. “Sign, pole” means an on-premises, free standing sign that is
supported by one or more uprights not greater than 12-inch diameter and not
attached to, or braced by, any other structure. Pole signs shall have a clear
open space of not less than 10 feet between the base line of said sign and the
ground level. No pole sign shall exceed a thickness of 12 inches.
P. “Sign, portable” means a free standing sign not permanently anchored
or secured to the ground or any building or wall.
Q. “Sign, projecting” means a sign, other than a wall sign, which
projects from and is supported by a wall of a building or structure.
R. “Sign, public” means a sign of a non-commercial nature and in the
public interest, erected by or upon the order of a public officer in the
performance of his or her public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs,
trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest,
and all other similar signs, including signs designating hospitals, libraries,
schools, airports, and other institutions or places of public interest or concern.
S. “Sign, real estate” means a sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of
the premises or part of the premises on which the sign is displayed.
T. “Sign, roof” means a sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet of a
building.
U. “Sign, service” means a sign identifying rest rooms, public telephone
facilities, first aid stations, fallout shelters, and other similar public service
facilities.
V. “Sign, wall” means any sign attached to, or erected against the wall or
painted on the surface of the wall of a building, with the exposed face of the
sign in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall, and includes fascia signs.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 949 -
2. Permit Required. It is unlawful for any person to erect, alter, or relocate
within the City any sign or other advertising structure as defined in this chapter
without first obtaining a permit from the Zoning Administrator.
3. Application for Permit. Applications for permits shall be made upon forms
provided by the Zoning Administrator, and shall contain or have attached thereto the
following information:
A. Applicant Information. Name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant.
B. Plans and Specifications. One drawing of the plans and specifications
and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground.
Such drawing shall show location of sign or signs and shall certify the
distance from each other and from signs or adjacent property.
C. Erector. Name of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting
the structure.
D. Consent. Written consent of the owner or lessee of the building,
structure, or land to which or on which the structure is to be erected.
E. Valuation. Valuation of sign.
F. Insurance. Insurance policy or bond as required.
G. Other. Such other information as the building inspector shall require
to show full compliance with this and all other laws and ordinances of the
City.
4. Permit Issued. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator, upon the
filing of an application for a permit to examine such plans and specifications and other
data, and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign or other advertising
structure, and if it appears that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the
requirements of this chapter, approved site plans, and all other requirements and laws
of the City, the Zoning Administrator shall then issue a permit. If the work authorized
under an erection permit has not been completed within six months after date of
issuance, the said permit shall become null and void and refund of the fee will not be
allowed.
5. Permit Fees. Every applicant, before being granted a permit hereunder, shall
pay to the City Clerk a permit fee for each such sign or other advertising structure
regulated by this section and as prescribed in this subsection. The fee shall be as
follows:
A. Signs 16 square feet or less – $10.00.
B. Signs over 16 square feet and not more than 100 square feet – $25.00.
C. Signs over 100 square feet – $50.00, plus $.20 per square foot over
100 square feet.
In computing the area of a sign, only one face of a double face sign shall be taken as
the area of the sign.
6. Inspection. The Zoning Administrator may inspect, from time to time as
deemed necessary, each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this section
for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is in compliance with this section.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 950 -
7. Compliance. If the Zoning Administrator finds that any sign or advertising
structure regulated herein is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this
section, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly give written notice to the permittee
thereof or to the owner of the premises on which the sign is located. The notice shall
state in writing the reason or reasons why such sign – and the keeping, owning,
maintenance, construction, and display or operation thereof – is unlawful under the
terms of this chapter. The notification shall provide that unless such violation is
corrected within 30 days, said sign shall be removed at the owner’s expense.
8. Signs Not to Constitute Traffic Hazard. No sign or other advertising structure
on private property as regulated by this section shall be erected:
A. At or near the intersection of any streets or near a private access to a
public street in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or
B. At any location where, by reason of the position, shape, or color, it
may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized
traffic sign, signal or device;
C. Which makes use of the words “STOP,” “LOOK,” “DRIVE-IN,”
“DANGER,” or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner
as to interfere with, mislead or confuse the motoring public.
9. Signs Extending Over City Property. It is unlawful for any person to erect or
maintain any sign or other advertising structure that extends over public property or a
public easement. An exception may be granted by the Council for a marquee, canopy,
awning, or projection of a wall sign, if existing building setback does not provide
sufficient space to accommodate same.
10. Insurance. Every sign or other advertising structure covered by this section
shall be registered with the Zoning Administrator by the person maintaining or
owning the same, and said person shall furnish to the City a certificate of liability
insurance with a municipality endorsement included, either as a single policy or as a
rider to a blanket policy showing the City as additional named insured in the amount
of $100,000.00 – $300,000.00 bodily injury and $50,000.00 property damage, or
single limit liability of $300,000.00. In addition, the City shall receive at least 30
days’ prior written notice of any cancellation or change in any of the required
insurance policies under this provision. Said certificate of insurance shall be so
conditioned as to defend, indemnify, protect and save harmless the City and its
employees from and against any and all liability, claims, losses of whatsoever kind or
nature, arising out of or by reason of the erection, hanging, repair or maintenance of
such sign or signs. No certificate of insurance shall be required on:
A. Any sign whose location and distance from public property is equal or
greater than the height of the sign plus 10 feet; or
B. Other advertising structure that is not located on or does not project
over a public thoroughfare or easement.
11. Exemptions. The provisions and regulations of this section do not apply to
the following signs:
A. Real Estate Signs. Real estate signs, not exceeding 12 square feet in
area, which advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which said
sign is located only. Such real estate signs shall not be located on public
property and shall be limited to one sign for each parcel listed.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 951 -
B. Name Plates. Name plates identifying a resident address or
appurtenant home occupation or permitted uses, not exceeding one square
foot in area.
C. Within Building. Signs located within the interior of a building.
D. Bulletin Boards. Bulletin boards, not over eight square feet in area,
for public, charitable or religious institutions when the same are located on the
premises of said institution.
E. Memorial Signs. Memorial signs; provided, when said sign is
constructed into the wall of a building, it is not greater in area than five
percent of the total square footage of each wall facing a street frontage.
F. Political Signs. Political signs, not exceeding six square feet, when
located on private property.
G. Public Signs. Public signs of a non-commercial nature and in the
public interest, erected by or upon the order of a public officer in the
performance of his or her public duty.
H. Service Signs. Service signs identifying restrooms, public telephone
facilities, first aid stations, fall-out shelters and other similar public service
facilities.
12. Municipal Signs Exempt. Traffic control or other municipal signs, legal
notices, railroad crossing signs, danger, and such temporary emergency or nonadvertising
signs as may be approved by the City Council or authorized public official
shall be exempt of the provisions and regulations of this section.
13. On-Premises Signs. See following Tables.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 952 -
Table 166-1 – On-Premises Signs in R-1a, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts
Number of Signs Size Height Setback
(ROW)
1 temporary real estate sign per street frontage 2 square feet 10 feet 10 feet
1 name plate identifying a resident address 1 square foot 4 feet 5 feet
Churches, schools, government buildings and other
permitted uses: 1 free standing identification sign or 1
bulletin board per street frontage
30 square feet 10 feet 15 feet
Residential subdivision, PUD, or apartments:
1 identifying wall sign or 1 identifying ground sign
per apartment complex:
Ground sign 15- to 25-foot
circumference
(note 1)
5- to 15-foot
(note 2)
10 feet
Wall sign 15 square feet
(max)
(note 3)
--- ---
Combined wall signs not in excess of 30 square feet per apartment
complex
Home occupations 2 square feet 10 feet no more than 5
feet from
principal
structure
Note 1: Sign area may be increased one foot in circumference for each additional one foot of setback, to a
maximum of 25 feet in circumference, provided the height is maintained at 5 feet or less.
Note 2: The height may increase one foot for each additional one-foot setback, to a maximum height of 15 feet.
Note 3: The area shall be determined by the smallest rectangle that encloses the words or characters of a sign.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 953 -
Table 166-2 – On-Premises Signs in C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 Districts
Number of Signs Size Height Setback
(ROW)
1 temporary real estate sign per street frontage 12 square feet 10 feet 10 feet
1 name plate identifying a resident address 1 square foot 4 feet 5 feet
Churches, schools, government buildings and other
permitted uses: 1 free standing identification sign or
1 bulletin board per street frontage
30 square feet 10 feet 10 feet
1 free standing identification or directory sign
per street frontage:
1 ground sign 15- to 25-foot
circumference
maximum
(note 1)
5- to 15-foot
maximum
(note 2)
10-foot
minimum
setback
or
1 pole sign
40 square feet
to 100 square
feet maximum
(note 3)
20 feet to 30
feet maximum
(note 4)
5 feet to 45
feet or more
Combined wall signs not in excess of 5 percent of total square footage of
each wall on street frontage; however, wall signs
shall not exceed 30 square feet per apartment
complex
Home occupations 2 square feet 10 feet no more than
5 feet from
principal
structure
Upon application by a merchants’ association, permission
may be granted by the Council to erect and maintain
ground signs or wall signs of a directional, orientational,
or identifying nature, when the same are developed in a
unified theme for the entire district. The Council may
provide conditions under which the association shall be
required to maintain said signs.
12 square feet 6.5 feet none required
(note 5)
Note 1: Sign area may increase one foot in circumference for each additional one foot of setback, to a maximum
size of 25 feet in circumference.
Note 2: Sign height may be increased by one foot for each additional five feet of setback, to a maximum height
of 15 feet.
Note 3: Sign area may increase two square feet for each additional foot of setback, to a maximum area of 100
square feet.
Note 4: Sign height may be increased by one foot for each additional four feet of setback, to a maximum height
of 30 feet.
Note 5: May be located in public right-of-way, at Council’s discretion.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 954 -
Table 166-3 – On-Premises Signs in M-1 and M-2 Districts
Number of Signs Size Height Setback
(ROW)
1 temporary real estate sign per street frontage 32 square feet 10 feet 10 feet
1 name plate identifying a resident address or appurtenant
to a home occupation or a permitted use
1 square foot 4 feet 5 feet
Churches, schools, government buildings and other special
permitted uses: 1 free standing identification sign or
1 bulletin board
30 square feet 10 feet 15 feet
1 free standing identification or directory sign
per street frontage:
1 ground sign 15- to 25-foot
circumference
maximum
(note 1)
5- to 15-foot
maximum
(note 2)
10-foot
minimum
setback
or
1 pole sign
40 square feet
to 100 square
feet maximum
(note 3)
20 feet to 30
feet maximum
(note 4)
5 feet to
45 feet
Combined wall signs not in excess of 5 percent of total square footage of
each wall on street frontage
Note 1: Sign area may increase one foot in circumference for each additional one foot of setback, to a maximum
size of 25 feet in circumference.
Note 2: Sign height may be increased by one foot for each additional five feet of setback, to a maximum height
of 15 feet.
Note 3: Sign area may increase two square feet for each additional foot of setback, to a maximum area of 100
square feet.
Note 4: Sign height may be increased by one foot for each additional four feet of setback, to a maximum height
of 30 feet.
Table 166-4 – On-Premises Signs in the A-1 District
Number of Signs Size Height Setback
(ROW)
1 temporary real estate sign per street frontage 32 square feet 10 feet 10 feet
1 name plate identifying a resident address or appurtenant
to a home occupation or a permitted use
1 square foot 4 feet 5 feet
Churches, schools, government buildings and other special
permitted uses: 1 free standing identification sign or
1 bulletin board
30 square feet 10 feet 15 feet
1 free standing sign per street frontage, designating sale of
produce, crops or livestock
30 square feet 10 feet 20 feet
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 955 -
14. Access Identification. Two free standing directional signs intended to identify
an access into or out of a lot shall be permitted per access; provided however, said
sign shall be no greater than 10 square feet in area and two and one-half feet in height.
15. Marquees, Awnings and Canopies.
A. General Provision. The term “sign” in this section does not apply to a
marquee, awning, or canopy unaccompanied by lettering when projecting
from the wall of a building above an entrance and extending over a public
right-of-way or public easement.
B. Locations. No marquee, awning, or canopy shall be permitted to
extend over City property unless approval is granted by the Council.
C. Height Regulation. No part of any marquee, awning, or canopy shall
be less than eight feet above ground level.
16. Statues, Monuments and Religious Symbols.
A. Definition. Statues, monuments or religious symbols unaccompanied
by lettering, when applied to the cornice, tower, spire, or yard of a place of
worship or private property.
B. Regulation. All statues, monuments and religious symbols greater
than five feet in height if placed in the front yard shall require Council
approval prior to erection. The Council reserves the right to accept or reject
the application.
17. Political Campaign Signs. Political campaign signs shall not be erected
earlier than 45 days prior to the date balloting takes place for the candidate or issue
indicated on the sign and shall be removed no later than seven days after said balloting
date.
18. Projecting Signs.
A. Thickness Limitation. The thickness measured between the principal
faces of any projecting sign shall not exceed 12 inches.
B. Height. No part of any projecting sign shall be less than 10 feet
above ground level, except as provided for under specific zoning districts.
C. Location. Every projecting sign shall be at least 10 feet above any
sidewalk area over which it is erected, and a distance not greater than two feet
from the wall to which it is attached, measuring from the point of the sign
nearest thereto. Every projecting sign to be erected over public or private
driveways or thoroughfares shall be placed not less than 15 feet above the
level of same.
D. Projecting Over Public Property. It is unlawful for any projecting
sign to be located over public property or a public easement unless approval is
granted by the Council.
19. Temporary Signs.
A. Definition. Temporary signs include any construction, real estate,
political, portable or other sign, banner, pennant, valance and advertising
display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 956 -
other materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a short
period of time only.
B. Special Permission. Banners and stringers may be used for special
occasions with Council approval. There shall be no more than two such
occasions per year; such occasions shall not exceed 10 days. Community
festivals or other similar events may be exempted from the provisions of this
section with the approval of the Council.
20. Free Standing Signs.
A. Letters to Be Secured. All letters, figures, characters, or
representations in cut-out or irregular form maintained in conjunction with,
attached to, or superimposed on a free standing sign shall be safely and
securely built or attached to the sign structure.
B. Height Limitation. The measurement of the height of a sign shall be
taken vertically from the average finished grade nearest the supporting base or
columns to the highest point of said sign; however, no mounding of earth may
be permitted to achieve a greater sign height.
C. Setback Line. The setback of a sign shall be measured to that portion
of the sign nearest the street or property bounds, which shall include the air
space above same.
D. Space Between Sign and Ground and Other Signs and Structures.
Pole signs shall have a clear open space of not less than 10 feet between the
base line of said sign and the ground level. Except for directional signs of a
traffic control nature, no free standing sign shall be closer than 50 feet to
another separate sign structure.
E. Size of Sign. The total area of a sign shall be actual square footage of
one sign face. Double face signs may be permitted with the maximum square
footage permitted on each side. Multi-faced signs shall not exceed two times
the area of single face signs. Where the circumference is used to measure a
ground sign the external boundary or perimeter of the sign shall be measured
per plan view at the widest point.
21. Off-Premises Signs.
A. General Provision. No off-premises sign or billboard shall be
permitted within 100 feet of any dwelling unit, public parkway, public park or
property line of public or parochial school site, church site, hospital site,
cemetery, similar institution or zoning district not permitting billboards or offpremises
signs. Furthermore, no billboards or off-premises sign shall be
permitted to face and be located within 300 feet of an R District.
B. Permitted Zones. Off-premises signs and billboards that conform
with the provisions of this section shall be permitted in the following zoning
districts:
M-1 Light Industrial District
M-2 Heavy Industrial District
A-1 Agricultural District
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 957 -
C. Setback, Size and Height Requirements.
(1) No off-premises sign or billboard shall be established closer
to the street right-of-way than the minimum building setback line for
that zoning district.
(2) The following size and height standards shall apply to all offpremises
signs and billboards regardless of zoning district:
Size* Max. Height
Single 350 square feet 35 feet
Double 675 square feet 35 feet
*Plus an additional 300 square feet for extensions.
Furthermore there shall be a minimum distance of 10 feet between
ground level at the base of the supporting uprights and the bottom of
the sign face.
D. Spacing of Off-Premises Advertising Signs.
(1) On Federal and State highways, Federal and State regulations
for spacing and setbacks shall apply; provided, however, if the
regulations of this chapter are found more restrictive, the more
restrictive requirement shall apply.
(2) No off-premises advertising sign or billboard shall be
established within 300 feet of any other off-premises advertising sign
facing the same direction.
22. Billboards Prohibited. All billboards, as defined in paragraph 1(B) of this
section, are hereby prohibited in all zoning districts.
23. Electronic Signs. Electronic Signs are permitted within the City of Carlisle.
The sign must comply with the same size as a monument sign or pole sign, however,
the electronic display area must not exceed more than 25 percent of the sign area.
Electronic signs are prohibited in residential zoned districts. The display cannot exist
of flashing, pulsating, rotating, beacons or moving lights. Any digital display must
appear for a minimum of 8 seconds. A marquee sign that scrolls can be no larger than
1 foot high by 12 feet long.
(Ord. 697 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
166.15 SIDEWALK AND CONCRETE APPROACH REQUIREMENTS. All new
construction within the City limits shall require sidewalks to be installed. All new
construction within the City limits shall require a concrete approach extending to the sidewalk
if the approach will abut any concrete or asphalt street. Concrete approaches will not be
required where they would abut a seal-coated street.
166.16 STORM SHELTERS. All new mobile home parks or additions to existing mobile
home parks shall be required to provide a storm safety facility containing minimum floor area
of 10 square feet per mobile home unit. The facility may serve in a dual capacity as an indoor
recreation facility as so designated by the owner. The facility may be built above or below the
ground but shall be structured in such a manner as to provide all mobile home park residents
with adequate shelter from tornadoes or other forms of severe weather.
CHAPTER 166 ZONING REGULATIONS – GENERAL REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 958 -
166.17 BUILDING STANDARDS. The following standards shall apply to all family
detached dwellings, that is, site-built dwellings, manufactured homes, and including multiple
dwelling units; however, such standards are not applicable to mobile homes as defined herein.
The following standards shall apply:
1. The minimum width of the main body of the dwelling unit shall be not less
than 20 feet.
2. The pitch of the main roof shall not be less than one foot rise for every four
feet of horizontal run. This requirement shall not apply to manufactured housing if
the housing otherwise complies with 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403.
3. Roofing material must either be or simulate asphalt or wood shingles or tile.
4. Exterior materials must either be or simulate materials traditionally used for
site-built homes in the area.
5. Ceiling heights shall be not less than seven feet, six inches.
6. Each bedroom shall contain usable floor space, excluding closets, of not less
than eight feet in any major dimension, together with a minimum of 80 square feet
usable floor space per double bed.
[The next page is 965]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 965 -
CHAPTER 167
ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
167.01 Regulations 167.09 Central Business District
167.02 Single-Family Residential District 167.10 Planned Office/Commercial Park District
167.03 One- and Two-Family Residential District 167.11 Light Industrial District
167.04 Medium Density Residential District 167.12 Heavy Industrial District
167.05 Multi-Family Residential District 167.13 Agriculture District
167.06 Limited Commercial District 167.14 One- and Two-Family Residential/Light Industrial
167.07 Transitional Commercial/Residential District District
167.08 Highway Commercial District 167.15 Modified Light Industrial District
167.01 REGULATIONS. Any regulations contained elsewhere in the Zoning Regulations
which are applicable shall apply to the districts referred to in this chapter.
167.02 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The R-1a Single-Family
Residential District is established for the purpose of low density single-family dwelling
control and to allow home occupations, certain public facilities, and certain special uses. It is
intended that no uses be permitted in this district which will devaluate property for residential
purposes or interfere with the health, safety, order, or general welfare of persons residing in
the district. Regulations are intended to control population density and to provide adequate
open space around buildings and structures.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of buildings or premises listed in this
subsection are permitted in the R-1a District.
A. One-family dwelling on each lot or building site.
B. Public or private parks, playgrounds, golf course, and other outdoor
recreational facilities that are commonly, but not necessarily, operated on a
non-profit basis; however, amusement parks, golf-driving ranges, and golf
miniature putting courses, normally operated for profit and employing
manufactured or constructed facilities of an unnatural or non-environmental
design shall be excluded.
C. Agricultural crops, including truck gardening, but not the raising of
poultry, pets, or livestock for commercial purposes, or on a scale that would
be objectionable because of noise or odor to surrounding residences.
2. Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in the R-1a
District:
A. Normal accessory buildings and structures for a dwelling such as
private garages, swimming pools, children’s playhouses (not used for
dwelling purposes), radio and television receiving antennas, barbecue pits,
playground equipment, tennis courts, etc.
B. Normal accessory buildings and structures for public recreation areas
such as refreshment stands, playground equipment, all-weather shelters, tennis
courts, barbecue pits, etc.
C. Domestic animals such as cats, dogs, birds, tropical fish, etc., which
are normally allowed to run free or are housed within the dwelling. Horses,
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 966 -
cows, sheep, chickens, etc. normally considered farm or wild and untamed
animals shall be excluded except as otherwise provided in the Zoning
Regulations.
D. Flower and vegetable gardening for noncommercial purposes.
E. Greenhouse and horticultural nurseries for noncommercial gain.
F. Home occupations of a professional, talented or artistic nature such as
beautician, doctor, engineer, lawyer, real estate or insurance agent, tailor,
seamstress, watchmaker, dentist, designer, sculptor; however, those
occupations normally classified as a trade and requiring the substantial use of
contractors or mechanics’ tools or equipment such as carpenters, electricians,
monument cutters, painters, plumbers, etc., shall be excluded.
3. Height Regulations. No principal building in an R-1a District shall exceed 35
feet in height.
4. Accessory Buildings. The regulations pertaining to the use of accessory
buildings are set out in Section 166.06.
5. Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in any R-1a District:
Principal Use Lot Area Lot
Frontage
Front
Yard
Depth
Side Yard
Least
Width Any
One Side
Minimum
Width
Sum of
Both Side
Yards
Rear
Yard
Depth
Dwellings 9,600
square feet
80 feet 30 feet 7 feet 15 feet 35 feet
Other Uses one acre 150 feet 50 feet 25 feet 50 feet 50 feet
6. Off-Street Parking. The regulations for off-street parking are contained in
Section 166.12.
[The next page is 971]
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 971 -
167.03 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The R-1 One- and
Two-Family Residential District is established for the purpose of low to medium density
single-family dwelling control and to allow home occupations, certain public facilities, and
certain special uses. This district takes into account areas that were platted into smaller lots
during early years of City growth.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. Only the use of buildings or premises listed in this
subsection are permitted in the R-1 District.
A. One- and two-family dwelling on each lot or building site.
B. Public or private parks, playgrounds, golf course, and other outdoor
recreational facilities that are commonly, but not necessarily, operated on a
non-profit basis; however, amusement parks, golf-driving ranges, and golf
miniature putting courses, normally operated for profit and employing
manufactured or constructed facilities of an unnatural or non-environmental
design shall be excluded.
C. Agricultural crops, including truck gardening, but not the raising of
poultry, pets, or livestock for commercial purposes, or on a scale that would
be objectionable because of noise or odor to surrounding residences.
2. Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in the R-1
District:
A. Normal accessory buildings and structures for a dwelling, such as
private garages, swimming pools, children’s playhouses (not used for
dwelling purposes), radio and television receiving antennas, barbecue pits,
playground equipment, tennis courts, etc.
B. Normal accessory buildings and structures for public recreation areas,
such as refreshment stands, playground equipment, all-weather shelters, tennis
courts, barbecue pits, etc.
C. Domestic animals such as cats, dogs, birds, tropical fish, etc., which
are normally allowed to run free or are housed within the dwelling. Horses,
cows, sheep, chickens, etc. normally considered farm or wild and untamed
animals shall be excluded except as otherwise provided in the Zoning
Regulations.
D. Flower and vegetable gardening for noncommercial purposes.
E. Greenhouses and horticultural nurseries for noncommercial gain.
F. Home occupations of a professional, talented or artistic nature such as
beautician, doctor, engineer, lawyer, real estate or insurance agent, tailor,
seamstress, watchmaker, dentist, designer, sculptor; however, those
occupations normally classified as a trade and requiring the substantial use of
contractors or mechanics’ tools or equipment, such as carpenters, electricians,
monument cutters, painters, plumbers, etc., shall be excluded.
3. Height Regulations. No principal building in an R-1 District shall exceed 35
feet in height.
4. Accessory Buildings. The regulations pertaining to the use of accessory
buildings are set out in Section 166.06.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 972 -
5. Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in any R-1 District:
Principal Use Lot Area Lot
Frontage
Front
Yard
Depth
Side Yard
Least
Width Any
One Side
Minimum
Width
Sum of
Both Side
Yards
Rear
Yard
Depth
Dwellings 7,500
square feet
60 feet 30 feet 7 feet 15 feet 35 feet
Other Uses one acre 150 feet 50 feet 25 feet 50 feet 50 feet
6. Off-Street Parking. The regulations for off-street parking are contained in
Section 166.12.
[The next page is 977]
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 977 -
167.04 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The R-2 Medium Density
Residential District is established for the purpose of allowing a slightly higher density than in
the R-1 District and yet retaining the residential character. This district allows single-family
homes, two-family structures (duplexes), home occupations, certain community facilities and
certain conditional uses.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. Only the use of buildings or premises listed in this
subsection are permitted in the R-2 District.
A. Any use permitted in the R-1 District, provided such use complies
with the minimum requirements of the R-2 District.
B. Multi-family dwellings, including rooming houses; provided,
however, land use density shall not exceed 10 dwelling units per acre of land
under ownership, exclusive of road right-of-way.
C. Day nursery schools and childcare centers, provided that no building,
structure, or accessory use for property so used is located less than 30 feet
from any other principal building on any other lot in an R District; and further
provided, there is established and well maintained in connection therewith a
completely fenced play lot of not less than 1,000 square feet in area for the
first 20 or fewer children under care, with 25 square feet added to such play
lot area for each additional designated child capacity of the principal building.
D. Nursing or convalescent home.
2. Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in the R-2
District:
A. Any use permitted in the R-1 District, provided such use complies
with the minimum requirements of the R-2 District.
B. Playground areas and equipment accessory to multi-family dwellings.
C. Multi-family entertainment and service centers, provided that such
areas shall not be located to the front of the principal building at ground level
or above and that such areas are screened from public view.
D. Storage garage accessory to the principal building.
3. Height Regulations. No principal building in an R-2 District shall exceed 35
feet in height.
4. Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in any R-2 District, subject to the modified
requirements:
Principal Use Lot Area Lot
Frontage
Front
Yard
Depth
Side Yard
Least
Width Any
One Side
Minimum
Width
Sum of
Both Side
Yards
Rear
Yard
Depth
Dwellings
and Day
Nurseries
7,500
square feet
60 feet 30 feet 7 feet 15 feet 35 feet
Other Uses one acre 150 feet 50 feet 25 feet 50 feet 50 feet
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 978 -
5. Building Floor Area to Lot Area Ratio. The building floor area ratio shall not
exceed the following in any R-2 District:
Total Floor Area
Height of Building To Lot Area Ratio
1 story.........................................................0.30
2 story.........................................................0.50
2½ story......................................................0.60
[The next page is 983]
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 983 -
167.05 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The R-3 Multi-Family
Residential District is established to provide a district suitable for family living in an area
characterized by medium to high residential uses. This district allows all the uses permitted
in R-1 and R-2 Districts. Said District should only be established in areas where street and
utility systems are adequate to accommodate high density development.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. Only the use of buildings or premises listed in this
subsection are permitted in the R-3 District.
A. Any use permitted in the R-2 District, provided such use complies
with the minimum requirements of the R-3 District.
B. Multi-family dwellings, including rooming houses; provided,
however, land use density shall not exceed 16 dwelling units per acre of land
under ownership, exclusive of road right-of-way.
2. Accessory Uses. Any use permitted in the R-2 District, provided such use
complies with the minimum requirements of the R-3 District.
3. Height Regulations. No principal building in an R-3 District shall exceed 35
feet in height.
4. Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in any R-3 District, subject to the modified
requirements:
Principal Use Lot Area Lot
Frontage
Front
Yard
Depth
Side Yard
Least
Width Any
One Side
Minimum
Width
Sum of
Both Side
Yards
Rear
Yard
Depth
Dwellings
and Day
Nurseries
7,500
square feet
60 feet 30 feet 10 feet 20 feet 35 feet
Other Uses one acre 150 feet 50 feet 25 feet 50 feet 50 feet
5. Building Floor Area to Lot Area Ratio. The building floor area ratio shall not
exceed the following in any R-3 District:
Total Floor Area
Height of Building To Lot Area Ratio
1 story.........................................................0.30
2 story.........................................................0.50
2½ story......................................................0.60
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 984 -
[The next page is 989]
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 989 -
167.06 LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. The C-1 Limited Commercial District
is intended to provide certain areas along the major streets of the City for the development of
business, professional, and public service offices and office buildings.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. Only the use of structures or land listed in this
section are permitted in the C-1 District.
A. Any use permitted in an R-3 District, provided such use complies
with the minimum requirements of the C-1 District.
B. Retail business or service establishments, such as the following:
Animal hospital
Antique shops
Apparel shops, infant, teenage and adult
Art goods and bric-a-brac shops
Artist shops and studios
Bakery in which products are sold only at retail and only on the premises
Banks, including drive-in teller service
Barber shop or beauty salon
Bookstore
Bowling alleys
Candy shops, retail sales only
Cigar and cigarette stores
Clothing store
Collection office of a public utility
Confectionary and ice cream stores
Curio stores
Dairy store
Drugstore
Florist shop, retail sales only
General hardware stores
Gift shop
Hobby shop
Ice cream parlor
Jewelry stores
Leather goods store
Mail order offices, display room
Medical, dental, and optometrist offices
Messenger offices
Millinery shops
Music store, record shop and video
Newsstand
Notions
Paint and wallpaper store
Pet shop
Photographic store and/or studio
Professional and sales offices
Radio and television sales and repair
Shoe and shoe repair shops
Soda fountain and cafe, provided no alcoholic beverages are served or sold
Soft drink stands
Souvenir stores and variety stores
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 990 -
C. Any use that is found by the Zoning Administrator to be a use similar
to one of the above named uses and, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, conforms to the intent of this section.
D. Outdoor advertising signs and billboards in accordance with the
provisions of Section 166.14.
2. Accessory Uses. Any accessory uses permitted in the R-3 District, provided
that such use complies with the minimum requirements of the C-1 District.
3. Height Regulations. No principal building in a C-1 District shall exceed 35
feet in height.
4. Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The minimum requirements for
any C-1 use shall be as specified in the R-3 District. For other permitted uses:
A. Lot area – 7,500 square feet.
B. Lot width – 50 feet.
C. Front yard depth – 45 feet.
D. Side yard least width on one side – None required except adjoining
any 25-foot R District, in which case not less than 25 feet.
E. Side yard minimum sum of both sides – None required except
adjoining any 25-foot R District, in which case not less than 25 feet.
F. Rear yard depths – None required except adjoining any 25-foot R
District, in which case not less than 25 feet.
All yards abutting a public thoroughfare shall be considered front yards and shall
comply with the requirements for front yards.
5. Minimum Open Space. The total land area devoted to open space and
landscaping in a C-1 District shall not be less than 20 percent of the gross land area
included in the building lot. Such open space shall be maintained as grassed and
landscaped area and shall not include access drives, parking areas, structures or
buildings, except ornamental structures included as part of the landscaping theme.
6. Site Plans. Site plans shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section 165.06 for all uses in C-1 Districts.
[The next page is 995]
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
TRANSITIONAL COMMERCIAL/RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 995 -
167.07 TRANSITIONAL COMMERCIAL/RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The C-1a
Transitional Commercial/Residential District is intended and designed to provide certain areas
of the City for the development of professional and business offices in areas where residential
dwellings predominate. The district is intended to include primarily established residential
areas where changing conditions have made limited office use suitable and not incompatible
with the basic residential character of the district. The C-1a District is also intended for
certain residential areas which by reason of proximity to existing commercial areas and major
streets would be suitable for limited office use. It is further the intention of this section that
the classification as C-1a of an area will aid in the preservation and stabilization of property
values. To this end, it is the intention that new buildings or the conversion and alteration of
existing buildings be compatible by means of landscaping, open space and architectural
treatment with neighboring residences. Only the use of structures or land listed in this section
are permitted in the C-1a District.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. Any use permitted in the R-3 District and C-1
District, excluding, however, those uses permitted in Section 167.06, but allowing for
those uses normally housed in a professional or business office.
2. Special Limitations. The following special limitations apply in the C-1a
District:
A. No existing building shall be altered or reconstructed in such a way so
as to appear to be anything but residential in character.
B. All new construction shall by means of external treatment appear to
be residential in character.
C. No off-street parking areas shall be located in any required front yard.
D. There shall be no display of goods from windows, doors or other
openings.
3. Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in the C-1a
District:
A. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any principal
permitted use.
B. Prescription pharmacy accessory to a medical clinic.
4. Height Regulations. No principal building in the C-1a District shall exceed
35 feet in height.
5. Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The minimum requirements for
any C-1a use shall be as specified in the R-3 District. For other permitted uses:
A. Lot area – 7,500 square feet.
B. Lot width – 50 feet.
C. Front yard depth – 45 feet.
D. Side yard least width on one side – None required except adjoining
any 25-foot R District, in which case not less than 25 feet.
E. Side yard minimum sum of both sides – None required except
adjoining any 25-foot R District, in which case not less than 25 feet.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
TRANSITIONAL COMMERCIAL/RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 996 -
F. Rear yard depths – None required except adjoining any 25-foot R
District, in which case not less than 25 feet.
All yards abutting a public thoroughfare shall be considered front yards and shall
comply with the requirements for front yards.
6. Minimum Open Space. The total land area devoted to open space and
landscaping in a C-1a District shall not be less than 20 percent of the gross land area
included in the building lot. Such open space shall be maintained as grassed and
landscaped area and shall not include access drives, parking areas, structures or
buildings, except ornamental structures included as part of the landscaping theme.
7. Site Plans. Site plans shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
Section 165.06 for all uses in the C-1a District.
[The next page is 1001]
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1001 -
167.08 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT. The C-2 Highway Commercial
District is intended to provide for neighborhood shopping areas outside the downtown area.
These districts include, as well, much of the strip commercial property, major streets, and
highways of the City. These uses permitted are intended to accommodate the general retail
consumer and the needs and services of the automobile traveling consumer.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. Only the use of structures or land listed in this
section are permitted in the C-2 District.
A. Any uses permitted in the C-1 District, provided such use complies
with the minimum requirements of the C-2 District.
B. Retail business or service establishments such as the following:
Animal hospital, veterinary clinic or kennel, provided any exercising runway
or pasture is at least 200 feet from any R District
Automobile, trailer and farm implement establishment for display, hire,
sales, and minor repairs, including sales lots, but not including body and
fender work
Auto parts
Ballrooms and dance halls
Bicycle sales
Billiard parlors and pool halls
Business, commercial, dancing or music schools
Car wash
Clothes cleaning and laundry pick-up stations
Cocktail lounge or tavern
Convenience stores
Dance and/or music studio
Furniture store
Garden shops
Gasoline service station
Grocery, delicatessen or meat market, except those dealing in live poultry
Household appliance stores
Landscape garden plant stores
Launderette
Locker plants for storage and retail only
Night clubs
Plumbing, heating, cooling, ventilating, electrical for sales and services
Post office substation
Printing
Restaurants
Sign painting shops
Small engine repair
C. Any use that is found by the Zoning Administrator to be a use similar
to one of the above named uses and, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, conforms to the intent of this section.
D. Outdoor advertising signs and billboards in accordance with the
provisions of Section 166.14.
2. Accessory Uses. Any accessory uses permitted in the C-1 District, provided
that such use complies with the minimum requirements for the C-2 District.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1002 -
3. Height Regulations. No principal building in the C-2 District shall exceed 35
feet in height.
4. Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The minimum requirements for
any C-2 use shall be as specified in the R-3 District. For other permitted uses:
A. Lot area – 7,500 square feet.
B. Lot width – 50 feet.
C. Front yard depth – 45 feet.
D. Side yard least width on one side – None required except adjoining
any 25-foot R District, in which case not less than 25 feet.
E. Side yard minimum sum of both sides – None required except
adjoining any 25-foot R District, in which case not less than 25 feet.
F. Rear yard depths – None required, except adjoining any 25-foot R
District, in which case not less than 25 feet.
All yards abutting a public thoroughfare shall be considered front yards and shall
comply with the requirements for front yards.
[The next page is 1007]
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1007 -
167.09 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. The C-3 Central Business District is
established to provide a district of concentrated retail commercial and service uses that are
intended to serve the needs of the local trade area. The C-3 District is intended to be located
only in the downtown area of the City and to be expanded out from the central area in an
orderly and progressive manner as demand for additional commercial land is generated.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. Only the use of structures or land listed in this
section are permitted in the C-3 District.
A. Any use permitted in the C-2 District, provided such use complies
with the minimum requirements of the C-3 District.
B. Manufacture or treatment of products clearly incidental to the conduct
of a retail business conducted on the premises.
C. Printing or publishing houses.
2. Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in the C-3
District:
A. Accessory uses permitted in the C-2 District.
B. Any exterior or roof sign the height of which shall not exceed 40
percent of the building height above the roof line, but not to exceed 50 feet
above the roof line in any case. For buildings less than 40 feet in height, the
maximum height above the roof line for any exterior or roof sign shall be 16
feet.
C. Apartment Units except in the basement or story abutting street grade,
provided adequate off-street parking is provided.
(Ord. 711 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
3. Height Regulations. No building in the C-3 District shall exceed 35 feet in
height.
4. Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed:
A. Lot area, lot area per family, and front yard depths – None required,
unless abutting the proposed right-of-way of a thoroughfare shown on Official
Major Thoroughfare Plan, in which case the building setback line shall be the
proposed right-of-way line.
B. Side yard least width on any one side, width minimum sum of both
side yards – None, except adjacent to an R District, in which case not less
than 10 feet.
C. Rear yard depths – None, except abutting an R District, in which case
not less than 25 feet.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1008 -
[The next page is 1013]
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
PLANNED OFFICE/COMMERCIAL PARK DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1013 -
167.10 PLANNED OFFICE/COMMERCIAL PARK DISTRICT. The C-4 Planned
Office/Commercial Park District is intended and designed to provide areas of the City for
development of: (i) business, professional and public service offices; (ii) a broad range of
both primary and accessory general commercial services; and (iii) certain primary and
accessory retail and personal service uses. The C-4 District is defined to be a planned
commercial area, under unit ownerships of not less than five acres, and is characterized by the
planned layout of buildings and common site improvements, such as access drives, parking
and loading areas, lighting, signs, pedestrian walkways, and landscaping.
1. Permitted Principal Uses. Principal permitted uses in the C-4 District are as
follows:
A. Business and professional offices.
B. Clinics or group medical offices, but not including animal clinics or
hospitals.
C. Commercial service offices and shops, such as business machines
servicing and repair; photocopying, printing and binding; data processing;
temporary manpower services; building maintenance services; car and truck
rentals; packaging and delivery services; communication, telephone sales and
telemarketing services; office machine sales; and similar commercial service
uses.
D. Laboratories, research, experimental, testing.
E. Office buildings serving the management, research, design, marketing
and production needs of the general business community.
F. Office building owned and operated by a public agency or authority.
G. Commercial trade schools and business colleges.
H. Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, processing, packaging, or
other comparable treatment of the following:
Bakery goods, candy and food products;
Cameras and other photographic equipment;
Electric and neon signs outdoor advertising signs;
Medical, dental and drafting instruments;
Musical instruments, toys, novelties, and rubber metal hand stamps;
Pottery and other ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay,
and kilns fired only by electricity or gas;
Products from previously prepared materials such as bone, canvas,
cellophane, cloth, cork, rope, cord, twine, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass,
hair, horn, leather, paper, cardboard, plastics, natural and synthetic
rubber, precious or semiprecious metals or stones, shells, textiles,
tobacco, wax, wood, yarns, light metal mesh, pipe, rods, strips, or wire;
Small precious instruments such as barometers, clocks, watches and
compasses;
Warehouses for storage of merchandise or material in connection with the
uses permitted in this district only.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses. Permitted accessory uses in the C-4 District are
accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any principal permitted use.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
PLANNED OFFICE/COMMERCIAL PARK DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1014 -
3. C-4 Development Plan; Petition. The owner or owners of any tract land of
not less than five acres shall petition the Council, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 165.07, to a change to the C-4 District classification. Such petition shall be
accompanied by a development plan, indicating how the petitioner intends to meet the
requirements of this chapter. Said development plan shall include evidence
concerning the feasibility of the project and its effect of surrounding property and
shall also include the following:
A. A development plan outlining, in detail, the areas to be developed for
buildings, the areas to be developed for parking, the location of sidewalks and
driveways, points of vehicular access, the location and height of walls, the
location and type of landscaping, and the location, size and number of signs.
B. Methods and feasibility of providing water, storm and sanitary sewer
facilities.
4. C-4 Development Review Procedures.
A. The petition and all attachments shall be referred to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for study and report after public hearing. The
Commission shall review the adequacy of public services, the proposed
improvements and the conformity of the proposed development with the
standards of the comprehensive plan and with recognized principles of civic
design, land use planning, and landscape architecture. After public hearing,
the Commission may approve or disapprove the development plan and request
for rezoning as submitted, or require that the petitioner amend the plan to
preserve the intent and purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety
and general welfare.
B. The petition and development plan, along with the Commission’s
recommendations or the request for rezoning, shall then be forwarded to the
Council. The Council, after public hearing, may approve or disapprove the
development plan and request for rezoning, as reported, or may require such
changes as are necessary to preserve the intent and purpose of this chapter to
promote public health, safety and the general welfare.
5. C-4 Development Plan Approval. The Council may make the approval of the
development plan contingent upon the completion of construction and improvements
within a reasonable period of time; provided, however, in the determination of such
period, the Council shall consider the scope and magnitude of the development project
and any schedule of construction and improvements submitted by the developer. Any
proposed change in the development plan, after approval by the Council, shall be
resubmitted and considered in the same manner as the original proposal.
6. Area and Size Regulations. The following area and size requirements shall be
observed in the C-4 District:
A. Minimum lot area – 5 acres.
B. Minimum yards – A minimum yard of 50 feet shall be required from
all property lines. No other minimum yards are required.
C. Maximum height – 60 feet.
7. Minimum Open Space. The total land area devoted to open space in the C-4
District shall not be less than 20 percent of the gross land area included in the building
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
PLANNED OFFICE/COMMERCIAL PARK DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1015 -
lot. Such open space shall be maintained as grassed and landscaped areas, interior and
exterior malls, pedestrian walks, and ornamental structures when part of the
landscaping theme. Open space shall not include structures or buildings, off-street
parking areas, loading areas, and access drives.
8. Off-Street Parking and Loading. Spaces for off-street parking and loading
shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 166.12.
9. Restriction on Noxious Conditions. No use shall be permitted to be
established or maintained which, by reason of its nature or manner of operation, is or
may become hazardous, noxious, or offensive owing to the emission of odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas, fumes, noise, vibrations, refuse matter, or water-carried waste.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
PLANNED OFFICE/COMMERCIAL PARK DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1016 -
[The next page is 1021]
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1021 -
167.11 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. The M-1 Light Industrial District is
established to provide areas in the City in which light industrial or manufacturing firms can
engage in processing, assembling, manufacturing, warehousing, and storage, and for related
incidental service facilities. The activities conducted in this district will create no obnoxious
sounds, glare, dust, or odor.
1. Permitted Principal Uses. Principal permitted uses in the M-1 District are as
follows:
A. Any business or service establishment permitted in a C District which
is incidental to an industrial or manufacturing use.
B. Industrial, manufacturing, major repair, processing, storage, and
wholesale establishments and services such as the following:
Automobile body and fender repair shop
Automobile construction, assembly or factories specializing in the rework or
rebuilding of automobile components
Automobile repair garage
Bag, carpet and rug cleaners
Bakeries
Carpenter and cabinet shops
Concrete mixing, concrete products manufacture
Contractor’s equipment and materials storage yard
Creamery, bottling works, dairy ice cream manufacturing, ice manufacturing
and cold storage
Enameling, lacquering or japanning
Flammable liquids, underground storage only, not to exceed 25,000 gallons
and located not less than 200 feet from any R District
Foundry casting lightweight non-ferrous metals or electric foundry not
causing noxious fumes or odors
Laboratories, experimental, film or testing
Laundries
Lumber and building supply yards
Machine shop
Milk distributing station
Motor freight terminal
Sawmill, planing mill, including manufacture of wood products
Sheet metal shops
C. Any residential use shall be prohibited, except for caretaker’s quarters
incidental to a permitted industrial use.
2. Accessory Uses. Any accessory use customarily accessory and incidental to a
permitted principal use.
3. Required Conditions. No use shall be permitted to be established or
maintained which, by reason of its nature or manner of operation, is or may become
hazardous, noxious, or offensive or which pollutes the air or water due to the emission
of cinders, dust, gas fumes, noise, odor, smoke, refuse matter or water-carried waste.
4. Height Regulations. No building in the M-1 District shall exceed 45 feet in
height.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1022 -
5. Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed:
Use Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard
Depth*
Side Yard*
Width Any
One Side
Rear Yard
Depth
All uses 10,000
square feet
75 feet 45 feet 10 feet ** 45 feet**
* All yards in the M-1 District abutting a public thoroughfare shall be considered front yards and shall
comply with the requirements for a front yard.
** M-1 District adjacent to any R District, the minimum setback shall be 50 feet from the M-1 District
boundary line, except in such cases where the district line is construed to following the centerline of
a public thoroughfare, wherein such cases shall be determined by the provisions for the required
minimum front yard depth.
[The next page is 1027]
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1027 -
167.12 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. The M-2 Heavy Industrial District is
established to provide areas in the City where heavy industrial, manufacturing, and other types
of firms can engage in processing, manufacturing, and related activities protected from the
encroachment of residential uses. This district is intended to allow extensive obnoxious
sounds, glare, dust, or odor. Certain extremely obnoxious or hazardous uses will require
special permission to locate in the district.
1. Use Regulations. A building or premises in the M-2 Heavy Industrial District
may be used for any purpose whatsoever, subject to the requirements and conditions
contained in this section.
A. No occupancy permit shall be issued for any use in conflict with any
ordinance of the City or law of the State regulating nuisances.
B. No occupancy permit shall be issued for any dwelling, school,
hospital, clinic or other institution for human care, except where incidental to
a permitted principal use.
C. No occupancy permit shall be issued for any of the following uses
until and unless the location of such use shall have been authorized by the
Council after reports by the Commission, City Engineer, Chief of the Fire
Department and the Health Department:
Abattoirs and slaughter houses or stock yards
Acid manufacture or wholesale storage of acids
Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacture
Chemical manufacturing
Distillation of bones
Explosive manufacture or storage
Fat rendering
Fertilizer manufacture
Garbage, offal or dead animals reduction or dumping, provided that all
refuse is earth covered daily
Gas manufacture and cylinder recharging
Glue, size or gelatine manufacture
Petroleum or its products, refining or wholesale storage of
Rubber goods manufacture
Sand or gravel pits provided they are enclosed by a fence that provides an
effective barrier against trespassing
Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores
Transmitting stations
Wholesale storage of gasoline
(Ord. 717 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
2. Required Conditions.
A. The best practical means known for the disposal of refuse matter or
water-carried waste, the abatement of obnoxious or offensive odor, dust,
smoke, gas, noise or similar nuisance, shall be employed.
B. All principal buildings and all accessory buildings or structures,
including loading and unloading facilities, shall be located at least 200 feet
from any R District and not less than 100 feet from any other district except
an M-1 District.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1028 -
3. Height Regulations. No structure in the M-2 District shall exceed in height
the distance measured to the centerline of the nearest street from any portion of the
proposed building or structure, except as modified herein.
4. Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the M-2 District:
Use Lot Area Lot
Frontage
Front
Yard
Depth
Side Yard
Least
Width Any
One Side
Minimum
Width
Sum of
Both Side
Yards
Rear
Yard
Depth
Any use 1 acre 200 feet 40 feet 20 feet* 40 feet* 40 feet*
* All yards in the M-2 District abutting a public thoroughfare shall be considered front yards and
shall comply with the requirements for a front yard.
[The next page is 1033]
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1033 -
167.13 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT. The A-1 Agriculture District is intended and
designed to provide for continued use of the agricultural resources and agricultural lands
within the City which are not expected to develop in urban uses in the immediate future. The
purpose of this zoning district is to provide for areas of managed growth in which agricultural
and other non-urban uses of property may continue and/or for the preservation of farm ground,
until such time as the City is able to provide municipal services and urban development can
take place. Before installation of facilities providing municipal services, the City must and the
property owner may initiate rezoning of property to uses consistent with the Comprehensive
Plan.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. Only the uses of structures or land listed in this
section are permitted in the A-1 District.
A. Agriculture and the usual agricultural buildings and structures; but not
including commercial livestock feed lots, poultry farms, grain storage and
grain drying facilities.
B. One- and two-family dwellings.
C. Churches, chapels, temples, and similar places of worship.
D. Public and parochial schools, elementary and secondary, and colleges
and universities.
E. Publicly owned parks, playgrounds, golf courses, and recreation
areas.
F. Private non-commercial recreational areas and centers, including
country clubs, swimming pools, golf courses, and riding stables; but not
including automotive race tracks, miniature golf courses, drive-in theaters and
similar commercial uses.
G. Cemeteries, including mausoleums.
H. Nurseries, greenhouses and truck gardens.
I. Public water supply and sewage treatment facilities.
J. Electrical and natural gas transmission and regulating facilities.
2. Special Use Permits. The following uses may be permitted in the A-1
District, subject to approval by the Board of Adjustment after notice and public
hearing. In its determination upon the particular use at the location requested, the
Board shall consider all of the following conditions: (i) the proposed location, design,
construction and operation of the particular use adequately safeguards the health,
safety, and general welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding
property; (ii) such use shall not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
surrounding property; (iii) such use shall not unduly increase congestion in the streets,
or public danger of fire and safety; (iv) such use shall not diminish or impair
established property values in adjoining or surrounding property; (v) such use shall be
in accord with the intent, purpose, and spirit of this chapter and the Comprehensive
Plan of the City. The uses subject to these provisions are as follows:
Any public building erected and used by any department of the Township, County,
State or Federal Government, not previously allowed as a principal permitted use
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1034 -
Kennels for the raising, breeding, and boarding of dogs or other small animals,
provided that all buildings, including exercise runways, are at least 200 feet from
all property lines.
Mining and extraction of minerals and raw materials, including sand and gravel,
subject to prior approval of the Iowa Natural Resources Commission of any such
operation located in or on the flood plain of any river or stream
Mink and chinchilla farms and ranches
Private gun clubs, skeet-shooting ranges and similar uses
Publicly owned or private aircraft landing fields or airports
Public or private sanitary landfills and solid waste disposal facilities
Applications for a special use permit under the terms of this section shall be
accompanied by evidence concerning the feasibility of the proposed request and its
effect on surrounding property and shall include a site plan defining the areas to be
developed for buildings and structures, the areas to be developed for parking, the
locations of driveways and the points of ingress and egress, including access roads
where required, the location and height of walls, the location and type of landscaping,
the location, size and number of signs and the manner of providing water supply and
sewage treatment facilities. In the event a special use permit is granted under the
terms of this section, any change thereafter in the approved use or site plan shall be
resubmitted and considered in the same manner as the original proposal.
3. Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in the A-1
District:
A. Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to
one of the permitted principal uses unless otherwise excluded.
B. Private garage or carport.
C. Home occupations as permitted in other sections of this chapter.
D. The taking of boarders or the leasing of rooms by a resident family,
provided the total number of boarders and roomers does not exceed three per
building.
E. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
F. Church bulletin boards.
G. Roadside stands for the sale of products grown on the premises.
4. Exemptions from Building Permits, Fees and Inspections. Agricultural
related buildings that are used for farm purposes only shall be exempt from paying
permit fees or be subject to any inspections.
5. Bulk Regulations. The following minimum requirements shall be observed,
subject to the modifications contained in other sections of this chapter.
A. Lot Area: dwellings – 87,020 square feet; no minimum required for
other permitted uses.
B. Lot Width – 300 feet.
C. Front Yard – 75 feet.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1035 -
D. Side Yards: Dwellings, 1 and 1½ stories, total side yard – 30 feet;
minimum on one side – 10 feet.
E. Rear Yard – 50 feet.
F. Maximum Height – no limitation.
G. Maximum Number of Stories – no limitation.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1036 -
[The next page is 1041]
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1041 -
167.14 ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
The RM-1 One- and Two-Family Residential/Light Industrial District is established to provide
for a transitional zone where one- and two-family residences and certain types of business and
commercial uses may co-exist in a mutually compatible environment. The district will allow
low density housing, home occupations, certain public facilities, certain special uses, light
industrial uses, including processing, assembling, manufacturing, warehousing and storage
and related incidental service facilities. The light industrial uses in this district will create no
hazardous, noxious or offensive conditions, including noise, glare, dust and odor.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. Principal permitted uses in the RM-1 District are as
follows:
A. One- and two-family dwelling on each lot or building site.
B. Agricultural crops, including truck gardening but not the raising of
either livestock or domestic pets for commercial purposes or on a scale that
would be objectionable because of noise or odor.
C. Any business or service establishment permitted in a C District that is
incidental to an industrial or manufacturing use.
D. Light industrial, manufacturing, repair, processing, storage and
wholesale establishments such as the following:
Automobile mechanical and body and fender repair
Back office and call center
Bag, carpet and rug cleaners
Bakeries
Carpenter and cabinet shops
Container and box manufacturing
Contractor’s equipment and materials storage
Creamery, bottling works, dairy product manufacturing, ice manufacturing
and cold storage
Electrostatic painting, enameling or lacquering
Freight warehousing and storage
Greenhouses and nurseries
Laboratories
Laundries
Lumber and building supplies
Machine shop
Metalworking, including die-casting, fabrication, plating, polishing and
stamping
Printing and publishing
Sheet metal shop
2. Accessory Uses. The following accessory uses are permitted in the RM-1
District:
A. Normal accessory buildings and structures for a dwelling, such as
private garages, swimming pools, children’s playhouses, radio and television
receiving antennas, playground equipment, etc.
B. Domestic pets such as cats, dogs, birds, etc. but not livestock or wild
animals on parcels of two acres in area or less.
C. Home occupations of any type.
CHAPTER 167 ZONING REGULATIONS – DISTRICT REGULATIONS
ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL/LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 1042 -
D. Any other accessory use customary and incidental to any permitted
principal use.
3. Required Conditions. No use shall be permitted to be established or
maintained in the RM-1 District which, by its nature or its manner of operation, is or
may become hazardous, noxious, or offensive or which will pollute the land, air, or
water due to any emission of dust, particulate matter, fumes, noise, odor, smoke,
refuse or liquid waste.
4. Height Regulations. No building in the RM-1 District shall exceed 40 feet in
height for a dwelling and 45 feet in height for a non-dwelling.
5. Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed in the RM-1 District:
Use Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard
Depth*
Side Yard* Width Rear Yard
Depth
Dwellings 7,500
square feet
60 feet 30 feet 7 feet any one side yard;
15 feet minimum sum of
both side yards
35 feet
Other uses 10,000
square feet
75 feet 45 feet 10 feet 45 feet
* All yards in the RM-1 District abutting a public thoroughfare shall be considered front yards and
shall comply with the requirements for a front yard.
[The next page is 1047]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
-i-
167.15 MODIFIED LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT. The MM-1 Modified Light
Industrial District is established to provide a light industrial zone located in a commercial area
with restrictions provided which will allow certain types of businesses and commercial uses to
co-exist in a mutually compatible environment. The district will allow many of the same
types of businesses that were allowed in the light industrial district with those eliminated
which were not compatible to a commercial district. The modified light industrial uses in this
district create no hazardous, noxious or offensive conditions, including noise, glare, dust
and/or odor.
1. Principal Permitted Uses. Principal permitted uses in the MM-1 District are
as follows:
A. Any business or service establishment permitted in a C District which
is incidental to industrial or manufacturing use.
B. Light industrial, manufacturing, repair, processing, storage and
wholesale establishments such as the following:
Automobile body and fender repair shop
Automobile repair garage
Bag, carpet and rug cleaners
Bakeries
Carpenter and cabinet shops
Contractor’s equipment and materials storage yard
Creamery, bottling works, dairy ice cream manufacturing, ice manufacturing
and cold storage
Enameling, lacquering or japanning
Foundry casting lightweight nonferrous metals. or electric foundry not
causing noxious fumes or odors
Laboratories - experimental, film or testing
Laundries
Lumber and building supply yards
Machine shop
Milk distributing station
Motor freight terminal
Sawmill, planing mill, including manufacture of wood products
Sheet metal shops.
2. Accessory Uses. All accessory uses customary and incidental to any
permitted principal use.
3. Required Conditions. No use shall be permitted to be established or
maintained which, by its nature or its manner of operation, is or may become
hazardous, noxious, or offensive or which will pollute the land, air, or water due to
any emission of dust, particulate matter, fumes, noise, odor, smoke, refuse or liquid
waste. Any outside storage located on the property in this district shall require an
8-foot privacy fence.
4. Height Regulations. No building in the MM-1 District shall exceed 45 feet in
height.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
-ii-
5. Lot Area, Frontage and Yard Requirements. The following minimum
requirements shall be observed:
Use Lot Area Lot Width Front Yard
Depth*
Side Yard*
Width
Rear Yard
Depth
Non-dwellings 10,000 square
feet
75 feet 45 feet 10 feet 45 feet
* All yards in the MM-1 District abutting a public thoroughfare shall be considered front yards and
shall comply with the requirements for a front yard.
[The next page is 1065]
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
CHAPTER 168
ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
168.01 Regulations 168.05 Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems
168.02 Unclassified Uses 168.06 Required Conditions
168.03 Special Uses 168.07 Restrictions
168.04 Adult Entertainment and Uses 168.08 Temporary Uses
168.01 REGULATIONS. The regulations set forth in this chapter or elsewhere in the Zoning
Regulations which are applicable shall apply to the unclassified and special uses listed in this chapter. It
shall be recognized that certain uses possess characteristics of such unique and special form as to make
impractical their being included automatically in any classes of use as set forth in the various districts
established by these Zoning Regulations; therefore, these uses shall be subject to certain conditions and
standards set forth in this chapter, and the authority for the location thereof shall be subject to review by
the Commission and the issuance of a special use permit by the Council; provided, however, a special use
permit may not be granted for a use in a zone from which it is specifically excluded by the provisions of
this chapter.
168.02 UNCLASSIFIED USES. The following uses are declared unclassified uses and are subject to
the provisions of this chapter:
1. Borrow pits and quarries for rock, sand, gravel, or other soil deposits.
2. Columbaria, crematories and mausoleums unless inside a cemetery, provided that these
uses are specifically excluded from any R District.
3. Establishments or enterprises involving large assemblages of people or automobiles, as
follows, provided these uses are specifically excluded from any R District:
A. Amusement parks.
B. Carnivals, circuses and fairgrounds, except as hereinafter provided.
C. Commercial sport or recreational enterprises, including non-profit amphitheaters,
convention halls and auditoriums.
D. Race tracks and rodeo grounds.
4. Mental hospitals.
5. Mining operations.
6. Rock crushing plants or the processing of materials from borrow pits and quarries.
7. Radio and television transmitters.
8. Rescue missions and leagues, provided these uses are specifically excluded from R
Districts.
9. Refuse and garbage dumps, incinerators and other waste disposal methods, provided these
uses are specifically excluded from R Districts.
10. Sewage disposal plant.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
11. Shooting ranges, including pistol, rifle, skeet and trap ranges.
168.03 SPECIAL USES. The following uses are declared special uses, and upon the issuance of a
special use permit, such special uses may be authorized in any zone in addition to those zones in which
such special uses are specifically authorized.
1. Accessory or branch structures and facilities for public utilities and public service uses,
including reservoirs and tanks, pumping stations, telephone exchanges and power and transformer
stations, but not including business offices or equipment storage yards and garages, which are
considered commercial, business, and industrial uses.
2. Buildings and uses owned by a municipality, county, and/or other political subdivision and
which are operated for the social benefit or convenience of the public, but excluding equipment
storage yards and garages that are operated and maintained for the necessary business and industrial
service of the community.
3. Churches.
4. Clubs, lodge and fraternal buildings that are operated by nonprofit benevolent
organizations for the social benefit or convenience of the public.
5. Educational schools, facilities and institutions, including elementary schools, junior high
schools, high schools and colleges, both public and privately owned, providing for the general
education of mankind. Schools that specialize in limited short business, commercial, and
industrial training courses and are operated for commercial gain are specifically excluded from this
chapter and shall be considered as a regular business or commercial use.
6. Golf, swimming and tennis clubs or country clubs and similar public and privately owned
uses.
7. Mobile home parks, subject to the minimum development requirements as follows,† R-2
and C-1 Districts only:
A. Minimum Requirements for Park:
(1) Front yard (measured from all streets on which park abuts) – 50 feet.
(2) Side yard – 35 feet.
(3) Rear yard – 35 feet.
(4) Area – 2 acres.
(5) Drives surfaced with asphaltic or Portland cement concrete (width) – 25
feet.
(6) Sanitary facilities shall be connected with the municipal sewer system or
adequate private sewage disposal facilities.
B. Requirements for Mobile Home Spaces:
(1) Space size – 50 feet by 90 feet.
(2) Space area – 4,500 square feet.
(3) Off-drive parking – one parking space for each mobile home space.
(4) Front yard – 15 feet.
† EDITOR’S NOTE: See illustration at the end of this chapter.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
(5) Rear yard – 10 feet.
(6) Side yard – 10 feet.
8. Museums and libraries not operated for profit.
9. Nursery schools for the day care or temporary overnight care of children.
10. Public parks.
11. Recreations, refreshment and service buildings in public parks, playgrounds, and golf
courses.
12. Temporary offices, billboards, and buildings incidental to the development and
construction of commercial, industrial, and residential projects.
13. Travel trailer parks (C-1 District only).
A. Minimum Requirements for Park:
(1) Front yard – same as C-1 District or 50 feet, whichever is greater. This
requirement shall apply to any and all roads or streets upon which the travel trailer
park abuts.
(2) Side yard – 35 feet.
(3) Rear yard – 35 feet.
(4) Minimum area – 1½ acres.
(5) Maximum density – 20 unit spaces per gross acre of park site.
(6) Drives – 25 feet in width with asphaltic concrete surface.
(7) A common service building providing laundry facilities, short order food
service, accessory supplies, etc. may be included in the travel trailer parks,
provided any such building is located within the central park area, is not visible to
passing traffic, and is restricted to the use of the park occupants. Such service
buildings shall be permitted in the C-1 District, provided such use conforms to the
requirements of the C-1 District Regulations.
(8) The rear and/or side yards shall be screened from adjacent property access
by a planting screen not less than 10 feet in width, or by an un-climbable fence
wall.
B. Requirements For Trailer Spaces:
(1) Minimum space size – 20 feet by 55 feet.
(2) Minimum space area – 1,100 square feet.
(3) Off-drive parking – one parking space for (and within the area of) each
trailer space.
(4) Minimum front yard – 10 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard – 5 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard – 5 feet.
(7) Trailer separation – the minimum distance between any two trailers shall
be not less than 10 feet.
C. Site Plan Requirements.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
(1) A site plan of the park site shall be required for review and consideration
of a special use permit.
(2) The site plan shall be prepared at a scale of not less than 1 inch = 100 feet.
(3) The provisions to meet the requirements of the Zoning Regulations shall
be clearly illustrated.
(4) All existing drainage and public utility facilities shall be shown, and
proposed methods of storm water removal, waste removal, and water distribution
shall be stated on the plan. Detailed requirements shall be approved by the Health
Department prior to the issuance of a special permit.
14. Residential uses, buildings or structures in use districts other than R Districts.
15. Adult entertainment and uses, subject to the regulations contained in Section 168.04 of this
chapter.
16. Bed and breakfast establishments.
17. Small wind energy conversion systems, subject to the regulations contained in Section
168.05 of this chapter.
18. Sales of fireworks limited to a C-2 Highway Commercial District and subject to licensing
by the State Fire Marshall Office. (Ord. 724 – Jun. 17 Supp.)
168.04 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT AND USES. It is the purpose of this section to regulate sexually
oriented businesses and related activities to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the City, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location
and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City. The provisions of this section have
neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this section to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
Neither is it the intent nor effect of this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
materials.
1. Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section.
A. “Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled
still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where
the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
B. “Adult bookstore” or “adult video store” means a commercial establishment that,
as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs,
films, motion picture, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual
representations that depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with
specified sexual activities.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or
adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long
as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration
the specified materials which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas. A principal business purpose need not be a primary use of an
establishment, so long as it is a significant use based upon the visible inventory or
commercial activity of the establishment.
C. “Adult cabaret” means a commercial establishment that regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity; or
(2) Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
(3) Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
(4) Persons who engage in lewd, lascivious or erotic dancing or performances
that are intended for the sexual interests or titillation of an audience or customers.
D. “Adult motel” means a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that:
(1) Offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way that
advertises the availability of these adult types of photographic reproductions; or
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 24
hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a
period of time that is less than 24 hours.
E. “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment where, for any
form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
F. “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment that regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live
performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities.
G. “Director” means the City Administrator or Police Chief and such employees of
the Police Department as the Police Chief may designate to perform the duties of the
Director under this section.
H. “Escort” means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model
lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
I. “Escort agency” means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes for a fee,
tip or other consideration.
J. “Establishment” means and includes any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented
business, to any sexually oriented business;
(3) The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
K. “Licensed day-care center” means a facility licensed by the State, whether situated
within the City or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or
supervision for more than 12 children under 14 years of age, where such children are not
related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, of less than
24 hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges
for the services it offers.
L. “Nude model studio” means any place where a person who appears in a state of
nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn,
painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or
any form of consideration.
M. “Nudity” or “state of nudity” means the appearance of a human bare buttock, anus,
male genitals, female genitals, or female breast without a fully opaque, complete covering
of the breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human male genitals
in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
N. “Permittee” means a person in whose name a permit to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application
for a permit.
O. “Semi-nude” means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast without a fully
opaque, complete covering of the breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered.
P. “Sexual encounter center” means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one
of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:
(1) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of
the opposite sex; or
(2) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude.
Q. “Sexually oriented business” means an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency,
nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
R. “Specified anatomical areas” means the male genitals in a state of sexual arousal
and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals.
S. “Specified sexual activities” means and includes any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse,
oral copulation or sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in subparagraphs (1) through (3) above.
T. “Substantial enlargement” of a sexually oriented business means the increase in
floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25 percent from the original premises.
U. “Transfer of ownership or control” of a sexually oriented business means and
includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities that form a controlling interest in the business,
whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers
the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other
operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
2. Classification. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
A. Adult arcades;
B. Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
C. Adult cabarets;
D. Adult motels;
E. Adult motion picture theaters;
F. Adult theaters;
G. Escort agencies;
H. Nude model studios; and
I. Sexual encounter centers.
3. Standards of Conduct. The following standards of conduct must be adhered to by entertainers
and employees of any sexually oriented business while on the premises:
A. No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in such less than opaque and
complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any specified anatomical area,
except when such entertainer or employee is separated from any and all customers by a
window or other partition that is maintained free of holes or other structural openings that
would permit physical contact between such entertainer and employee and any customer
within the viewing area and customers are not permitted within four feet of the window or
other partition. However, a single opening in such window or partition, allowing for
payment for entertainment, by a customer to the entertainer, shall be permitted and at this
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
point customers are permitted within two feet of the window or other partition to allow
customers to reach the opening.
B. No employee or entertainer shall perform:
(1) Any specified sexual activities; or
(2) The displaying of any specified anatomical area, except as provided for in
paragraph A of this subsection.
C. No employee or entertainer who is either not separated from any and all customers
as provided in paragraph A of this subsection, or in an area of the premises not open to
customers shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or
clothing as described in paragraph A of this subsection.
D. No employee or entertainer shall knowingly touch any specified anatomical area
of another person, or knowingly permit another person to touch any specified anatomical
area of such employee or entertainer; or no employee or entertainer shall knowingly fondle
or caress any specified anatomical area of another person, whether such area is clothed,
unclothed, covered or exposed, or knowingly permit another person to fondle or caress any
specified anatomical area of such employee or entertainer, whether such area is clothed,
unclothed, covered or exposed.
E. No entertainer shall be visible from any public place during the hours of his or her
employment, or apparent hours of his or her employment, while such entertainer is
unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing to expose to view any specified anatomical
area or while performing any entertainment, either while clothed or unclothed.
F. No entertainer shall solicit, demand or receive any payment or gratuity from any
customer for any act prohibited by this section.
G. No entertainer shall receive any payment or gratuity from any customer, except
through an opening in the window or partition separating such entertainer from a customer,
as described in paragraph A of this subsection.
4. Standards of Operation. At any sexually oriented business, the following are required:
A. A sign, on which upper-case letters are at least two inches high and lower-case
letters are at least one inch high, shall be conspicuously displayed in the common area at
the principal entrance and shall read as follows:
THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS
IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF CARLISLE, IOWA.
ENTERTAINERS ARE:
1. Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct on the premises or in prostitution;
2. Not permitted to be unclothed or in such less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing so as
to expose to view any portion of the breasts below the top of the areola, or any portion of the pubic region,
buttocks and/or genitals, except when separated from customers by the window or partition between the
entertainer and customers.
3. Not permitted to receive any payment or gratuity from any customer, except through an opening in the
window or partition separating such entertainer from a customer.
B. Neither entertainment nor any photograph, drawing, sketch, or other pictorial or
graphic representation thereof displaying any specified anatomical area shall be visible
from a public place.
C. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
less than one foot-candle as measured at the floor level, and such illumination must be
maintained at all times that any customer is present in or on the premises.
5. Permit Required.
A. It is unlawful for a person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid
permit issued by the Director.
B. An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the City. The
application must be accompanied by a sketch or a diagram showing the configuration of
the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The
sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated
scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches.
C. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this section and the
premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the Health
Department, Fire Department, Building Official and Zoning Official.
D. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he
must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a
sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent
or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business or as the entity that wishes to
operate such a business, each individual having a ten percent or greater interest in the
corporation must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
E. The fact that a person possesses other types of State or City permits and/or licenses
does not exempt said person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business
permit.
F. Applications for a permit, whether original or renewal, must be made to the
Director by the intended operator of the enterprise. Applications must be submitted by
hand delivery to the office of the Director during regular working hours. Application forms
shall be supplied by the Director. The intended operator shall be required to give the
following information on the application form:
(1) The name, street address (and mailing address if different) and Iowa
driver’s license number of the intended operator.
(2) The name and street address (and mailing address if different) of the
owner.
(3) The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general
description of the services to be provided.
(4) The telephone number of the establishment.
(5) The address and legal description of the tract of land on which the
establishment is to be located.
(6) If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner acquiring
the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location
for which the permit is sought.
(7) If the establishment is not in operation, the expected start-up date (which
shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the permit). If
the expected start-up date is to be more than ten days following the date of issuance
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
of the permit, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair, or remodeling
work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner’s time
schedule and plan for accomplishing the same.
(8) Statement that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or released
from confinement for conviction of a felony, whichever event is later, within five
years immediately preceding the application, or has not been convicted of a
misdemeanor or released from confinement for conviction of a misdemeanor,
whichever event is later, within two years immediately preceding the application,
where such felony or misdemeanor involved sexual offenses, prostitution, sexual
abuse of a child, or pornography and related offenses, as defined in the Code of
Iowa, Federal law, or the statutes of any other state, or controlled substance or
illegal drugs or narcotics offenses, as defined in the Code of Iowa, Federal law or
the statutes of any other state, or has not been convicted of a municipal ordinance
violation or released from confinement for conviction of a municipal ordinance
violation, whichever event is later, within two years immediately preceding the
application, where such municipal ordinance violation involved indecent exposure,
prostitution or the possession or sale of controlled substances or illegal drugs or
narcotics.
G. The application shall be accompanied by the following:
(1) Payment of the application fee in full.
(2) If the establishment is an Iowa corporation, a certified copy of the articles
of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto.
(3) If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the
certificate of authority to transact business in the State, together with all
amendments thereto.
(4) If the establishment is a partnership formed under the laws of the State, a
certified copy of the certificate of partnership, together with all amendments
thereto.
(5) If the establishment is a foreign partnership, a certified copy of the
certificate of partnership and the qualification documents, together with all
amendments thereto.
(6) Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the
establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed.
(7) If the persons identified as the fee owners of the tract of land in item (6)
are not also the owners of the establishment, then the lease, purchase contract,
purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document evidencing the
legally enforceable right of the owners or proposed owners of the establishment to
have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be
used for the establishment for the purpose of the operation of the establishment.
(8) Any of items (2) through (7) above shall not be required for a renewal
application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished the
Director with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct
and current.
H. The application shall contain a statement under oath that:
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
(1) The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the
application and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is
true and correct; and
(2) The applicant has read the provisions of this section.
I. A separate application and permit are required for each sexually oriented business.
6. Issuance of Permit.
A. The Director shall approve the issuance of a permit to an applicant within 30 days
after receipt of an application unless the Director finds one or more of the following to be
true:
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age.
(2) An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in the payment to the City
of taxes, fines or penalties assessed against said applicant or spouse or imposed in
relation to a sexually oriented business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for
issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a question or request for information
on the application form.
(4) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit by
the City to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months, or
residing with a person whose permit to operate a sexually oriented business has
been revoked within the preceding 12 months.
(5) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not been
approved by the Health Department, Fire Department, Building Official, and
Zoning Official as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(6) The permit fee required by this section has not been paid.
(7) An application of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in
compliance with any of the provisions of this section.
B. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is
granted, the expiration date and the address of the sexually oriented business. The permit
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business that it may be easily read at any time.
C. The Health Department, Fire Department, Building Official, and Zoning Official
shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance
within 20 days of receipt of the application by the Director. The certification shall be
promptly presented to the Director.
D. In the event that the Director determines that an applicant is not eligible for a
permit, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within 45
days after the receipt of the application by the Director, provided that the applicant may
request, in writing, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than
10 days at any time before the notice is issued in order to make modifications necessary to
comply with this section.
E. An applicant may appeal the decision of the Director regarding a denial to the
Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the Clerk within 15 days after the applicant
is given notice of the Director’s decision. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
memorandum or other writing setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all
arguments in support thereof. The Director may submit a memorandum in response to the
memorandum filed by the applicant on appeal to the Council. After reviewing such
memoranda, as well as the Director’s written decision, if any, and exhibits submitted to the
Director, the Council shall vote either to uphold or overrule the Director’s decision. Such
vote shall be taken within 21 calendar days after the date on which the Clerk receives the
notice of appeal. However, all parties shall be required to comply with the Director’s
decision during the pendency of the appeal.
7. Fees. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $500.00. This fee is to be
used to pay for the cost of the administration and enforcement of this section.
8. Inspection. An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police Department
or other City or State department or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business
for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
9. Expiration of Permit.
A. Each permit shall expire one year after the date of issuance and may be renewed
only by making application as provided herein. Application for renewal should be made
at least 30 days before the expiration date and when made less than 30 days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be affected.
B. When the Director denies renewal of a permit, the applicant shall not be issued a
permit for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to the denial, the Director finds
that the basis for denial of the renewal permit has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a permit if at least 90 days has elapsed since the date the denial became
final.
10. Suspension. The Director shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if it is
determined that the permittee or an employee of a permittee has:
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this section.
B. Become impaired or intoxicated through the use of alcoholic beverages or
controlled substances while on the sexually oriented business premises.
C. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as
authorized by this section.
D. Knowingly permitted illegal gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises.
11. Revocation.
A. The Director shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension in subsection 10 occurs
and the permit has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
B. The Director shall also revoke a permit if it is determined that:
(1) A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted
during the application process.
(2) A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale
of controlled substances on the premises.
(3) A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
(4) A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the permittee’s permit was suspended.
(5) A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sexual conduct to
occur in or on the premises.
(6) A permittee is delinquent in the payment to the City or State for any taxes
or fees past due.
(7) The owner or operator of the establishment knowingly allowed a person
under 18 years of age to enter an establishment.
(8) There was a change of owner or operator for which a transfer application
was not filed in a timely manner.
C. When the Director revokes a permit, the revocation shall continue for one year,
and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business permit for one year from
the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Director finds that
the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
permit if at least 90 days has elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
12. Transfer of Permit. A permittee shall not transfer the permit to another, nor shall a
permittee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other
than the address designated in the application.
13. Location Restrictions. Sexually oriented business shall be permitted in any
C-3 zoned commercial district, provided that:
A. The sexually oriented business may not be operated within 2,000 feet of:
(1) A church or synagogue or regular place of religious worship.
(2) A public or private elementary or secondary school.
(3) A boundary of any residential district.
(4) A public park.
(5) A licensed day-care center.
(6) Another sexually oriented business.
(7) Residential lot or residence.
B. A sexually oriented business may not be operated in the same building, structure
or portion thereof, containing another sexually oriented business.
C. For the purpose of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building
or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted,
to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, synagogue, regular place of worship
or public or private elementary or secondary school or to the nearest boundary of an
affected public park, residential district or residential lot, or licensed day-care center.
D. For purposes of paragraph C of this subsection, the distance between any two
sexually oriented business uses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which
each business is located.
14. Nonconforming Uses.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
A. Any business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this section and which is in violation of the configuration requirements with regard to
structure and location contained in this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The
nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed two years,
unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days
or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered
except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented
businesses are within 2,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the
sexually oriented business that was first established and continually operating at a
particular location is the conforming use and the later established business is
nonconforming.
B. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not
rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the
sexually oriented business permit, of a church, synagogue or regular place of religious
worship, public or private elementary school or secondary school, licensed day-care center,
public park, or residential district within 2,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This
provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and does not apply when an
application for a permit is submitted after a permit has expired or has been revoked.
15. Additional Regulation for Adult Motels.
A. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less
than 10 hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as
that term is defined in this section.
B. It is unlawful if a person, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel,
motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business
permit, rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within 10 hours from the time
the room is rented, rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again.
For purposes of paragraph B of this subsection, the term “rent” or “sub-rent” means the act of
permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
16. Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films or Videos. A person who
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which
exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette, or other video reproduction that depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas shall comply with the following requirements:
A. Upon application for a sexually oriented permit, the application shall be
accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location
of one or more manager’s stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and
designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A
manager’s station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or architect’s blueprint shall
not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some
designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of
the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Director may waive the
foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since it was prepared.
B. The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
C. No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may be made
without the prior approval of the Director.
D. It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one
employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at all times that any patron is
present inside the premises.
E. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not
contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there
is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this
subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
F. It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any
agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in
paragraph E remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to paragraph A of this subsection.
G. No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
H. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access to an illumination
of not less than one foot-candle as measured at the floor level.
I. It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any
agents and employees present in the premises, to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
17. Exterior Portions of Sexually Oriented Businesses.
A. It is unlawful for an owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the
merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point outside the
establishment.
B. It is unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow the
exterior portion of the sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or any words,
lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner
except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this section.
C. It is unlawful for the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to allow
exterior portions of the establishment to be painted any color other than a single achromatic
color. This provision shall not apply to a sexually oriented business if the following
conditions are met:
(1) The establishment is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and
(2) The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit
center, including the exterior portions of the business, are painted the same color
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall
architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted
exterior portion of a sexually oriented business.
18. Signage.
A. Notwithstanding any other City ordinance, code or regulation to the contrary, it is
unlawful for the owner or operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person
to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the sexually oriented business other than the
one primary sign and one secondary sign, as provided herein.
B. Primary signs shall have no more than two display surfaces. Each such display
surface shall:
(1) Not contain any flashing lights.
(2) Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape.
(3) Not exceed 75 square feet in area.
(4) Not exceed 10 feet in height or 10 feet in length.
C. Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial
representations in any manner, and may contain only the name of the enterprise.
D. Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of solid color and each such
letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such lettering
on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color.
E. Secondary signs shall have only one display surface. Such display surface shall:
(1) Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape.
(2) Not exceed 20 square feet in area.
(3) Not exceed 5 feet in height and 4 feet in width.
(4) Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise.
F. The provisions of subparagraph (1) of paragraph B and of paragraphs C and D
shall also apply to secondary signs.
19. Persons Younger Than Eighteen Prohibited.
A. It is unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of age to enter or be
on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time that the sexually oriented
business is open for business.
B. It shall be the duty of the operator of each sexually oriented business to ensure that
an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the sexually oriented business at all
times during regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to prohibit any
person under the age of 18 years from entering the sexually oriented business. It shall be
presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 unless such attendant
asked for and was furnished:
(1) A valid operator’s, commercial operator’s, or chauffeur’s driver’s license;
or
(2) A valid personal identification certificate issued by the State reflecting that
such person is 18 years of age or older.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
20. Massages or Baths Administered by Person of Opposite Sex. It is unlawful for any
establishment, regardless of whether it is a public or private facility, to operate a massage salon,
massage parlor or any similar type of business where any physical contact with the recipient of
such services is provided by a person of the opposite sex unless licensed by the State of Iowa.
21. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. The permittee of a sexually oriented
business shall not allow the possession or consumption on premises by any person of any alcoholic
beverage, wine or beer. No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer
on the premises of any sexually oriented business.
22. Notices.
A. Any notice required or permitted to be given by the Director or any other City
office, division, department or other agency under this section to any applicant, operator,
or owner of an establishment may be given either by personal delivery or by certified
United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent
address as specified in the application for the permit, or transfer application that has been
received by the Director, or any notice of address change that has been received by the
Director. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United
States mail. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the
Director shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance to the establishment.
B. Any notice required or permitted to be given to the Director by any person under
this section shall not be deemed given until and unless it is received in the office of the
Director.
C. It is the duty of each owner who is designated on the permit application and each
operator to furnish a notice to the Director in writing of any change of residence or mailing
address.
23. Injunction. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business
without a valid permit or who otherwise violates this section is subject to a suit for injunction as
well as prosecution for criminal violations.
24. Exemptions. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that a person appearing in a
state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated by:
A. A proprietary school licensed by the State of Iowa or a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
B. A private college or university that maintains and operates educational programs
in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely
or partly by taxation.
168.05 SMALL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS. The intent of this section is to balance
the need for clean, renewable energy resources and the necessity to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of the community. The City finds these regulations are necessary to ensure that Small Wind Energy
Conversion Systems are appropriately designed, sited and installed.
1. Definitions. The following terms are defined for use in this section.
A. “Height, total system” means the height above grade of the system, including the
generating unit and the highest vertical extension of any blades or rotors.
B. “Lot” (or parcel) means any legally established lot or parcel which contains or
could contain a permitted or permitted conditional principal use as provided by Chapter
166 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
C. “Off grid” means an electrical system that is not connected to utility distribution
and transmission facilities or to any building or structure that is connected.
D. “Shadow flicker” means changing light intensity caused by sunlight through the
moving blades of a wind energy conversion system.
E. “Small Wind Energy Conversion System” (SWECS) means a wind energy
conversion system that has a nameplate rated capacity of up to 15 kilowatts for residential
uses and districts and up to 100 kilowatts for commercial and industrial districts, and which
is incidental and subordinate to a principal use on the same parcel. A system is considered
a SWECS only if it supplies electrical power solely for use by the owner on the site, except
that when a parcel on which the system is installed also receives electrical power supplied
by a utility company, excess electrical power generated and not presently needed by the
owner for on-site use may be used by the utility company in accordance with Section 199,
Chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code, as amended from time to time.
F. “Small Wind Energy Conversion System, free standing” means a SWECS that is
elevated by means of a monopole tower only and is not located on another supporting
structure except that the tower shall have an appropriately constructed concrete base.
Guyed, lattice, or other non-monopole style towers do not meet this definition.
G. “Small Wind Energy Conversion System, horizontal axis” means a SWECS that
has blades that rotate through a horizontal plane.
H. “Small Wind Energy Conversion System, building mounted” means a SWECS that
is securely fastened to any portion of a principal building in order to achieve desired
elevation, whether attached directly to the principal building or attached to a tower
structure, which is in turn fastened to the principal building.
I. “Small Wind Energy Conversion System, vertical axis” means a SWECS that has
blades that rotate through a vertical plane.
J. “Tower” means the vertical component of a Wind Energy Conversion System that
elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
K. “Wind Energy Conversion System” (WECS) means an aggregation of parts,
including the foundation, base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guy wires and
accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc., in such
configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or electrical
energy, e.g., wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine.
L. “Wind turbine generator” means the component of a wind energy conversion
system that transforms mechanical energy from the wind into electrical energy.
2. Use. A Small Wind Energy Conversion System shall be allowed only as an accessory
conditional use to a permitted principal use or approved permitted principal use.
3. Zoning. A SWECS may be allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts, subject to the
provisions contained in this chapter and elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances.
4. Permit Required. It is unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter, or locate any SWECS
within the City, unless a permitted conditional use permit has been obtained from the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The conditional use permit may be revoked by resolution of the City Council,
upon recommendation of the Commission, any time the approved system does not comply with the
rules set forth in this chapter and the conditions imposed by the Commission and Council. The
owner/operator of the SWECS must also obtain any other permits required by other Federal, State
and local agencies/departments prior to constructing the system.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
5. Number of Systems Per Zoning Lot.
A. Residential Use. No SWECS may be placed on any parcel or lot zoned for
residential use.
B. Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and Agricultural Use. No more than one
freestanding SWECS may be placed on any parcel or lot with a commercial, industrial, or
institutional use that is taller than the tallest existing principal building located on said
parcel or lot. Additional freestanding Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems that
conform to setback requirements contained herein and which are no taller than the tallest
existing principal building located on said parcel or lot may be allowed. Additional
building mounted Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems may be allowed within the
parameters herein below. The generating capacity of aggregated Small Wind Energy
Conversion Systems shall not exceed the anticipated energy needs for on-site consumption.
C. Mixed Use. Any building containing both residential and commercial uses or
described as a “mixed use” building shall be considered to be a commercial use for the
purposes of this section.
D. All Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems must be located a minimum of 500
feet from any residential zoning or use.
6. Tower. Only monopole towers shall be permitted for freestanding Small Wind Energy
Conversion Systems. Lattice, guyed, or towers of any other type shall not be considered to be in
compliance with this section.
7. Color. Freestanding Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems shall be a neutral color such
as white, sky blue, or light gray. A building mounted SWECS shall match the color of the building
on which it is mounted. Other colors may be allowed at the discretion of the Commission and
Council. The surface shall be non-reflective.
8. Lighting. No lights shall be installed on the tower, unless required to meet FAA
regulations.
9. Signage. No signage or advertising of any kind shall be permitted on the tower or any
associated structures.
10. Climbing Apparatus. The tower must be designed to prevent climbing within the first ten
feet.
11. Maintenance. Facilities shall be well maintained in accordance with manufacturer’s
specifications and shall remain in an operational condition that poses no potential safety hazard or
which is in violation of any provisions contained within this section or elsewhere within this Code
of Ordinances.
12. Displacement of Parking Prohibited. The location of the SWECS shall not result in the net
loss of required parking as specified elsewhere in the City zoning code.
13. Utility Notification. The City shall notify the utility of receipt of an application to install
an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this
notification requirement.
14. Interconnection. The SWECS, if not off-grid, shall meet the requirements for
interconnection and operation as set forth by the utility and the Iowa Utilities Board. No permit of
any kind shall be issued until the City has been provided with a copy of an executed interconnection
agreement. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
15. Restriction on Use of Electricity Generated. A SWECS shall be used exclusively to supply
electrical power to the owner for on-site consumption, except that excess electrical power generated
by the SWECS and not presently needed for use by the owner may be used by the utility company
in accordance with Section 199, Chapter 15.11(5) of the Iowa Administrative Code, as may be
subsequently amended.
16. Noise. A SWECS shall be designed, installed, and operated so that the noise generated
does not exceed the maximum noise levels established elsewhere in this Code of Ordinances.
17. Shadow Flicker. No SWECS shall be installed and operated so to cause a shadow flicker
to fall on or in any existing residential structure.
18. Safety Controls. Each SWECS shall be equipped with both an automatic and manual
braking, governing, or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation, over-speeding, and
excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor blades, or turbine components. Said automatic
braking system shall also be capable of stopping turbine rotation in the event of a power outage so
as to prevent back feeding of the grid.
19. Shut Off. A clearly marked and easily accessible shut off for the wind turbine will be
required, as determined by the Building Official.
20. Electromagnetic Interference. All Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems shall be
designed and constructed so as not to cause radio and television interference. If it is determined
that the SWECS is causing electromagnetic interference, the owner/operator shall take the
necessary corrective action to eliminate this interference including relocation or removal of the
facilities, subject to the approval of the appropriate City authority. A permit granting a SWECS
may be revoked if electromagnetic interference from the SWECS becomes evident.
21. Wind Access Easements. The enactment of this chapter does not constitute the granting of
an easement by the City. The SWECS owner/operator shall have the sole responsibility to acquire
any covenants, easements, or similar documentation to assure and/or protect access to sufficient
wind as may or may not be necessary to operate the SWECS.
22. Insurance. The owner/operator of a SWECS must demonstrate and maintain liability
insurance of not less than $1,000,000 coverage.
23. Engineer Certification. Applications for any SWECS shall be accompanied by standard
drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and footings. An engineering
analysis of all components of the SWECS showing compliance with the applicable regulations and
certified by an Iowa licensed professional engineer shall also be submitted.
24. Installation. Installation must be done according to manufacturer’s recommendations. All
wiring and electrical work must be completed according to the applicable building and electric
codes. All electrical components must meet code recognized test standards.
25. Removal. If the SWECS remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a continuous period of
six months, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned. The SWECS owner/operator shall
remove the abandoned system at said owner/operator’s expense. Removal of the system includes
the entire structure, transmission equipment and fencing from the property excluding foundations.
Non-function or lack of operation may be proven by reports from the interconnected utility. For
off-grid systems the City shall have the right to enter the property at its sole discretion to determine
if the off-grid system is generating power. Such generation may be proven by use of an amp meter.
The SWECS owner/operator and successors shall make available to the City Administrator all
reports to and from the purchaser of energy from the SWECS if requested. If removal of towers
and appurtenant facilities is required, the City Administrator shall notify the SWECS
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
owner/operator. Removal shall be completed within six months after written notice to remove has
been provided to the owner/operator by the City.
26. Right of Entrance. As a condition of approval of a conditional use permit, an applicant
seeking to install a SWECS shall be required to sign a petition and waiver agreement, which shall
be recorded and run with the land, granting permission to the City to enter the property to remove
the SWECS pursuant to the terms of approval and to assure compliance with the other conditions
set forth in the permit. Removal shall be at the expense of the owner/operator and the cost may be
assessed against the property.
27. Feasibility Study. It is required that a feasibility study be made of any site prior to installing
a wind turbine. The feasibility study shall include measuring actual wind speeds at the proposed
turbine site for at least three months. If the site is not feasible, no SWECS will be permitted.
28. Bulk Regulations.
A. Setbacks.
(1) The minimum distance between any freestanding SWECS and any
property line shall be a distance that is equivalent to 150 percent of the total system
height. The setback shall be measured from the property line to the point of the
SWECS closest to the property line.
(2) The required setback for any building mounted SWECS shall be equal to
the required setback of the principal building to which the SWECS is to be attached
at such time that the application to install a building mounted SWECS is received
by the City.
B. Maximum Height. Height shall be measured from the ground to the top of the
tower, including the wind turbine generator and blades.
(1) For lots of more than one and fewer than three acres, the maximum height
shall be 65 feet.
(2) For lots of three to seven acres, the maximum height shall be 80 feet.
(3) For lots of more than seven acres, the maximum height shall be 100 feet.
(4) A building mounted SWECS may be a maximum of 10 feet higher than
the point of attachment to the building on which it is attached.
C. Minimum Lot Size.
(1) The minimum lot size for a freestanding SWECS shall be one acre.
(2) The minimum lot size for a building mounted SWECS shall be one acre
for any building mounted SWECS to be mounted on a building of less than five
stories in height.
(3) There shall be no minimum lot size for a building mounted SWECS to be
mounted on buildings of five or more stories in height.
D. Clearance of Blade. No portion of a horizontal axis SWECS blade shall extend
within 30 feet of the ground. No portion of a vertical axis SWECS shall extend within 10
feet of the ground. No blades may extend over parking areas, driveways or sidewalks. No
blade may extend within 20 feet of the nearest tree, structure, or above ground utility
facilities.
E. Location.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
(1) No part of a SWECS shall be located within or over drainage, utility or
other established easements.
(2) A freestanding SWECS shall be located entirely in the rear yard.
(3) A SWECS shall be located in compliance with the guidelines of applicable
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations, as amended from time to
time.
(4) No SWECS shall be constructed so that any part thereof can extend within
20 feet laterally of an overhead electrical power line (excluding secondary
electrical service lines or service drops). The setback from underground electric
distribution lines shall be at least five feet.
(5) Building mounted Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems are prohibited
unless the owner has obtained a written analysis from an Iowa-licensed structural
engineer determining that installation of a SWECS will not cause damage to the
structure and that the SWECS can be securely fastened so as to not pose a hazard
caused by detaching from the structure.
29. Application Required. Application for a SWECS shall be made on forms provided by the
City. No action may be taken regarding requests for Small Wind Energy Conversion Systems until
completed applications have been filed and fees paid.
168.06 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
1. A special use permit shall not authorize a use that does not comply with the minimum
requirements of the district in which it is located.
2. A special use permit shall not authorize a use which is in conflict with any ordinance of
the City or law of the State regulating nuisances, pollution, or hazardous occupation.
3. Required Site Plan and Statistical Information. The request for authorization of an
unclassified or special use shall be accompanied by a site plan in compliance with Section 165.06.
In addition, the following information shall be required:
A. A vicinity map illustrating the approximate location of existing buildings and all
existing land use within 500 feet of the proposed site boundaries.
B. As the uses herein are classified as possessing characteristics of unique and special
form making automatic inclusion in the various districts impractical, a brief technical
report, prepared by a qualified professional person, which shall outline and illustrate the
provisions and methods for the abatement of undesirable effects on the public, which are
peculiar to the use, such as but not limited to the following:
(1) Traffic density and control.
(2) Excessive lighting.
(3) Noise level.
(4) Hazardous conditions to spectators, participants, trespassers or
neighboring uses.
(5) Pollution of the air, water or earth.
168.07 RESTRICTIONS. Authorization for a special use permit shall not be granted for failure to
comply with the following conditions:
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
1. Buildings involving the large assemblages of people shall not be located less than 300 feet
from any existing dwelling site.
2. Uses involving nuisances such as noise, vibration, pollution, etc., shall not be located less
than 500 feet from an R District or less than 1,000 feet from an existing dwelling.
3. Uses involving the extensive use of exterior lighting shall not be located in a vicinity where
such lighting may be hazardous to air or ground traffic, and such uses shall not be located less than
a distance required to reduce the light intensity to normal residential street lighting intensity at any
R District boundary.
4. Uses of a utility or public service which are located within an R or C District, for the benefit
of improved public service, shall be screened from public view by buffer walls or effective
landscape screening.
168.08 TEMPORARY USES. Notwithstanding other provisions of the Zoning Regulations, the
Council may, without notice, public hearing, or other procedure described in this chapter, for the issuance
of a special permit, issue a special permit authorizing the operation of a charitable or other nonprofit
sponsored carnival for a period not to exceed seven (7) days.
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
ILLUSTRATION OF MOBILE HOME PARK REQUIREMENTS
CHAPTER 168 ZONING REGULATIONS –
UNCLASSIFIED AND SPECIAL USES
[The next page is 1101]
CHAPTER 169
ZONING REGULATIONS – EXCEPTIONS,
MODIFICATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
169.01 Structures Permitted Above Height Limit 169.04 Other Exceptions to Yard Requirements
169.02 Double Frontage Lots 169.05 Lots Platted Prior to 1948
169.03 Rear Yards Adjacent to Alleys
169.01 STRUCTURES PERMITTED ABOVE HEIGHT LIMIT. The building height limitations of
the Zoning Regulations shall be modified as follows:
1. Chimneys, cooling towers, fire towers, grain elevators, monuments, penthouses, stacks,
stage towers or scenery lofts, tanks, silos, water towers, ornamental towers and spires, radio or
television towers or necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected to a height in accordance
with existing or hereafter adopted ordinances.
2. Public, semi-public or private service buildings, hospitals, sanatoriums or schools when
permitted in a district may be erected to a greater height than otherwise permitted in the district if
the building is set back from each property line at least one foot in addition to the minimum yard
requirements for every two feet of additional building height above the height limit otherwise
provided in the district in which the building is constructed.
169.02 DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS. Buildings on double frontage lots extending through from
street to street shall be buffered from the rear street by a buffer wall or planting screen and access to the
rear street shall be prohibited.
169.03 REAR YARDS ADJACENT TO ALLEYS. In computing the depth of a rear yard where the
rear yard opens on any alley, one-half of the alley width may be included as a portion of the rear yard.
169.04 OTHER EXCEPTIONS TO YARD REQUIREMENTS. Every part of a required yard shall
be open to the sky unobstructed with any building or structure, except for a permitted accessory building in
a rear yard, and except for ordinary projects not to exceed 24 inches including roof overhang.
169.05 LOTS PLATTED PRIOR TO 1948. The purpose of this section is to permit the building of
single-family dwellings within platted areas upon lots platted prior to the year 1948, so as to utilize existing
lots.
1. Lot Size. Single-family dwellings shall be permitted built upon lots of a size greater than
4,800 square feet, with a setback to conform to existing buildings, under the condition that
adjoining lots are occupied by residences or other buildings and the lots under construction cannot
be expanded so as to include additional land by reason of existing buildings.
2. Setbacks and Side Yards. It is required that the setback shall be in conformity to existing
residences and that the side yard shall be not less than 7½ feet. It is further required that there be
provided upon said lot at least one off-street parking space.
CHAPTER 170
ZONING REGULATIONS – ADMINISTRATION
AND ENFORCEMENT
170.01 Administration and Enforcement 170.05 Compliance with Applications, Plans and Permits
170.02 Building Permits Required 170.06 Duties of Administrative Officer, Board, Council
170.03 Application for Building Permit and Courts in Matters of Appeal
170.04 Certificates of Zoning Compliance for New, Altered
or Nonconforming Uses
170.01 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. The provisions of these Zoning Regulations
shall be enforced and administered by the Zoning Administrator. If the Zoning Administrator shall find
that any of the provisions of the Zoning Regulations are being violated, said official shall notify in writing
the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action
necessary to correct it. The Zoning Administrator shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land,
buildings, or structures, removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations or structural
changes thereof, discontinuance of any illegal work being done, or shall take any other action authorized
by the Zoning Regulations to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
170.02 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED. Buildings or other structures shall not be erected, moved,
added to or structurally altered without a permit therefor, issued by the Zoning Administrator. Building
permits shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations or upon written
order from the Board of Adjustment. Fees for building permits shall be as provided by ordinance.
170.03 APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT. All applications for building permits shall be
accompanied by a plan showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon, and the location
and dimensions of the existing or proposed building or alteration. The application shall include existing or
proposed building or alterations, existing or proposed uses of the building and land, the number of families,
housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate, conditions existing on the lot,
and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement
of the Zoning Regulations.
170.04 CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE FOR NEW, ALTERED OR
NONCONFORMING USES. It is unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any
building or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted or wholly or
partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been
issued by the Zoning Administrator, stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the
requirements of the Zoning Regulations. Certificates of zoning compliance shall be applied for
coincidentally with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten (10) days after the
lawful erection or alteration of the building is completed in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning
Regulations. A temporary certificate of zoning compliance may be issued by the Zoning Administrator for
a period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its
completion, provided that such temporary certificate may require such conditions and safeguards as will
protect the safety of the occupants and the public. The Zoning Administrator shall maintain a record of all
certificates of zoning compliance and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person. Failure to
obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of the Zoning Regulations.
170.05 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICATIONS, PLANS AND PERMITS. Building permits or
certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and specifications, approved by the Zoning
Administrator, authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Any variation in the use, arrangement, or
construction from the submitted plans shall be deemed a violation.
170.06 DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER, BOARD, COUNCIL AND COURTS IN
MATTERS OF APPEAL. All questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the
Zoning Administrator and such questions shall be presented to the Board only on appeal from the decision
of the Zoning Administrator, and recourse from the decisions of the Board shall be to the courts as provided
by law. The duties of the Council in connection with the Zoning Regulations shall not include hearing and
deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such
questions shall be as stated herein. The Council, under the Zoning Regulations, shall have only the duties
of:
1. Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or repeal of the Zoning
Regulations as provided by law.
2. Considering applications for special permits for special uses as specified in Section 168.03.
3. Considering applications for uses listed in the M Districts.
CHAPTER 171
ZONING REGULATIONS – BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
171.01 Board Created 171.06 Powers – Special Exceptions
171.02 Meetings 171.07 Powers – Variances
171.03 Appeals 171.08 Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
171.04 Hearings; Notice 171.09 Appeals from Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
171.05 Powers – Administrative Review
171.01 BOARD CREATED. A Board of Adjustment is hereby established, which shall consist of seven
members. Five members shall be residents of the City, appointed by the Council. Two members shall be
residents of the area outside the City over which the zoning jurisdiction of the City has been extended,
appointed by the Board of Supervisors of the County in which such extended area is located. The term of
office of the members of the Board shall be for five years, on a staggered basis.
171.02 MEETINGS. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson, and at such
other times as the Board may determine. The Chairperson or, in the absence of the Chairperson, the acting
Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall
be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each question
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public
record. The presence of four members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum.
171.03 APPEALS. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer,
department, Board or Bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal
shall be taken within ten days by filing with the Zoning Administrator and with the Board a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Board after notice
of appeal shall have been filed with such officer that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would
in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board
or by a court of record on application on notice to the Zoning Administrator and on due cause shown. The
fee for appeal is $10.00.
171.04 HEARINGS; NOTICE. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing on the appeal,
give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a
reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
171.05 POWERS – ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW. The Board shall have power to hear and decide
appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Zoning Administrator in the enforcement of the Zoning Regulations.
171.06 POWERS – SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS. The Board shall have power to permit the following
exceptions to the district regulations set forth in the Zoning Regulations, subject to the requirements of this
section:
1. To permit erection and use of a building or the use of premises or vary the height and the
regulations in any location for a public service corporation for public utility purposes or for
purposes of public communication, which the Board determines is reasonably necessary for the
public convenience or welfare.
2. To permit the extension of a use into a district where it would otherwise be prohibited in a
case where a district boundary line is so located that a lot or plot is in more than one district.
3. To hear and decide only such other special exceptions as the Board is specifically
authorized to pass on by the terms of these Zoning Regulations, to decide such questions as are
involved in determining whether special exceptions should be granted and to grant special
exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under the Zoning Regulations or
to deny special exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of the Zoning
Regulations. A special exception shall not be granted by the Board unless and until:
A. A written application for special exception is submitted, indicating the applicable
chapter or section of the Zoning Regulations under which the special exception is sought
and stating the grounds on which it is requested.
B. Notice of public hearing shall be given in advance of public hearing. The owner
of the property for which special exception is sought or any agent and any other affected
property owners shall be notified by mail. Notice of hearing may also be posted on the
property for which special exception is sought.
C. The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or
attorney.
D. The Board shall make a finding that it is empowered under the Zoning Regulations
described in the application to grant the special exception, and that the granting of the
special exception will not adversely affect the public interest.
In granting any special exception, the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards
in conformity with the Zoning Regulations. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms under which the special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation
of the Zoning Regulations. The Board may prescribe a time limit within which the action for which
the special exception is required shall be begun or completed, or both. Failure to begin or complete,
or both, such action within the time limits set, shall void the special exception.
171.07 POWERS – VARIANCES. The Board shall have power to authorize upon appeal in specific
cases such variance from the terms of the Zoning Regulations as will not be contrary to the public interest
where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Zoning Regulations would
result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of the Zoning Regulations shall not be granted
by the Board unless and until:
1. A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating that:
A. Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land,
structure, or building involved, and which are not applicable to other lands, structures or
buildings, in the same district.
B. Literal interpretation of the provisions of the Zoning Regulations would deprive
the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the
terms of the Zoning Regulations.
C. The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the
applicant.
D. Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special
privilege that is denied by the Zoning Regulations to other lands, structures, or buildings
in the same district.
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no
permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the
issuance of a variance.
2. Notice of public hearing shall be given in advance of the public hearing. The owner of the
property for which the variance is sought or any agent and any other affected property owners shall
be notified by mail.
3. The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney.
4. The Board shall make findings that the requirements of this chapter have been met by the
applicant for a variance.
5. The Board shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify
the granting of the variance.
6. The Board shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of the Zoning Regulations and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
In granting any variance, the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with
the Zoning Regulations. Violations of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under
which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the Zoning Regulations. Under no
circumstances shall the Board grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of the Zoning
Regulations in the district involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of the
Zoning Regulations in said district.
171.08 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. In exercising the above mentioned
powers, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of the Zoning Regulations,
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and
to that end shall have powers of the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring
vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant upon any matter upon
which it is required to pass under the Zoning Regulations or to effect any variation in the application of the
Zoning Regulations.
171.09 APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. Any taxpayer or
any officer, department, Board or Bureau of the City or any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved
by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting
forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition
shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board. The
court may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the decision brought up for review.
CHAPTER 172
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
172.01 Declaration of Intent 172.06 Side Yards
172.02 Principal Permitted Uses 172.07 Required Documents
172.03 Procedure 172.08 Commencement
172.04 Design Standards 172.09 Completion
172.05 Density Requirements
172.01 DECLARATION OF INTENT. Planned Unit Development is intended to encourage a more
innovative approach to the development of land by permitting flexibility and design, placement of
buildings, and the use of open spaces, while at the same time retaining substantially the same population
density and area coverage permitted in the district in which the project is located.
172.02 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES. In a Planned Unit Development only the following uses
are permitted:
1. Single-family, two-family and multiple dwellings.
2. Other neighborhood uses such as schools, parks and churches.
3. Neighborhood retail uses and those uses permitted in the C-1 Commercial District may be
specifically and selectively authorized as to type and size only when integrated by design as an
accessory element of the project, provided the development is planned for more than 150 dwelling
units.
172.03 PROCEDURE.
1. The owner or owners of any tract of land of sufficient area to permit construction of at least
24 dwelling units may petition the City Council for a change to the PUD Zoning District
classification. The petition shall be accompanied by evidence that the proposed development is
compatible with the surrounding area, to maintain any common ground included within the
development, evidence of the feasibility of providing adequate storm and surface water drainage
and sanitary sewer for the proposed development, evidence that the developer is capable of
successfully completing the proposed development, and three (3) copies of the preliminary plan of
development.
2. The petition, accompanying evidence, and preliminary plan shall be referred to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for study and report. The Commission shall review the
conformity of the proposed development with the standards of the comprehensive plan and with
recognized principles of civic design, land use planning, and landscape architecture. After public
hearing, the Commission may approve or disapprove the preliminary plan and request for rezoning
as submitted or require that the petitioner amend the plan to preserve the intent and purpose of this
chapter to promote public health, safety, and general welfare.
3. The petition and preliminary plan as approved by the Commission, along with the
Commission’s recommendations on the request for rezoning, shall then be referred to the City
Council. The Council may approve or disapprove the preliminary plan and request for rezoning as
reported or may require such changes in the plan as are necessary to preserve the intent and purpose
of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and general welfare.
4. If the Council approves the preliminary plan and request for rezoning, the applicant shall
submit, within 270 days (or such longer period as may be approved by the Council after
recommendation by the Commission), to the Commission three copies of the final plan of not less
than one stage of the proposed development.
5. The final development plan shall be referred to the Council. The Council shall review and
approve it if it is in substantial compliance with the preliminary development plan.
172.04 DESIGN STANDARDS. The standards of design herein contained are intended only as
minimum requirements. Lot area, yard, and height requirements in this district shall be as set forth in this
chapter, and shall prevail over conflicting requirements of the Zoning Regulations.
1. Buildings shall only be used for residential purposes; occupant garages, occupant storage
space and similar accessory uses; non-commercial recreational facilities, community activities,
including churches and schools; and retail type convenience facilities designed to primarily serve
occupants of the development.
2. All dedicated street, sanitary sewer and storm sewer facilities shall be approved by the City
Engineer.
3. No building permit for any building or other structure within the development shall be
issued until the final development plan is approved by the City Council and filed with the City
Clerk.
4. Any land gained within the development because of the reduction in lot sizes below
minimum requirements shall be placed in common land to be dedicated to the City or managed by
a Homeowners Association. The dedication of land to the City shall be referred to the Park Board
for recommendation and report.
5. The parking requirements of the Zoning Regulations shall apply to all developments.
6. Each proposed stage of the development shall comply with the density requirements for
the zoning district in which it is located.
7. Developments or portions thereof which are being developed for sale or resale shall contain
common land in area totaling not less than 25% of the net development area.
172.05 DENSITY REQUIREMENTS. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in a Planned
Unit Development shall be determined by dividing the net development area by the maximum densities
allowed in each district regulation. Net development area shall be determined by subtracting from the gross
development area any area set aside for churches and schools and area proposed for streets. If the
development contains two or more different zoning district classifications, the number of dwelling units
permitted shall be the total of the number permitted in each district but the dwelling units may be located
within the development irrespective of the conventional zoning district classification of any particular area.
172.06 SIDE YARDS. The minimum width required for a side yard in conjunction with a dwelling built
in a Planned Unit Development shall be five feet.
172.07 REQUIRED DOCUMENTS. The following documents are minimum requirements, and
auxiliary drawings, architectural models, and research documentation are encouraged to present a concise
explanation of the development intended.
1. Preliminary Plan.
A. A site analysis showing a review of topography, natural drainage patterns, existing
vegetation, sanitary sewer and water service, and major street connections.
B. A schematic plan at one inch = 50 feet minimum showing location of:
(1) Buildings with the height and exterior design of typical structures and the
number of dwelling units in each.
(2) Parking areas.
(3) Access drives and sidewalks.
(4) Streets abutting or within the proposed development.
(5) Required peripheral yards.
(6) Common land, recreation areas and parks.
(7) Utility extensions.
(8) Development stages and timing.
2. Information Required. The preliminary site plan required shall include the following
information concerning the proposed development:
A. Names of all persons having an interest in the property, legal description of
property, point of compass, scale and date.
B. Applicant’s name, planned land use and present zoning location and names of
adjoining subdivisions, the numbers of the adjoining lots therein and the names and
addresses of adjoining landowners.
C. If the applicant is other than the legal owner, the applicant’s interest shall be stated.
D. Name and address of engineer, architect, landscape architect, or urban planner
preparing the Planned Unit Development.
3. Final Development Plan.
A. A development plan at one inch = 50 feet showing location and dimensions of:
(1) Buildings with the height and exterior design of typical structures and the
number of dwelling units in each.
(2) Parking areas.
(3) Access drives and sidewalks.
(4) Streets abutting or within the proposed development.
(5) Landscaping and plant materials, its size at time of installation and at
maturity.
(6) All proposed walls and fences.
(7) Required peripheral yards.
(8) Common land, recreation areas, and parks.
(9) Existing and proposed utilities and public easements.
(10) Proposed signs and their design, area, and dimensions.
(11) Lighting facilities and their type and design.
(12) Storm and sanitary sewer design.
(13) Development stages and timing.
B. If the proposed development includes common land that will not be dedicated to
the City, and the proposed development will not be held in single ownership, proposed
bylaws of a Homeowners Association fully defining the functions, responsibilities and
operating procedures of the association. The proposed by-laws shall include but not be
limited to provisions:
(1) Automatically extending membership in the association to all owners of
dwelling units within the development.
(2) Limiting the uses of the common property to those permitted by the final
development plan.
(3) Granting to each owner of a dwelling unit within the development the right
to the use and enjoyment of the common property.
(4) Placing the responsibility for operation and maintenance of the common
property in the association.
(5) Giving every owner of a dwelling unit voting rights in the association.
(6) If the development will combine rental and for sale dwelling units, stating
the relationship between the renters and the Homeowners Association and the
rights renters shall have to the use of the common land.
C. Performance bond or bonds approved by the City Council in an amount not less
than the estimated cost of the bonded improvements, which bonds shall assure the City that
the dedicated public streets and utilities, including sewers, located therein and other
common development facilities in each stage shall be completed by the developer within
the time specified on the final development plan.
D. Covenant to run with the land, in favor of the City and all persons having a
possessory interest in any portion of the development premises, that the owner or owners
of the land or their successors in interest will maintain all interior streets, parking areas,
sidewalks, parks and plantings which have not been dedicated to the City in accordance
with the ordinances of the City and the final development plan as approved by the City
Council, which shall be recorded in the office of the Warren County Recorder.
172.08 COMMENCEMENT. The Council may condition the approval of the final development plan
upon the developer’s commencing construction of the development within one year after Council approval
of the plan. Failure to meet this requirement shall be deemed sufficient cause for the Council, in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, to rezone the subject property to the zoning classification effective at
the time of the original submission of the petition and preliminary plan, unless an extension is approved by
the Council for due cause shown after recommendation by the Commission.
172.09 COMPLETION. The Council may make the approval of the development plan contingent upon
the completion of construction and improvements within a reasonable period of time, provided, however
that in the determination of such period, the Council shall consider the scope and magnitude of the
development and any schedule of construction and improvements submitted by the developer. Failure to
complete all construction and improvements within said period of time shall be deemed sufficient cause for
the Council to rezone the subject property to the classification effective at the time of the original
submission of the petition and preliminary plan, unless an extension is approved by the Council for due
cause shown after recommendation by the Commission. Any change in the final development plan or
required Homeowners Association bylaws proposed after the Council has approved the plan shall be
resubmitted and considered in the same manner as the original development plan.
CHAPTER 180
SUBDIVISION CONTROL
180.01 Title 180.08 Preliminary Plat Requirements
180.02 Jurisdiction 180.09 Final Plat Requirements
180.03 Definitions 180.10 Fees
180.04 Procedure 180.11 Variations and Exceptions
180.05 Subdivision Design Standards 180.12 Enforcement
180.06 Street Construction 180.13 Changes and Amendments
180.07 Improvements
180.01 TITLE. This chapter may be known as the “Subdivision Regulations of Carlisle, Iowa.”
180.02 JURISDICTION. This chapter governs the review of subdivision plats and or plats of survey
for divisions of all lands within the corporate limits of the City, and within two miles adjacent to said
corporate limits. The authority to review subdivision plats or plats of survey within two miles of the
corporate limits of the City is established pursuant to Section 354.9, Subsections 1 and 2, of the Code of
Iowa.
180.03 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are herein defined.
1. “Architect” means a registered architect authorized to practice architecture as defined by
the laws of the State.
2. “Arterial thoroughfare” means a street used primarily for fast, intense volume, mixed
vehicular, through traffic.
3. “Block” means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets,
highways, parks, railroad or similar fixed land division and/or the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision.
4. “Building line” means setback lines and outlines the buildable area of a lot which remains
after the required yard areas have been provided for. Building lines shall be shown on all lots
intended for residential use of any character by ordinance. Such building lines shall not be less
than required by the Zoning Regulations. Where the subdivided area is not under zoning control,
the Commission shall require building lines in accordance with the needs of each division.
5. “City Inspector” means the person appointed by the City Council to act in that capacity.
6. “Collector streets” means those streets that carry traffic from minor streets to the major
system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential
development and streets for circulation within such a development.
7. “Commission” means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
8. “Cul-de-sac” means a short, minor street, having one end open to motor traffic, the other
end being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
9. “Design Standards Manual” means the Des Moines Metropolitan Design Standards
Manual.
10. “District” means a section or sections of land area depicted on the Official Zoning Map
within which the regulations governing the use of buildings and premises or the height of
buildings and area of sites are uniform.
11. “Easement” means a grant by the property owner of the use, for a specific purpose, of a
strip of land by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons, and within the
limits of which the owner of the fee shall not erect any permanent structures but shall have the
right to make any other use of the land subject to such easement which is not inconsistent with
the rights of the grantee. Public utilities shall have the right to trim or remove trees which
interfere with the use of such easements.
12. “Engineer” means a registered engineer authorized to practice civil engineering as
defined by the laws of the State.
13. “Local street” means a street used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
14. “Lot” means a portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development.
15. “Maintenance bonds” means maintenance bonds issued by a responsible surety company
and are required as follows:
Streets ........................................ 4-year maintenance bond
Sanitary sewers .......................... 2-year maintenance bond
Storm sewers .............................. 2-year maintenance bond
Water mains .............................. 2-year maintenance bond
Sidewalks ................................... 4-year maintenance bond
The amount of the maintenance bond shall be 100% of the construction cost of the improvement
and shall be determined by the City Engineer.
16. “Marginal access street” means a street that is parallel to and adjacent to a major
thoroughfare or highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from
through traffic, while limiting access to the major thoroughfare.
17. “Plat” means a map, drawing, or chart on which the subdivider’s plan of the subdivision is
presented and which the subdivider submits for approval and intends to record in final form.
18. “Roadway” means that portion of the street available for vehicular traffic, and where curbs
are laid, the portion from back to back of curbs.
19. “Street” means the entire width between the property lines bounded every way of whatever
nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for the purpose
of vehicular traffic and others, and whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
throughway, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle or however otherwise
designated.
20. “Subdivider” means any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
estate, trust, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide
land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined herein and includes any agent of the subdivider.
21. “Subdivision” means a division of land into three or more lots or other divisions of land
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or building development, or
any change in existing street lines or public easements. The term, when appropriate to the context,
relates to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided, or the resubdivision of land
previously divided or platted into lots or other divisions of land or, if a new street is involved, any
division of land.
22. “Surveyor” means a registered surveyor authorized to practice surveying as defined by the
Registration Act of the State.
180.04 PROCEDURE. In obtaining final approval of a proposed subdivision by the Commission and
the Council, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat and a final plat in accordance with the following
order and procedure:
1. The subdivider shall prepare a sketch plan for review by the City prior to preparation of a
preliminary and final plat. The sketch plan shall show at minimum the proposed development to
include lot size, street, general utility layout, acreage, population density, and intended use.
2. The subdivider shall prepare and file with the City Clerk four copies of a preliminary plat
conforming in detail to the requirements set forth in this chapter. Six copies of the preliminary plat
shall be submitted for subdivisions outside the corporate limits of the City.
3. The City Clerk shall forthwith refer two copies to the City Inspector and two copies to the
Commission. In the case of a subdivision outside the corporate limits of the City, the Clerk shall
refer two copies of the preliminary plat to the County Board of Supervisors and keep the County
Engineer advised of the status of the plat and actions taken thereon.
4. The City Inspector shall carefully examine said plat as to its compliance with the laws and
ordinances of the City, the existing street system, and good engineering practices and shall as soon
as possible submit findings in duplicate to the Commission.
5. After receiving the City Inspector’s report, the Commission shall study the preliminary plat
and other material for conformity thereof to these regulations. The Commission may confer with
the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of such improvements to be
made by the subdivider. The Commission, in joint session with the Council, shall approve or reject
such plan within 45 days after the date of submission thereof to the Commission. If the Commission
does not act within 45 days, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be approved, provided,
however, that the subdivider may agree to an extension of the time for a period not to exceed 60
days. The approval of the preliminary plat shall be null and void unless the final plat is presented
to the Commission within 180 days after date of approval.
6. Before approving a preliminary plat, the Commission may in its discretion hold a public
hearing on the proposed plat, notice of which shall be given by publication in a local newspaper of
general distribution or by posting notices on the tract or by sending notices to affected property
owners by mail. Such notice shall be given not less than four or more than 20 days prior to the
public hearing.
7. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Commission, the subdivider may proceed
with the preparation of the final plat together with any detailed construction drawings and
specifications for the improvements required under this chapter.
8. Before submitting the final plat to the Commission for approval, the subdivider shall
furnish all plans and information as listed in Section 180.09 of this chapter necessary for the
detailed engineering consideration of the improvements required under this chapter and obtain
approval of the City Inspector, which shall be endorsed thereon.
9. The final plat shall be filed in duplicate together with a certificate from the City Inspector
that the final plat is substantially in accord with the preliminary plat as approved by the
Commission.
10. The Commission shall then consider the final plat and if the same is approved, shall submit
its recommendation of approval to the Council together with a certified copy of its resolution
showing action of the Commission.
11. The Council shall then consider the plat and if the same is acceptable and in accordance
with this chapter, the Council shall accept the same. If said plat is disapproved by the Council,
such disapproval shall point out in writing wherein said proposed plat is objectionable.
12. The passage of a resolution by the Council accepting the plat shall constitute final approval
of the platting of the area shown on the final plat, but the subdivider or owner shall cause such plat
to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Warren County, Iowa, as provided in Chapter
354 of the Code of Iowa, and amendatory acts thereto, and shall file satisfactory evidence of such
recording in the office of the City Clerk before the City shall recognize the plat as being in full
force and effect.
180.05 SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS. The standards and details of design herein contained
are intended only as minimum requirements so that the general arrangement and layout of a subdivision
may be adjusted to a wide variety of circumstances; however, in the design and development of a plat, the
subdivider should use standards consistent with the site conditions as to assure an economical, pleasant,
and durable neighborhood. Construction drawings and design requirements for storm water, sanitary sewer,
water mains, streets, sidewalks, street lighting, street trees and other utilities are set forth in the Design
Standards Manual.
1. Blocks. No block shall be longer than 1,320 feet, except as approved by the Commission.
2. Easements. Easements for utilities shall be provided along rear or side lot lines or long
alleys, as required by the City Engineer. Whenever any stream or important surface water course
is located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall, at his or her own expense, make
adequate provision for straightening or widening the channel so it will properly carry the surface
water, and shall reserve or dedicate to the City an easement along each side of the stream. Such
easements shall be for the purpose of widening, improving, maintaining or protecting the stream.
The width of such easements shall be not less than 20 feet each, plus the stream design width, and
the total width of the easement shall be adequate to provide for any necessary channel straightening
or relocation.
3. Lots.
A. Corner lots shall be not less than 20 feet greater in width than the minimum
required interior lot width so as to permit adequate building setbacks on both front and side
streets.
B. Double frontage lots other than corner lots shall be prohibited except where such
lots back onto a major street or highway or except in the case of large commercial or
industrial lots. Such double frontage lots shall be buffered from the rear street frontage by
permanent screen walls, planting screens, or other screening method deemed acceptable by
the Commission. Ingress/egress shall be limited to the frontage street and is strictly
prohibited on the rear street.
C. Each lot shall be provided by means of a public street with satisfactory access to
an existing public street.
D. Each lot shall be provided with not less than 40 feet of access frontage to a public
street.
E. No lot shall be less in size or shape required to provide an adequate building site
in compliance with the Zoning Regulations.
F. For the purpose of complying with minimum health standards, the following
minimum lot sizes shall be observed:
(1) Lots that cannot be reasonably served by an existing public sanitary sewer
system and public water mains shall have a minimum width of 100 feet, measured
at the building line, and an area of not less than two acres or the minimum
permitted by the Zoning Regulations, whichever is larger.
(2) Lots that are not within a reasonable distance of a public sanitary sewer
system but are connected to a public water supply main shall have a minimum
width of 80 feet and an area of two acres or the minimum permitted by the Zoning
Regulations, whichever is larger.
G. Side lot lines where possible shall be at right angles or radial to the street lines.
4. Concrete Monuments. Monuments shall be placed at block corners, point of curves. Iron
rods shall be placed at the change in direction along lot lines and at each lot corner.
5. Streets and Rights-of-Way.
A. Alleys. Alleys may be required in business areas and industrial districts for
adequate access to block interiors and for off-street loading and parking purposes. Except
where justified by unusual conditions, alleys will not be approved in residential districts.
Dead-end alleys shall be provided with a means of turning around at the dead end thereof.
B. Circulation. The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation within the
subdivision as well as convenient access to adjoining streets, thoroughfares or
unsubdivided land as may be required by the Commission. In a case where a street will
eventually be extended beyond the plat, but is temporarily dead ended, an interim
turnaround may be required.
C. Comprehensive Plan. All proposed plats and subdivisions shall conform to the
Comprehensive Plan.
D. Continuation of Existing Streets. Proposed streets shall provide for continuation
or completion of any existing streets (constructed or recorded) in adjoining property at
equal or greater width, but not less than 60 feet in width, and in similar alignment, unless
variations are recommended by the Commission.
E. Culs-de-sac. Whenever a cul-de-sac is permitted, such street shall comply with
the minimum requirements set forth in the Design Standard Manual.
F. Dedication. A deed to the City shall be given for all streets before the same will
be accepted for City maintenance.
G. Half Streets. Dedication of half streets will be discouraged. Where there exists a
dedicated or platted half street or alley adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half
shall be platted if deemed necessary by the Commission.
H. Land Not Platted. Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract
owned by the subdivider, the Commission may require topography and a Master Plan of
the entire tract of land under the ownership, mortgage purchase option or other agreements
for deed.
I. Major Thoroughfares. When a new subdivision, except where justified by limiting
conditions, involves frontage on a heavy traffic-way, the street layout shall provide motor
access to such frontage by one of the following means:
(1) A parallel street supplying frontage for lots backing on the traffic-way.
(2) A series of culs-de-sac or short loops entered from and planned at right
angles to such a parallel street, with their terminal lots backing onto the highways.
(3) An access drive separated by a planting strip from the highway to which a
motor access from the drive is provided at points suitably spaced.
(4) A service drive or alley at the rear of the lots. Where any one of the abovementioned
arrangements is used, deed covenants or other means should prevent
any private residential driveways from having direct access to the traffic-way.
J. Neighborhood Plan. If any overall plan has been made by the Commission for the
neighborhood in which the proposed subdivision is located, the street system of the latter
shall conform in general thereto.
K. Physical and Cultural Features. In general, streets shall be platted with appropriate
regard for topography, creeks, wooded areas and other natural features which would lend
themselves to attractive treatment.
L. Railroads. If a railroad is involved, the subdivision plat should:
(1) Be so arranged as to permit, where necessary, future grade separations at
highway crossings of the railroad.
(2) Border the railroad with a parallel street at a sufficient distance from it to
permit deep lots to back onto railroad; or form a buffer strip for park, commercial
or industrial use.
(3) Provide culs-de-sac at right angles to the railroad so as to permit lots to
back onto the railroad.
M. Street Grades. Streets and alleys shall be completed to grades that have been
officially determined or approved by the City Engineer.
N. Street Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as
possible.
O. Street Names. All newly platted streets shall be named in a manner conforming to
the prevailing street naming system. A proposed street that is obviously in alignment with
other existing streets, or with a street that may logically be extended although the various
portions be at a considerable distance from each other, shall bear the same name. Names
of new streets shall be subject to the approval of the City in order to avoid duplication or
close similarity of names.
P. The street layout shall provide access to all lots and parcels of land within the
subdivision.
Q. Street jogs (intersections) of less than 150 feet shall be avoided.
R. New subdivisions shall make provisions for continuation and extension of
thoroughfares and collector streets and roads.
S. No dead-end streets will be permitted except at subdivision boundaries.
T. Thoroughfare and collector streets in a subdivision shall extend through to the
boundaries thereof, unless a terminal point within the subdivision is shown in the master
street plan.
U. Minimum Rights-of-Way. The minimum rights-of-way shall be provided as
follows:
Thoroughfares ......................................... 80 feet
Residential collector streets .................... 70 feet
Commercial collector streets .................. 80 feet
Residential streets ................................... 60 feet
Local residential streets .......................... 50 feet
180.06 STREET CONSTRUCTION. All streets shall be installed according to the Design Standards
Manual.
180.07 IMPROVEMENTS. The subdivider shall be responsible for the installation and/or construction
of all improvements required by this chapter, and shall warrant the design, material, and workmanship of
such improvements, installation, and/or construction for a period of two (2) years from and after
completion. Such warrant shall be by bond or other acceptable collateral, shall be subject to review by the
City Attorney, shall specifically assure the expedient repair or replacement of defective improvements
under warranty, and shall indemnify the City from any and all costs or losses resulting from or contributed
to by such defective improvements. All of the foregoing improvements shall be constructed and accepted
by formal resolution of the Council. Before passage of said resolution of acceptance, the City Engineer
shall report that said improvements meet all City specifications and ordinances or other requirements and
agreements between the subdivider and the City. This requirement may be waived if the subdivider will
post a performance bond or certified check with the City guaranteeing that said improvements will be
constructed within a period of one year after final acceptance of the plat; however, if a performance bond
is posted, final acceptance of the plat will not constitute final acceptance by the City of any improvements
to be constructed. Improvements will be accepted only after their construction has been completed and no
public funds will be expended in the subdivision until such improvements have been completed and
accepted by the City. If a performance bond is posted, such bond shall be subject to review by the City
Attorney prior to acceptance, shall specifically assure the expedient installation and completion of all
improvements within the specified construction time period, and shall indemnify the City from any and all
costs or losses of the development and construction. The Council may waive the requirements of this
chapter for the construction and installation of some or all of the improvements in cases of resubdivision,
where only the size, shape and arrangement of the lots are being changed; provided, however, such waiver
shall be limited to existing improvements in good repair as determined by the City Engineer. Improvements
not existing or in poor repair shall meet the requirements of this chapter. The Council may waive the
requirements of this chapter for the construction and installation of some or all of the improvements in cases
of dedication of land or right-of-way to public use where such dedication is in excess of the needs of the
subdivision and is desired by a public agency in lieu of a purchase or condemnation proceeding.
1. All Improvements. All plans, specifications, installation, and construction required by this
chapter shall be subject to the review, approval, and inspection by the City Engineer or other
authorized City representative. The subdivider shall furnish the City Engineer with a construction
schedule prior to commencement of any and/or all construction; and shall notify the City Engineer,
not less than 24 hours in advance of readiness for required inspections.
2. Curb and Gutter. Curb and gutter shall be required on all streets. All curb and gutter shall
be designed in accordance with the Design Standards Manual and constructed to the grade approved
by the Council after receiving the report and recommendation of the City Engineer.
3. Drainage. All subdivisions shall include storm drainage plans for the positive removal of
storm waters. Such plans shall be prepared by a registered Engineer, in accordance with the Design
Standards Manual, and approved by the City Engineer.
4. Gas. Gas mains shall be installed underground and located to comply with the Design
Standards Manual.
5. Sidewalks.
A. Sidewalks shall be required and shall be constructed to the grade approved by the
Council after receiving the report and recommendation of the City Engineer.
B. All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the Design Standards
Manual.
6. Sewer. Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible and within 200 feet, the
subdivider shall provide each lot in the subdivision with the connection to the sewer. Further,
where the existing sewer may be reasonably extended through the subdivision so as to provide for
continuous future development, such provisions shall be made. All sanitary sewers shall be
designed in accordance with the Design Standards Manual and installed as for City and State
specifications. Any plat that cannot reasonably be served by public sewer shall show results of soil
percolation tests made by the Engineer preparing the plat. Such tests shall be in accordance with
the Warren County Board of Health. The designing engineer shall furnish the City with three
certified copies of as-built plans and certify that the facilities have been installed in accordance
with the plans and specifications. As-built plans shall specifically show service line stub locations.
7. Electric Utility Cables. Underground electric cables shall be required and located to
comply with the Design Standards Manual.
8. Water Lines. Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider shall connect with
such water main and provide a water connection for each lot and stubbed in to the proper line in
accordance with the Design Standards Manual.
180.08 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS. The preliminary plat of a subdivision is not
intended to serve as a record plat and shall be submitted for review separately and prior to submission of
the final plat. Its purpose is to show on a map all facts needed to enable the Commission to determine
whether the proposed layout of the land in question is satisfactory from the standpoint of the public interest.
The subdivider or a representative may call at the office of the Commission in advance of the preliminary
plat in order to discuss the proposed subdivision and in order to obtain information as to the requirements
necessary for approval of the plat.
1. Number of Copies and Scale. Four copies of the preliminary plat shall be submitted as
prescribed for review. The scale of the map shall be one inch = 50 feet on small subdivisions and
one inch = 100 feet on large subdivisions unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
2. Contents of Preliminary Plat.
A. Legal description, acreage and name of subdivision.
B. Name and address of the recorded and owner and developer.
C. Name of person who prepared the plat (engineer, surveyor, etc.) and date.
D. Tract boundary lines (labeled and indicated by a heavy line) showing dimensions,
bearings angles and references to known lines or bench marks.
E. Location of existing lot lines, streets, public utilities, water mains, sewers, tiles,
drainpipes, culverts, watercourses, bridges, railroads, existing buildings in the proposed
subdivision.
F. Contour lines at intervals of not more than five feet, MSL.
G. Location and widths, other dimensions and names of proposed streets, utility
easements and other open spaces dedicated for public use (parks, playgrounds, etc.).
H. A statement concerning the location and approximate size or capacity of utilities
proposed to be installed. Connecting points to existing utilities.
I. The layout of proposed blocks (if used) and lots, including the dimensions of each,
and the lot and block number in numerical order.
J. Lot areas (approximate) with area of smallest lot annotated.
K. Proposed building setbacks for frontage and side streets.
L. North point and graphic scale.
M. Names of adjacent property owners or adjoining subdivisions.
N. Grades of proposed streets with a cross section of street showing roadway location,
type and width of surfacing, the type of drainage and other improvements to be installed.
O. The drainage of the land including proposed storm sewers, ditches, culverts,
bridges and other structures with special emphasis on erosion control measures.
P. Flood plain boundary area to be shown.
Q. Location and dimension of sidewalks to be installed.
3. Accompanying Material.
A. An abstractor’s title together with an attorney’s opinion, in duplicate, showing that
the fee title to the subdivision is in the owner as shown on the plat and showing any
encumbrances that may exist against said land.
B. Any plat that cannot reasonably be served by public sewer shall show results of
soil percolation tests made by the Engineer preparing the plat. Such tests shall be made in
accordance with the specifications approved by the City Engineer.
C. Restrictions proposed, if any, to be included in the owner’s dedication of the plat.
D. Written statement, of the appropriate officials, of the availability of gas and
electricity to the proposed subdivision.
E. Written and signed statements explaining how and when the subdivider proposes
to provide and install all improvements required by this chapter. Such statement shall
acknowledge required inspections and approvals by the City Engineer.
180.09 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
1. Number of Copies and Scale. When and if the preliminary plat is approved, the subdivider
shall submit six copies of the final plat for review by the Commission. The scale of the map shall
be one inch = 100 feet on large subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the Commission.
2. Contents of Final Plat. The final plat shall be drawn in India ink on reproducible linen or
Mylar film on an 18-inch by 24-inch or 24-inch by 36-inch sheet size with a border line allowing a
three-inch binding margin along the left hand narrow width and a one-half inch margin on the
remaining narrow width and two long sides. The following information shall be shown on the plat.
A. Block lines shall be designated by heavy solid lines.
B. Block corners shall be shown rounded by appropriate radius with arch length (A
=), chord (ch =), central angle (? =), radius (R =) and Tangent
(T =) shown.
C. Boundary lines shall be designated by a heavy line (#3 or #4 pen) of long dash/two
dots, etc., and labeled “Plat Boundary.”
(1) Boundary dimensions from angle point to angle point shall be shown for
all sides of the closed traverse.
(2) Bearings, based on an assumed meridian approximating north, of all
boundary lines or internal angles of all angle points on the boundary shall be
shown.
D. Building setback lines for frontage and side streets shall be designated by a fine
short dashed line, labeled “Building Setback Line” and dimensioned.
E. Centerlines of all street rights-of-way shall be designated by a fine line (#0 or #00
pen) of long dash/short dash or dot, etc., and dimensions from angle point to angle point,
point of curvature to point of tangency, intersection to intersection or any combination
thereof between intersections with the appropriate bearings, clearly shown. Curve data
shall include arc length
(A =), chord (ch =), central angle (?=), radius (R =), and tangent (T =). All points of
curvature (P.C.) and points of tangency (P.T.) shall be located and labeled.
F. Certification by a registered engineer and/or land surveyor in accordance with
State law.
G. Easements for public utilities and drainage facilities shall be designated by fine
line (#0 or #00 pen) of medium length dashes and appropriately labeled with reserved width
and type of “easement.”
H. Fractional lines and corners of the government township and section surveys shall
be appropriately labeled and dimensioned as applicable to the plat. All plats shall be tied
to a known section or fractional corners by distances and bearings or angles.
I. Legal description of the platted area shall be included on the plat.
J. Lot lines shall be designated by medium fine (#0 or #1 pen) to solid lines.
K. Lots shall be numbered consecutively, all sides dimensioned. The bearings or
corner angles of all lot lines that are not parallel to the block lines shall be shown and lines
intersecting a curved line shall be labeled as radial or not radial, as applicable. Dimensions
of lot lines that are curved shall include appropriate curve data; arc length (A), chord (ch)
and central angle (?); where the radius is not shown elsewhere it shall be shown. The
area of all nonrectangular lots shall be shown to the nearest 100 square feet.
L. Permanent reference monuments shall be labeled (P.R.M.) and located.
M. Scale shall be indicated graphically as the scale in feet along with the compass
point.
N. Street names, location, lot designation and right-of-way width for all streets within
or abutting the plat shall be shown.
O. Surveyor’s notes shall include the following as appropriate or applicable to the
particular plat:
(1) All bearings are based on an assumed meridian for computation purposes.
(2) Block corner radii are 25 feet unless noted otherwise.
(3) Dashed lines shown at the rear or sides of certain lots are “easements”
reserved for the installation and maintenance of public utilities and drainage
facilities.
(4) Any other notes deemed necessary for the particular plat.
3. Accompanying Material.
A. A warranty deed to the City properly executed for all streets intended as public
streets and for any other property intended for public use.
B. Any protective covenants or restrictions to be imposed upon the plat shall be
submitted for approval.
C. Plans and profiles of all streets and alleys at a 50-foot horizontal scale and fivefoot
vertical scale. Profiles shall show location, size and grade of all conduits, sewers,
pipelines, etc., to be placed under the streets and alleys. Profiles shall be drawn with north
oriented to the top or left side of the drawing.
D. Performance bond, if any.
E. Drainage plans for the positive removal of storm water.
4. Recording Plat. There shall be three copies stamped as approved by the Council:
A. The original linen tracing shall be retained for file by the City Clerk.
B. One copy shall be filed with the County Recorder. The owner shall assume
responsibility for filing.
C. One copy with accompanying resolution by the Council approving and accepting
the plat shall be filed with the County Auditor. This copy must be accompanied by a
statement by the proprietors and their spouses, if any, that the plat is prepared with their
free consent and in accordance with their desire, signed and acknowledged before an
officer authorized to take the acknowledgments of deeds. The statement by the proprietors
may also include a dedication to the public of all lands within the plat that are designated
for streets, alleys, parks, open areas, school property, or other public use, if the dedication
is approved by the Council. Recording of the plat is the responsibility of the owner.
180.10 FEES. Filing fees shall be set by resolution of the Council.
180.11 VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS. Whenever the tract proposed to be subdivided is of such
unusual topography, size or shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual conditions that the
strict application of the requirements contained in these regulations would result in substantial hardships or
injustices, the Council, upon recommendation of the Commission, may vary or modify such requirements
so that the subdivider is allowed to develop the property in a reasonable manner; but so that, at the same
time, the public welfare and interest of the City and surrounding area are protected and the general intent
and spirit of these regulations are preserved.
180.12 ENFORCEMENT.
1. No plat of any subdivision shall be recorded in the County Recorder’s office or have any
validity until it has been approved in the manner prescribed herein.
2. The Council shall not permit any public improvements over which it has control to be made
from City funds or any City money expended for improvements or maintenance on any street in
any area that has been subdivided after the date of adoption of these regulations unless such
subdivision or street has been approved in accordance with the provisions contained herein and
accepted by the Council as a public street.
180.13 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS. Any provisions of these regulations may be changed and
amended from time to time by the Council; provided, however, such changes and amendments shall not
become effective until after study and report by the Commission and until after a public hearing has been
held, public notice of which shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation at least four and not more
than 20 days prior to such hearing.

(
(
(
CHAPTER160
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
160.01 Statutory Authority
160.02 Findings of Fact
160.03 Statement of Purpose
160.04 Definitions
160.05 Lands to Which Chapter Applies
160.06 Compliance
160.07 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
160.08 Interpretation
160.09 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
160.10 General Flood Plain Standards
160.11 Special Floodway Provisions
160.12 Special Provisions for Shallow Flooding Areas
160.13 Appointment, Duties and Responsibilities of
Flood Plain Administrator
160.14 Flood Plain Development Permit
160.15 Variances
160.16 Nonconforming Uses
160.17 Penalties for Violation
160.18 Amendments
160.01 STATUTORY AUTHORITY. The Legislature of the State of Iowa has, in
Chapter 364, Code of Iowa, as amended, delegated the power to cities to exercise any power
and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges
and property of the City or of its residents, and to preserve and improve the peace, safety,
health, welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents.
160.02 FINDINGS OF ]!'ACT.
1. The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation, which
can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
2. These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects are caused by: (i) the
occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages that create
hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately elevated or otherwise protected
from flooding; and (ii) the cumulative effect of obstructions on the flood plain,
causing increases in flood heights and velocities.
160.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges, and property of the City and its residents and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, and comfort and convenience of its residents by
minimizing flood losses with provisions designed to:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, or property in
times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities.
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities that serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction or
substantial improvement.
3. Protect individuals from buying lands that may not be suited for intended
purposes because of flood hazard.
4. Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to
purchase flood insurance through the National Flood Insurance Program.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 865 -
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
160.04 DEFINITIONS. Unless specifically defmed below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
1. "Base flood" means the flood having one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. (See "100-year flood.")
2. "Basement" means any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or
lowest level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. (Also see "lowest floor.")
3. "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or
materials. Development does not include "minor projects" or "routine maintenance of
existing buildings and facilities" as defined in this section. It also does not include
gardening, plowing, and similar practices that do not involve filling or grading.
4. "Existing construction" means any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the first flood plain management
regulations adopted by the community, and may also be referred to as "existing
structure."
5. "Existing factory-built home park or subdivision" means a factory-built home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either fmal site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the effective date of the first flood
plain management regulations adopted by the community.
I
6. "Expansion of existing factory-built home park or subdivision" means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
7. "Factory-built home" means any structure designed for residential use which
is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site.
For the purpose of this chapter, "factory-built home" includes mobile homes,
manufactured homes, and modular homes and also includes recreational vehicles that
are placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days and not fully licensed for
and ready for highway use.
8. "Factory-built home park" means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land
divided into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.
9. "Flood" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams or rivers
or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
10. "Flood elevation" means the elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular
site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the 100-year flood
elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the occurrence of the 100-year
flood.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 866 -
CHAPTER 160
(
(
(
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
11. "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map prepared as part
of (but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates both
the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
12. "Flood plain" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as
a result of a flood.
13. "Flood plain management" means an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of flood
plains, including (but not limited to) emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, flood proofing, and flood plain management regulations.
14. "Flood proofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities
which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
15. "Flood way" means the channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
flood plains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge floodwaters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the
floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood by more than one foot.
16. "Floodway fringe" means those portions of the flood plain, other than the
floodway, which can be filled, leveed, or otherwise obstructed without causing
substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.
17. "Historic structure" means any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places,
maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing in
the National Register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or
a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered
historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with
historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified,
either: (i) by an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or (ii) directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
18. "Lowest floor" means the floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building
including a basement except when all the following criteria are met:
A. The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic
pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of
Section 160.10(4)(A); and
B. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, dry-walled, etc.) and
used solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage; and
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 867 -
CHAPTER160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
C. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace,
electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one foot
above the 100-year flood level; and
D. The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria A, B, C, and D above, the
lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not satisfy the
criteria above.
19. "Minor projects" means small development activities (except for filling,
grading and excavating) valued at less than $500.00.
20. ''New construction" (new buildings, factory-built home parks) means those
structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or after
the effective date of the first flood plain management regulations adopted by the
community.
21. ''New factory-built home park or subdivision" means a factory-built home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the first flood
plain management regulations adopted by the community.
22. "100-year flood" means a flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will
be equaled or exceeded at least once every 100 years.
23. "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle that is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
24. "Routine maintenance of existing buildings and facilities" means repairs
necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not trigger a
building permit, provided they are not associated with general improvements of the
structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs include:
A. Normal .maintenance of structures such as re-roofmg, replacing
roofing tiles and replacing siding;
B. Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets,
countertops and similar finish work;
C. Basement sealing;
D. Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes;
E. Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating or airconditioning
systems and repairing wells or septic systems.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 868 -
CHAPTER 160
(
(
(
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
25. "Special flood hazard area" means the land within a community subject to the
"100-year flood." This land is identified as Zone A, AE, Al-A30, AO, and AH on the
City's Flood Insurance Rate Map.
26. "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within
180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement or
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings,
the installation of pile, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such
as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
27. "Structure" means anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, factorybuilt
homes, storage tanks, and other similar uses.
28. "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal
or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
29. "Substantial improvement" means any improvement to a structure which
satisfies either of the following criteria:
A. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:
(i) before the start of construction of the improvement; or (ii) if the structure
has been substantially damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement
of a structure to correct existing violations of State or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions. The term also does not include any alteration of a historic
structure, provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's designation
as a historic structure.
B. Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
25 percent or more. All additions constructed after the effective date of the
first flood plain management regulations adopted by the community shall be
added fo any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in
original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
30. "Variance" means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
flood plain management regulations.
31. "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 869 -
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
160.05 LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES., The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all lands and uses which have significant flood hazards. The Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) for Warren County and incorporated areas, City of Carlisle, Panels
19181C0090E, 0160E, 0176E, dated March 2, 2009, and Panels 0069F, 0070F, 0157F, dated
October 16, 2014, which were prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study for Warren
County, shall be used to identify such flood hazard areas and all areas shown thereon to be
within the boundaries of the 100-year flood shall be considered as having significant flood
hazards. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the precise location of the 100-year flood
boundary, the location shall be determined on the basis of the 100-year flood evaluation at the
particular site in question. The Warren County Flood Insurance Study is hereby adopted by
reference and is made a part of this chapter for the purpose of administering flood plain
regulations.
160.06 COMPLIANCE. No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall
be located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms
of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of
this chapter.
160.07 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS. It is not intended by this
chapter to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail. Any ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of the
inconsistency only.
160.08 INTERPRETATION. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of
the Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by
State statutes.
160.09 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY. The standards required by
this chapter are considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. This chapter does not imply
that areas outside the designated areas of significant flood hazard will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City or any officer or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
160.10 GENERAL FLOOD PLAIN STANDARDS. All uses must be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage and shall meet the following applicable performance
standards. Where 100-year flood data has not been provided in the Flood Insurance Study, the
Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to determine: (i) whether the land
involved is either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe; and (ii) the 100-
year flood level. The applicant will be responsible for providing the Department of Natural
Resources with sufficient technical information to make such determination.
1. All Development. All development within the areas of significant flood
hazard shall:
A. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
CODE 'OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 870 -
CHAPTER 160
(
(
(
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
C. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage.
D. Obtain all other necessary permits from Federal, State and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources.
2. Residential Buildings. All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of one
foot above the 100-year flood level. Construction shall be upon compacted fill which
shall, at all points, be no lower than one foot above the 100-year flood level and
extend at such elevation at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected
thereon. Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed, subject to
favorable consideration by the City Council, where existing topography, street grades,
or other factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must be
adequate to support the structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards
associated with flooding. All new residential structures shall be provided with a
means of access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year
flood.
3. Nonresidential Buildings. All new or substantially improved nonresidential
buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated a minimum of one
foot above the 100-year flood level,' or together with attendant utility and sanitary
systems, be flood proofed to such a level. When flood proofing is utilized, a
professional engineer registered in the State shall certify that the flood proofing
methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact
and uplift forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the
structure, below the 100-year flood level, is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the
specific elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which any
structures are flood proofed shall be maintained by the Administrator.
4. All New and Substantially Improved Structures.
A. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not including basements)
which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by
a registered professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade. ·
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
Such areas shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and
low damage potential storage.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 871 -
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLA1N REGULATIONS
B. New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
C. New and substantially improved structures must be constructed with
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water
from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
5. Factory-Built Homes.
A. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factorybuilt
home parks or subdivisions, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum of one foot above the
100-year flood level.
B. All factory-built homes, including those placed in existing factorybuilt
home parks or subdivisions, shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
6. Utility and Sanitary Systems.
A. On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be located or
designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
B. All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system as well as
the discharge of effluent into floodwaters. Wastewater treatment facilities
(other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a level of flood protection
equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
C. New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. Water
supply treatment facilities other than on-site systems shall be provided with a
level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above the 100-year flood
elevation.
D. Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system and the risk
associated with such flood damaged or impaired systems.
7. Flammable or Explosive Materials. Storage of equipment and materials that
are flammable, explosive, or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited
unless elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. Other material
and equipment must either be similarly elevated or: (i) not subject to major flood
damage and anchored to prevent movement due to floodwaters; or (ii) readily
removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.
8. Levees and Floodwalls. Flood control structural works such as levees,
floodwalls, etc. shall provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a
minimum of three feet of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior
drainage. In addition, structural flood control works shall be approved by the
Department of Natural Resources.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 872 -
CHAPTER 160
(
(
(
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
9. Watercourse Alterations. Watercourse alterations or relocations must be
designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the ·altered or relocated
portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the
Department of Natural Resources.
10. Subdivisions. Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and
subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. Development
associated with subdivision proposals (including the installation of public utilities)
shall meet the applicable performance standards of this chapter. Subdivision
proposals intended for residential use shall provide all lots with a means of access
which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood. Proposals for
subdivisions greater than five acres or 50 lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-
year flood elevation data for those areas located within the area of significant flood
hazard.
11. Accessory Structures.
A. Detached garages, sheds, and similar structures accessory to a
residential use are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation requirements
where the following criteria are satisfied:
( 1) The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
(2) The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential.
(3) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
(4) The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation
which may result in damage to other structures.
(5) The structure's service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or flood proofed to at least one foot
above the 100-year flood level.
B. Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements for such a
structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage
of the structure and its contents.
12. Recreational Vehicles.
A. Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements of subsection
5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factory-built homes
when the following criteria are satisfied.
( 1) The recreational vehicle shall be located on the site for less
than 180 consecutive days, and
(2) The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no
permanently attached additions.
B. Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for more than 180
consecutive days or are not ready for highway use must satisfy requirements
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 873 -
CHAPTER160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
of subsection 5 of this section regarding anchoring and elevation of factorybuilt
homes.
13. Pipelines. Pipeline river and stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed
and banks, or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel
degradation and meandering.
160.11 SPECIAL FLOODWAY PROVISIONS. In addition to the general flood plain
standards, uses within the floodway must meet the following applicable standards. The
floodway is that portion of the flood plain which must be protected from developmental
encroachment to allow the free flow of floodwaters. Where floodway data has been provided
in the flood insurance study, such data shall be used to define the floodway. Where no
floodway data has been provided, the Department of Natural Resources shall be contacted to
provide a floodway delineation. The applicant will be responsible for providing the
Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make such
determination.
1. No use shall be permitted in the floodway that would result in any increase in
the 100-year flood level. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood
levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would
be allowed for similarly situated lands.
2. All uses within the floodway shall:
A. Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
C. Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to
flood damage.
3. No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or floodway of
any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any other drainage facility or
system.
4. Structures, buildings, and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall meet
the applicable general flood plain standards and shall be constructed or aligned to
present the minimum possible resistance to flood flows.
5. Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and shall not
be for human habitation.
6. Storage of equipment or materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or
injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. Storage of other material may
be allowed if readily removable from the floodway within the time available after
flood warning.
7. Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and modifications)
must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or relocations must be approved by the
Department of Natural Resources.
8. Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial
purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 874 -
(
CHAPTER 160
160.12
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
9. Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and banks
or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and
meandering or due to the action of flood flows.
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR SHALLOW FLOODING AREAS. In addition
to the general flood plain standards, uses within shallow flooding areas must meet the
following applicable standards.
1. In shallow flooding areas designated as an AO Zone on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM), the minimum flood proofing/flood protection elevation shall be
equal to the number of feet as specified on the FIRM (or a minimum of 2.0 feet if no
number is specified) above the highest natural grade adjacent to the structure.
2. In shallow flooding areas designated as an AH Zone on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, the minimum flood proofing/flood protection elevation shall be equal to the
elevation as specified on the FIRM.
160.13 APPOINTMENT, DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOOD PLAIN
ADMINISTRATOR.
160.14
1. The City Clerk is hereby appointed to implement and administer the
provisions of this chapter and will herein be referred to as the Administrator.
2. Duties of the Administrator shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following:
A. Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure that
the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied.
B. Review all flood plain development permit applications to assure that
all necessary permits have been obtained from Federal, State, and local
governmental agencies including approval when required from the
Department of Natural Resources for flood plain construction.
C. Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures.
D. Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to National
Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which all new or substantially improved
structures have been flood-proofed.
E. Notify adjacent communities and/or counties and the Department of
Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notifications to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
F. Keep a record of all permits, appeals and such other transactions and
correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter.
FLOOD PLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
1. Permit Required. A flood plain development permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to any flood plain development (any manmade
change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings
or other structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations)
including the placement of factory-built homes.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 875 -
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
2. Application for Permit. Application shall be made on forms furnished by the
Administrator and shall include the following:
A. Description of the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is to be made.
B. Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be done
(i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description) that will readily
identify and locate the work to be done.
C. Indication of the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended.
D. Elevation of the 1"00-year flood.
E. Elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to which a
building is to be flood proofed.
F. For buildings being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the improvements.
G. Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this chapter.
3. Action on Application. The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time,
make a determination as to whether the proposed flood plain development meets the
applicable standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application.
For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the specific reasons
therefor. The Administrator shall not issue permits for variances except as directed by
the Council.
4. Construction and Use to Be as Provided in Application and Plans. Flood
plain development permits, issued on the basis of approved plans and applications,
authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans
and applications and no other use, arrangement or construction. Any use,
arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. The applicant shall be required to submit certification by a
professional engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State, that the
finished fill, building floor elevations, flood proofing, or other flood protection
measures were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior
to the use or occupancy of any structure.
160.15 VARIANCES.
1. The Council may authorize upon request in specific cases such variances from
the terms of this chapter that will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable
standards:
A. Variances shall only be granted upon: (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and (iii) a determination that
the granting of the variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 876 -
CHAPTER 160
(
(
FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local codes or ordinances.
B. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood would result. Consideration
of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for
similarly situated lands.
C. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
D. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection
for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant
shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that: (i) the
issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage;
and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and property.
E. All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
2. Factors Upon Which the Decision to Grant Variances Shall Be Based. In
passing upon applications for variances, the Council shall consider all relevant factors
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
A. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
B. The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
C. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
D. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
E. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the City.
F. The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location.
G. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
H. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
I. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
flood plain management program for the area.
J. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
K. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwater expected at the site.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 877 -
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
L. The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
M. Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter.
3. Conditions Attached to Variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed
above, the Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not
necessarily be limited to:
A. Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
B. Limitation of periods of use and operation.
C. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
D. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical
alternative to achieving the purposes of this chapter.
E. Flood proofing measures.
160.16 NONCONFORMING USES.
1. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
A. If such use is discontinued for six (6) consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
B. Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
2. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including
flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This limitation does not include the
cost of any alteration to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, building
or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its
continued designation.
160.17 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. Violations of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any of the requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person
who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from talcing such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy violations.
160.18 AMENDMENTS. The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from
time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval from the Department of
Natural Resources.
[The next page is 8 81]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 878 -
~
\
(
{
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with
existing local codes or ordinances.
B. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood would result. Consideration
of the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for
similarly situated lands.
C. Variances shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
D. In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood protection
for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this chapter, the applicant
shall be notified in writing over the signature of the Administrator that: (i) the
issuance of a variance will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage;
and (ii) such construction increases risks to life and property ..
E. All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of the
Department of Natural Resources.
2. Factors Upon Which the Decision to Grant Variances Shall Be Based. In
passing upon applications for variances, the Council shall consider all relevant factors
specified in other sections of this chapter and:
A. The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or
velocities caused by encroachments.
B. The danger that materials may be swept on to other land or
downstream to the injury of others.
C. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of
these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions.
D. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
E. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the City.
F. The requirements of the facility for a flood plain location.
G. The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding for the
proposed use.
H. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing development and
development anticipated in the foreseeable future.
I. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
flood plain management program for the area.
J. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
K. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwater expected at the site.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 877 -
CHAPTER 160 FLOOD PLAIN REGULATIONS
L. The cost of providing 'governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities (sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems), facilities, streets, and bridges.
M. Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this chapter.
3. Conditions Attached to Variances. Upon consideration of the factors listed
above, the Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but not
necessarily be limited to:
A. Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities.
B. Limitation of periods of use and operation.
C. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
D. Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical
alternative to achieving the purposes of this chapter.
E. Flood proofing measures.
160.16 NONCONFORMING USES.
1. A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful before the
passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in conformity with the
provisions ofthis chapter, may be continued subject to the following conditions:
A. 1f such use is discontinued for six ( 6) consecutive months, any future
use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter.
B. Uses or adjuncts thereof that are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
2. 1f any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including
flood, it shall not be reconstructed if the cost is more than 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred, unless it is reconstructed in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter. This limitation does not include the
cost of any alteration to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, building
or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its
continued designation.
160.17 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. Violations of the provisions of this chapter or
failure to comply with any of the requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person
who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy violations.
160.18 AMENDMENTS. The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from
time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed. No amendment, supplement,
change, or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval from the Department of
Natural Resources.
[The next page is 901]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CARLISLE, IOWA
- 878 -