
Clinton, IA Code of Ordinances


CITY OF CLINTON, IOWA
CODE OF ORDINANCES




2019 S-13 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2605, passed 3-12-2019




 







 



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



HOME RULE CHARTER



Section




   2.01   Preamble





   2.02   Powers of the City





   2.03   City Council





   2.04   Mayor





   2.05   City Manager





   2.06   Boards, Commissions and Committees





   2.07   Initiative and Referendum





   2.08   Charter Amendments and Review




SECTION 2.01  PREAMBLE.



   We, the citizens of Clinton, Iowa, have adopted this Home Rule Charter
based upon the following principles:



   1.   The government of Clinton is a representative form of
government directly accountable to its citizens who all share the
responsibility for it.



   2.   The government of Clinton and those representing it should be
accessible and responsible to the people.



   3.   Each citizen has a right to obtain fair, equal and courteous
treatment from each City official and employee.



   4.   The government of Clinton shall promote the health, safety and
general welfare of its residents and encourage the participation of its
citizens in their government in order to secure the full benefits of “Home
Rule.”



SECTION 2.02  POWERS OF THE CITY.



   The City shall have all the powers possible under the constitution and
laws of the State of Iowa.



   1.   Construction.  The powers of the City under this Charter shall
be construed liberally in favor of the City and the specific mention of
particular powers in the Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any
way the general power in this section.



   2.   Existing Legislation.  The enactment of this Charter shall not
repeal existing resolutions or ordinances of the City or change its Code of
Ordinances, except where the provisions of this enactment specifically change
or are irreconcilable with the provisions of such resolutions, ordinances or
provisions of this Code of Ordinances.



   3.   Savings Clause.  If any provisions of this Charter or the
application of this Charter to any person or circumstance is held invalid,
the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this
Charter.



SECTION 2.03  CITY COUNCIL.



   1.   Composition.  The Council shall consist of seven (7) members.
Three (3), to be known as Council members at large, shall be nominated by the
eligible electors of the City at large, and elected by the qualified electors
of the City at large. Four (4), to be known as ward Council members, shall be
nominated by the eligible electors of their respective wards and elected by
the qualified electors of their respective wards.



   2.   Division Into Wards.  The Council, by ordinance, shall divide
the City into four (4) wards of substantially equal population.



   3.   Eligibility.  To be eligible to be elected and to retain a
Council position, a person must be an eligible elector of the City. Ward
Council members must also be residents of the ward at the time of their
nomination and election and during their term of office.



   4.   Terms.  The terms of all Council members shall be staggered
4-year terms.



   5.   Compensation.  The Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe the
compensation of the Council members and other elected City officers; however,
the Council shall not adopt such an ordinance changing the compensation of
any elected officer during the months of November and December in the year of
a regular City election. A change in the compensation of Council members
becomes effective for all Council members at the beginning of the term of the
Council members elected at the election next following the change in
compensation.



   6.   General Powers.  All powers of the City are vested in the
Council, except as otherwise provided by the laws of the State and provisions
of this Charter.



   7.   Rules and Records.  The Council shall determine its own rules
and shall maintain records of its proceedings consistent with the laws of the
State.



   8.   Vacancies.  The Council shall fill vacancies in the event a
Council member no longer is a qualified elector of the City, no longer is a
resident of the City or a resident of a specific ward, resigns or deceases.
The Council shall act as a nomination committee conducting one public hearing
within fourteen (14) days of the occurrence of the vacancy, and shall
establish a list of names of eligible electors willing to serve. The Council
shall fill the vacancy from the established list within forty (40) days of
the occurrence of the vacancy. Nothing in this section shall preempt the
citizens’ right to petition for an election as provided by the laws of the
State.



   9.   City Council Action.  The Council shall exercise a power only
by the passage of a motion, a resolution, an amendment, or an ordinance in
the following manner:



      A.   Action by Council.  Passage of an ordinance, amendment
or resolution requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council.
Passage of a motion requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A
resolution must be passed to spend public funds in excess of twenty-five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) on any one project, or to accept public
improvements and facilities upon their completion. Each Council member’s
vote on a measure must be recorded. A measure which fails to receive
sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated.



(Iowa Code § 380.4)



      B.   Overriding Mayor’s Veto.  Within thirty (30) days
after the Mayor’s veto, the Council may pass the measure again by a vote of
not less than two-thirds of all of the members of the Council.



(Iowa Code § 380.6(2))



      C.   Measures Become Effective.  Measures passed by the
Council become effective in one of the following ways:



         (1)   An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor
becomes effective when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is
published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the
ordinance or amendment.



(Iowa Code § 380.6(1)(a))



         (2)   A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective
immediately upon signing.



(Iowa Code § 380.6(1)(b))



         (3)   A motion becomes effective immediately upon
passage of the motion by the Council.



(Iowa Code § 380.6(1)(c))



         (4)   If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or
resolution and the Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a
resolution becomes effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or
amendment becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is
published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the
ordinance or amendment.



(Iowa Code § 380.6(2))



         (5)   If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance,
amendment or resolution, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days
after the date of passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the
ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, but not sooner than
fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, unless a subsequent effective
date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.



(Iowa Code § 380.6(3))



“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the
Council including a vacant seat and a seat where the member is absent, but
does not include a seat where the Council member declines to vote by reason
of a conflict of interest.



(Iowa Code § 380.4)



      D.   Tie Votes.  Any measure resulting in a tie vote shall be
reconsidered at the next regular Council meeting.



      E.   Submittal to Voters.  The Council may submit to the
voters a proposition for the repeal, amendment or enactment of any measure,
to be voted upon at any succeeding general, regular or special City election,
and if the proposition submitted receives a majority of the votes, the
measure shall be repealed, amended or enacted accordingly.



   10.   Prohibitions.



      A.   A Council member may not hold any other City office or be
a City employee or any other elected official while serving on the City
Council.



      B.   Council members, as policy makers, should not interfere
with the supervision or direction of any department or person appointed by or
under the control of the Mayor or City Manager.



   11.   Appointments.



      A.   The Council may appoint a City Manager. (See Section
2.05.)



      B.   All appointments to City boards, commissions and
committees shall not become effective unless approved by the City except as
otherwise provided by the laws of the State of Iowa and this Charter.



      C.   The Council shall fix the compensation of persons it
appoints and shall provide for the method of appointment, promotion, removal
and compensation of other City employees consistent with the laws of the
State and this Charter.



SECTION 2.04  MAYOR.



   1.   Eligibility, Election and Term.



      A.   There shall be a Mayor elected at large by the qualified
electors of the City.



      B.   Only eligible electors of the City shall be eligible to
hold the office of Mayor.



      C.   The Mayor shall be elected by voters at large at the
regular City election every four years to serve for a four-year term.



   2.   Salary.  The Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe the
compensation of the Mayor, giving due regard to the duties and
responsibilities of the position. However, a change in the compensation of
the Mayor does not become effective during the term in which the change is
adopted and the Council shall not adopt an ordinance changing the
compensation of the Mayor during the months of November and December in the
year of a regular City election.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(8))



   3.   Vacancy.  Should a vacancy occur in the office of the Mayor in
the event of resignation or death, the Council shall act as a nominating
committee. The committee shall conduct one public hearing within fourteen
(14) days of the occurrence of the vacancy and shall establish a list of
names of eligible electors willing to serve. The Council shall fill the
vacancy from the established list within forty (40) days of the occurrence of
the vacancy. Nothing in this section shall preempt the citizens’ right to
petition for an election as provided by the laws of the State.



   4.   Mayor’s Powers and Duties.



      A.   The Mayor is the official representative of the City.



      B.   The Mayor is the presiding officer of the Council. The
Mayor may call special meetings of the Council when necessary.



      C.   The Mayor is not a voting member of the Council. The
Mayor may enter into all discussions and express views.



      D.   The Mayor may sign, veto or take no action on an
ordinance, amendment or resolution passed by the Council. If the Mayor signs
a measure, a resolution becomes effective immediately upon signing, and an
ordinance or amendment becomes a law when published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the measure. If the Mayor vetoes a measure,
the Mayor shall explain the reasons for the veto in a written message to the
Council at the time of the veto. Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor’s
veto, the Council may pass the measure again by an affirmative vote of not
less than two-thirds (2/3) majority of the Council members. If the Mayor
vetoes a measure and the Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s
veto, a resolution becomes effective immediately upon repassage and an
ordinance or amendment becomes a law when published, unless a subsequent
effective date is provided within the measure. If the Mayor takes not action
on a measure, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the
date of passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes a law when published,
but not sooner than fourteen (14) days after the date of passage, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the measure.



      E.   The Mayor is responsible for enforcement of all laws,
provisions of this Charter and actions of the Council.



      F.   The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem, who will act
as mayor during the Mayor’s absence.



SECTION 2.05  CITY MANAGER.



   The Council may by ordinance provide for a City Manager, and prescribe
the Manager’s powers, duties and compensation. The City has such an
ordinance at the present time (Ordinance No. 1772, dated June 26, 1984) which
shall continue in full force and effect subject to repeal or amendment by the
Council in the manner provided by law.



SECTION 2.06  BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES.



   1.   Establishment.  The Council may establish boards, commissions
and committees in addition to those required by the laws of the State and
shall specify the titles, duties, length of terms, qualifications of members
and other appropriate matters. The Council may reduce or increase duties of
any board, commission or committee; transfer duties from one to another or
dissolve any board, commission or committee, except as otherwise provided by
Iowa law or this Charter. This section does not apply to “Standing
Committees of the City Council.”  All members shall be residents of the
City and eligible electors.



   2.   Appointment, Vacancies and Removal.  The Mayor shall appoint,
with the approval of the Council, all members of boards, commissions and
committees unless otherwise provided by the laws of the State or existing
City ordinances at the time of the adoption of this Charter, and shall seek
to provide broad representation on all boards, commissions and committees,
subject to the requirements of the laws of the State of Iowa. All members
shall be residents of the City and eligible electors. The Council shall
establish procedures for not less than thirty (30) days’ notice of
vacancies on boards, commissions and committees and shall encourage
nominations by citizens before the vacancies are filled. The Council shall
establish conditions for the removal of members of boards, commissions and
committees for just cause, consistent with the laws of the State.



   3.   Rules.  All boards, commissions and committees shall adopt
rules and procedures for their operation, including rules pertaining to open
meetings, consistent with the laws of the State.



SECTION 2.07  INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM.



   1.   Initiative.  The qualified electors have the right to propose
ordinances to the Council, and if the Council fails to adopt an ordinance so
proposed without any change in substance, to have the ordinance submitted to
the voters at an election.



   2.   Referendum.  The qualified electors have the right to require
reconsideration by the Council of an existing ordinance, and if the Council
fails to repeal such ordinance, to have it submitted to the voters at an
election.



   3.   Definitions.  As used in this section, the following terms
have these meanings:



      A.   “Eligible electors” mean persons who possess all of
the qualifications necessary to entitle the person to be registered to vote,
whether or not the person is in fact so registered.



      B.   “Ordinance” means all measures of a legislative
nature, however designated, which are of permanent rather than temporary
character and include a proposition enacting, amending or repealing a new or
existing law, policy or plan, as opposed to one providing for the execution
or administration of a law, policy or plan already enacted by the Council.



      C.   “Qualified electors” mean residents of the City who
are registered voters of the City.



   4.   Limitations as to Subject Matter.  The right of initiative and
referendum shall not extend to any of the following:



      A.   Any measure of an executive or administrative nature.



      B.   The City budget.



      C.   The appropriation of money.



      D.   The levy of taxes or special assessments.



      E.   The issuance of General Obligation and Revenue Bonds.



      F.   The letting of contracts.



      G.   Salaries of City employees.



      H.   Emergency ordinances.



      I.   Any measure required to be enacted by State or Federal
law.



      J.   Amendments to this Charter, except as provided in Section
2.08(1)(B) of this Charter.



      K.   Amendments affecting the City Zoning ordinance.



   5.   Limitation as to Resubmission.  No initiative or referendum
petition shall be filed within two years after the same measure or a measure
substantially the same has been submitted to the voters at an election.



   6.   Council Repeal, Amendment and Reenactment.  No ordinance
proposed by initiative petition and adopted by the vote of the Council
without submission to the voters, or adopted by the voters pursuant to this
section, may for two years thereafter be repealed or amended except by a vote
of the people, unless provision is otherwise made in the original initiative
ordinance. No ordinance referred by referendum petition and repealed by the
vote of the Council without submission to the voters, or repealed by the
voters pursuant to this section, may be reenacted for two years thereafter
except by vote of the people, unless provision is otherwise made in the
original referendum petition.



   7.   Construction.



      A.   Scope of Power.  It is intended that this section confer
broad initiative and referendum powers upon the qualified electors of the
City.



      B.   Initiative.  It is intended that an initiative petition
will be valid and may repeal an existing ordinance in whole or in part by
virtue of proposing a new ordinance. It is intended that an initiative
petition may amend an existing ordinance.



      C.   Referendum.  It is intended that a referendum petition
may propose an election to repeal an ordinance in whole or in part.



   8.   Effect of Filing Petition.  The filing of an initiative or
referendum petition does not suspend or invalidate any ordinance under
consideration and such ordinance shall remain in full force and effect until
its amendment or repeal by Council pursuant to this Charter, or until a
majority of the qualified electors voting on an ordinance vote to repeal or
amend the ordinance and the vote is certified by the Clinton County, Iowa
Board of Canvassers.



   9.   City Obligation.  An initiative or referendum vote which
repeals an existing ordinance in whole or in part does not affect any
obligations entered into by the City, its agencies or any person in reliance
on the ordinance during the time it was in effect.



   10.   Commencement of Proceedings.  One or more qualified electors,
hereafter referred to as the “petitioners,” may commence initiative or
referendum proceedings by filing with the City Clerk an affidavit stating
they will supervise the circulation of the petition and will be responsible
for filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and
specifying the address to which all relevant notices are to be sent, and
setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or citing the ordinance
sought to be reconsidered.



   11.   Affidavit.  The City Clerk shall accept the affidavit for
filing if on its face it appears to have signatures of one or more qualified
elector(s). The City Clerk shall issue the appropriate petition forms to the
petitioners within two (2) days after the affidavit is accepted for filing.



   12.   Petitions.



      A.   Number of Signatures.  Initiative and referendum
petitions must be signed by qualified electors equal in number to at least
twenty-five percent (25%) of the number of persons who voted in the last
regular City election, but by not fewer than 1,500 qualified electors.



      B.   Form and Content.  All papers of a petition prepared for
filing must be substantially uniform in size and style and must be assembled
as one instrument. Each signature on the petition must be followed by the
address of the person signing and the date signature is executed. A petition
prepared for circulation must contain or have attached thereto throughout its
circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be
reconsidered. The petition filed with the City Clerk need have attached to it
only one copy of the ordinance being proposed or referred.



      C.   Affidavit of Circulator.  Each paper of a petition
containing signatures must have attached to it when filed an affidavit
executed by a qualified elector certifying the number of signatures on the
paper, that he/she personally circulated it, that all signatures were affixed
in his/her presence, that he/she believes them to be genuine signatures of
the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an
opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed or
sought to be reconsidered. Any person filing a false affidavit will be liable
to criminal penalties as provided by Iowa law.



      D.   Time for Filing Initiative Petitions.  Signatures on an
initiative petition must be secured and the petition filed within six months
after the date the affidavit required under Section 2.07(10) was filed.



      E.   Time for Filing Referendum Petitions.  Referendum
petitions may be filed within six months after the date the affidavit
required under Section 2.07(10) was filed.



   13.   Procedure After Filing.



      A.   Certificate of Clerk.  Within twenty (20) days after a
petition is filed, the City Clerk shall complete a certificate as to its
sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is
defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the
petitioners by registered mail, and a copy to the Mayor, who shall advise the
Council. If a petition is certified sufficient, the City Clerk shall promptly
present the certificate to the Council.



      B.   Validity of Signatures.  A petition shall be deemed
sufficient for the purposes of this section if it contains valid signatures
in the number prescribed by subsection 12 and is timely filed, even though
the petition may contain one or more invalid signatures. A valid signature
need not be in the identical form in which the qualified elector’s name
appears on the voting rolls, nor may a signature be deemed invalid because
the address accompanying the name on the petition is different from the
address for the same name on the current voting rolls.



   14.   Action on Petitions.



      A.   Action by Council.  When an initiative or referendum
petition has been certified sufficient, the Council shall promptly consider
the proposed initiative ordinance or reconsider the referred ordinance. If
the Council fails to adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change
in substance within sixty (60) days, or fails to repeal the referred
ordinance within sixty (60) days after the date the petition was finally
determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to
the qualified electors of the City as hereinafter prescribed. The Council
shall submit to the voters any ordinance which has been proposed or referred
in accordance with the provisions of this section unless the petition is
deemed insufficient pursuant to subsection 13 of this section. If at any time
more than thirty (30) days before the scheduled initiative or referendum
election the Council adopts the proposed initiative ordinance without any
change in substance, or repeals a referred ordinance, the initiative or
referendum proceedings shall terminate and the proposed or referred ordinance
shall not be submitted to the voters.



      B.   Submission to Voters.  The vote of the City on a
proposed or referred ordinance shall be a special election to be held at the
regular City election, or at a general election, whichever comes first,
provided, however, that the Council may provide for a special referendum
election on a referred ordinance any time after the expiration of the sixty
(60) day period provided for reconsideration in paragraph A of this
subsection. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made
available to the qualified electors at the polls and shall be advertised at
the City’s expense in the manner prescribed by the laws of the State. The
subject matter and purpose of the referred or proposed ordinance shall be
indicated on the ballot.



   15.   Results of Election.



      A.   Initiative.  If a majority of the qualified electors
voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be
considered adopted upon certification of the election results by the Clinton
County, Iowa Board of Canvassers and shall be treated in all respects in the
same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the Council, except as
provided in Section 2.07(6). If conflicting ordinances are approved by
majority vote at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of
affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.



      B.   Referendum.  If a majority of the qualified electors
voting on a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered
repealed upon certification of the election results by the Clinton County,
Iowa Board of Canvassers. If conflicting ordinances are approved by majority
vote at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of
affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.



   16.   Prohibition on Establishment of Stricter Conditions or
Requirements.  The Council may not set, except by Charter amendment,
conditions or requirements affecting initiative and referendum which are
higher or more stringent than those imposed by this Charter.



SECTION 2.08  CHARTER AMENDMENTS AND REVIEW.



   1.   Amendments.  This Charter may be amended only by one of the
following methods:



      A.   The Council, by resolution, may submit a proposed
amendment to the voters at a special City election or a general election, and
a proposed amendment becomes effective when approved by a majority of those
voting.



      B.   The Council, by ordinance, may amend the Charter.
However, within thirty (30) days of publication of the ordinance, if a
petition signed by eligible electors of the City equal in number to ten
percent (10%) of the persons who voted at the last preceding regular City
election, but not less than 10 persons, is filed with the Council, the
Council must submit the amending ordinance to the voters at a special City
election or general election, whichever comes first, and the amendment does
not become effective until approved by a majority of those voting.



      C.   If a petition signed by eligible electors of the City
equal in number to ten percent (10%) of the persons who voted at the last
preceding regular City election, but not less than 10 persons, is filed with
the Council proposing an amendment to the Charter, the Council must submit
the proposed amendment to the voters at a special City election or a general
election, whichever comes first, and the amendment becomes effective if
approved by a majority of those voting.



   2.   Charter Review Commission.  The Council, using the procedures
prescribed in Section 2.06, may establish a Charter Review Commission at
least once every ten (10) years following the effective date of this Charter.
The Commission, consisting of at least nine (9) members, shall review the
existing Charter and may, within twelve (12) months, recommend any Charter
amendments that it deems fit. The Council shall submit such amendments to the
voters in the form prescribed by the Commission, and an amendment becomes
effective when approved by a majority of those voting. The Commission may
also recommend to the Council that it exercise its power of amendment
pursuant to Section 2.08(1)(B) of this Charter on a matter recommended by the
Commission.



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   Chapter



      10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      11.   BOUNDARIES



      12.   SCHEDULE OF FINES



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   City powers



   10.04   Indemnity



   10.05   Personal injuries



   10.06   Rules of construction



   10.07   Amendments



   10.08   Catchlines and notes



   10.09   Altering code



   10.10   Section histories; statutory references



   10.11   Severability



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE.



   This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Clinton, Iowa, 2009.



(1999 Code, § 1.01)



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Where words and phrases used in this code of ordinances are defined by
state law, the definitions apply to their use in this code of ordinances and
are adopted by reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further
definition or are reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have
the following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another
portion of this code of ordinances.



   ALLEY.  A public right-of-way, other than a street, affording
secondary means of access to abutting property.



   CITY.  The City of Clinton, Iowa.



   CLERK.  The City Clerk of Clinton, Iowa.



   CODE.  The specific chapter of this code of ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the
Building Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).



   CODE OF ORDINANCES.  The Code of Ordinances of the City of Clinton,
Iowa, 2009.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of Clinton, Iowa.



   COUNTY.  Clinton County, Iowa.



   MEASURE.  An ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may
be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED
are equivalent to the words SWEAR and SWORN.



   OCCUPANT or TENANT.  Applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether
alone or with others.



   ORDINANCES.  The ordinances of the City of Clinton, Iowa, as embodied
in the code of ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance adopting
the code of ordinances and those enacted hereafter.



   PERSON.  An individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust or other
legal entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee or similar
representative thereof, but does not include a governmental body.



   PRECEDING and FOLLOWING.  Next before and next after, respectively.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real property and tangible and intangible personal
property unless clearly indicated otherwise.



   PROPERTY OWNER.  A person owning private property in the city as shown
by the County Auditor’s plats of the city.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes in its meaning, but is not restricted to, any
city-owned open place, such as parks and squares.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Any and all property owned by the city or held in
the name of the city by any of the departments, commissions or agencies
within the city government.



   PUBLIC WAY.  Includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk or other public thoroughfare.



   SIDEWALK.  The surfaced portion of the street between the edge of the
traveled way, surfacing or curb line and the adjacent property line, intended
for the use of pedestrians.



   STATE.  The State of Iowa.



   STATUTES or LAWS.  The latest edition of the Iowa Code, as amended.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.



   WRITING AND WRITTEN.  Include printing, typing, lithographing or other
mode of representing words and letters.



   YEAR.  A calendar year.



(1999 Code, § 1.02)



§ 10.03  CITY POWERS.



   The city may, except as expressly limited by the State Constitution,
and if not inconsistent with the laws of the State General Assembly, exercise
any power and perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges and property of the city and of its
residents, and preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare,
comfort and convenience of its residents and each and every provision of this
code of ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing
powers and the performance of the foregoing functions.



(Iowa Code § 364.1)  (1999 Code, § 1.03)



§ 10.04  INDEMNITY.



   The applicant for any permit or license under this code of ordinances,
by making the application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or
death of any person or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to
property whatsoever, including all costs and expenses incident thereto,
however arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or remotely, the
issuance of the permit or license or the doing of anything thereunder, or the
failure of the applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of the
applicant, to abide by or comply with any of the provisions of this code of
ordinances or the terms and conditions of the permit or license, and the
applicant, by making an application, forever agrees to indemnify the city and
its officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless from any
and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss,
damage, injury or death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto,
by reason of the foregoing. The provisions of this section shall be deemed to
be a part of any permit or license issued under this code of ordinances or
any other ordinance of the city whether expressly recited therein or not.



(1999 Code, § 1.04)



§ 10.05  PERSONAL INJURIES.



   When action is brought against the city for personal injuries alleged
to have been caused by its negligence, the city may notify in writing any
person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall
state the pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and
location of the court where the action is pending, a brief statement of the
alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the city believes that the
person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the city,
and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit
is conclusive in any action by the city against any person so notified, as to
the existence of the defect or other cause of the injury or damage, as to the
liability of the city to the plaintiff in the first named action, and as to
the amount of the damage or injury. The city may maintain an action against
the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all
the expenses incurred by the city in the suit.



(Iowa Code § 364.14)  (1999 Code, § 1.05)



§ 10.06  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In the construction of the code of ordinances the following rules shall
be observed, unless the construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the Council or repugnant to the context of the provisions.



   (A)   Verb tense and plurals.  Words used in the present tense
include the future, the singular number includes the plural and the plural
number includes the singular.



   (B)   May.  The word “may” confers a power.



   (C)   Must.  The word “must” states a requirement.



   (D)   Shall.  The word “shall” imposes a duty.



   (E)   Gender.  The masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter genders.



   (F)   Interpretation.  All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in the code of ordinances shall be liberally construed
in order that the true intent and meaning of the Council may be fully carried
out.



   (G)   Extension of authority.  Whenever an officer or employee is
required or authorized to do an act by a provision of the code of ordinances,
the provision shall be construed as authorizing performance by a regular
assistant, subordinate or a duly authorized designee of the officer or
employee.



(1999 Code, § 1.06)



§ 10.07  AMENDMENTS.



   All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner affect this code of
ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, subchapter, section or
division to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the city.



(Iowa Code § 380.2)  (1999 Code, § 1.07)



§ 10.08  CATCHLINES AND NOTES.



   The catchlines of the several sections of the code of ordinances,
titles, headings (chapter, section and division), editor’s notes, cross
references and state law references, unless set out in the body of the
section itself, contained in the code of ordinances, do not constitute any
part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate, explain, supplement or
clarify the contents of a section.



(1999 Code, § 1.08)



§ 10.09  ALTERING CODE.



   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of the code of ordinances, or to
insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the
code of ordinances in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the
city to be misrepresented thereby.



(Iowa Code § 718.5)  (1999 Code, § 1.09)



§ 10.10  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance and any and all amending ordinances
are listed following the text of the code section. Example:  (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord.
25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the
text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: 
(Iowa Code § 376.3)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of
ordinances of the town, the prior code section number shall be indicated in
the history by “(1999 Code, §       ).” The history notes following
sections and the references scattered throughout the code are not part of the
code, but are merely for the benefit for the user of the code.



§ 10.11  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, provision or part of the code of ordinances is adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, the adjudication will not affect the validity of
the code of ordinances as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.



(1999 Code, § 1.10)



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Standard penalty.  Unless another penalty is expressly
provided by the code of ordinances for any particular provision, section or
chapter, any person failing to perform a duty, or obtain a license required
by, or violating any provision of the code of ordinances, or any rule or
regulation adopted herein by reference shall be guilty of a municipal
infraction, and upon conviction, be subject to a fine of up to $500 for a
first offense, a fine of up to $750 for a first repeat offense, and a fine of
up to $1,000 for each subsequent repeat offense.



(Iowa Code § 364.3(2))  (1999 Code, § 1.11)



   (B)   Municipal infractions.



      (1)   Municipal infraction.  A violation of this code of
ordinances or any ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the
omission or failure to perform any act or duty required by the same, with the
exception of those provisions specifically provided under state law as a
felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple
misdemeanor under the Iowa Code Chapters 687 through 747, is a municipal
infraction punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.



(Iowa Code § 364.22(3))  (1999 Code, § 4.01)



      (2)   Environmental violation.  A municipal infraction which
is a violation of the Iowa Code Chapter 455B or of a standard established by
the city in consultation with the Department of Natural Resources, or both,
may be classified as an environmental violation. However, the provisions of
this division (B)(2) shall not be applicable until the city has offered to
participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or to the
following specific violations:



         (a)   A violation arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. § 403.8;



         (b)   The discharge of airborne residue from grain,
created by the handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person not engaged
in the industrial production or manufacturing of grain products; and/or



         (c)   The discharge of airborne residue from grain,
created by the handling, drying or storing of grain, by a person engaged in
industrial production or manufacturing if the discharge occurs from September
15 to January 15.



(Iowa Code § 364.22(1))  (1999 Code, § 4.02)



      (3)   Penalties.  A municipal infraction is punishable by the
following civil penalties.



         (a)   Standard civil penalties.



            1.   First offense:  at least $100, but not to
exceed $500.



            2.   Second offense: at least $200, but not to
exceed $750.



            3.   Third and subsequent offenses:  at least
$300, but not to exceed $1,000.



            4.   Each day that a violation occurs or is
permitted to exist constitutes a repeat offense.



         (b)   Special civil penalties.



            1.   A municipal infraction arising from
noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40
C.F.R. § 403.8, by an industrial user shall be punishable by a penalty of
not more than $1,000 for each day a violation exists or continues.



            2.   A municipal infraction classified as an
environmental violation shall be punishable by a penalty of not more than
$1,000 for each occurrence. However, an environmental violation shall not be
subject to the penalty if all of the following conditions are satisfied:



               a.   The violation results solely from
conducting an initial startup, cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled
maintenance, testing or conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the
violation or the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation;



               b.   The city is notified of the violation
within 24 hours from the time that the violation begins; and



               c.   The violation does not continue in
existence for more than eight hours.



(Iowa Code § 364.22(1))  (1999 Code, § 4.03)



      (4)   Civil citations.  Any officer authorized by the city to
enforce this code of ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who
commits a municipal infraction. The citation may be served by personal
service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure 56.1, by certified mail
addressed to the defendant at defendant’s last known mailing address,
return receipt requested or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule
of Civil Procedure 60 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil
Procedure 60.1. A copy of the citation shall be retained by the issuing
officer, and one copy shall be sent to the Clerk of the District Court. The
citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been committed
and shall contain the following information:



         (a)   The name and address of the defendant;



         (b)   The name or description of the infraction attested
to by the officer issuing the citation;



         (c)   The location and time of the infraction;



         (d)   The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the
alternative relief sought, or both;



         (e)   The manner, location and time in which the penalty
may be paid;



         (f)   The time and place of court appearance; and



         (g)   The penalty for failure to appear in court.



(Iowa Code § 364.22(4))  (1999 Code, § 4.04)



      (5)   Alternative relief. In addition to the fines referenced
above, the city may, at its option, seek injunctive relief against the
offending party and, if said injunction is granted by the court and later
violated by the offending party, seek sanctions for contempt of court against
the offending party. Further, if costs are incurred to abate any nuisance or
other violation of the city code or due to non-payment of charges due and
owing for any service delivered, the city may, in lieu of filing liens
against the property owner, seek a personal judgement against the responsible
owner, renter, or occupant of a property to which the violation pertains.



(Iowa Code § 364.22(8))  (1999 Code, § 4.05)



      (6)   Criminal penalties.  This chapter does not preclude a
peace officer from issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this code
of ordinances or regulation if criminal penalties are also provided for the
violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the authority of the city to enforce
the provisions of this code of ordinances by criminal sanctions or other
lawful means.



(Iowa Code § 364.22(11))  (1999 Code, § 4.06)



(Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)



CHAPTER 11:  BOUNDARIES



Section



   11.01   Division into wards



§ 11.01  DIVISION INTO WARDS.



   The city is four wards described as follows.



   (A)   The First Ward in the city shall be bounded as follows.



      (1)   First Ward; First Precinct.  All that part of the city
bounded as follows:



   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of South Tenth Street
and Eleventh Avenue South; thence east on said centerline of Eleventh Avenue
South to the centerline of South Ninth Street; thence north on said
centerline of South Ninth Street to the centerline of Tenth Avenue South;
thence east on said centerline of Tenth Avenue South to the centerline of
South Eighth Street; thence north on said centerline of South Eighth Street
to the centerline of Ninth Avenue South; thence east on said centerline of
Ninth Avenue South to the centerline of South Sixth Street; thence north on
said centerline of South Sixth Street to the centerline of Sixth Avenue
South; thence east on said centerline of Sixth Avenue South to the centerline
of South Fifth Street; thence north on said centerline of South Fifth Street
to the centerline of Fifth Avenue South; thence east on said centerline of
Fifth Avenue South to the centerline of South First Street; thence north on
said centerline of South First Street to the centerline of Fourth Avenue
South; and thence east on said centerline to the easterly extension thereof
to the east city limits, being the thread of the main channel of the
Mississippi River; thence southerly on said east city limits line to the
easterly extension of the centerline of Beaver Channel, being a branch of the
Mississippi River; thence southwesterly on said easterly extension and the
centerline of Beaver Channel to the centerline of the South Fifth Street boat
ramp; thence north on said centerline of the South Fifth Street boat ramp to
the centerline of Nineteenth Avenue South; thence west on said centerline of
Nineteenth Avenue South to the intersection of Nineteenth Avenue South and
the Union Pacific Railroad tracks; thence southwesterly along said Union
Pacific Railroad tracks to the southeasterly extension of the centerline of
Eighteenth Place; thence northwesterly on said southeasterly extension and
centerline of Eighteenth Place to the centerline of Camanche Avenue; thence
easterly on said centerline of Camanche Avenue to the centerline of Fifteenth
Avenue South; thence west on said centerline of Fifteenth Avenue South to the
centerline of South Twelfth Street; thence north on said centerline of South
Twelfth Street to the centerline of the intersection of Thirteenth Avenue
South and Briarcliff Lane; thence northeast on said centerline of Briarcliff
Lane to the centerline of South Tenth Street; thence south on said centerline
of South Tenth Street to the centerline of Eleventh Avenue South, the point
of beginning.



      (2)   First Ward; Second Precinct. 



         (a)   All the part of the city lying south and west of
the following described lines:



   Commencing one-half mile south of the center of Section 14, Township 81
North, Range 5 East of the 5th P.M., being the intersection of the west city
limits and the centerline of Lincoln Way (U.S. Highway 30); thence north on
the west city limits line to the centerline of Second Avenue South (230th
street); thence east on said centerline of Second Avenue South to the
centerline of South Thirty-Second Street; thence south on said centerline of
Thirty-Second Street to the centerline of Hart’s Mill Road; thence easterly
on said centerline of Hart’s Mill Road to the centerline of South Bluff
Blvd.; thence northeasterly on said centerline of Bluff Blvd. to the
centerline of South Seventeenth Street; thence south on said centerline of
South Seventeenth Street to the centerline of Thirteenth Avenue South; thence
east on said centerline of Thirteenth Avenue South to the centerline of South
Twelfth Street; thence south on the centerline of South Twelfth Street to the
centerline of Fifteenth Avenue South; thence east on said centerline of
Fifteenth Avenue South to the centerline of Camanche Avenue; thence southwest
on said centerline of Camanche Avenue to the centerline of Eighteenth Place
which lies southeasterly of Camanche Avenue; thence southeasterly on said
centerline of Eighteenth Place and the southeasterly extension of Eighteenth
Place to the intersection of the southeasterly extension of Eighteenth Place
and Union Pacific Railroad tracks; thence northeasterly along said Union
Pacific Railroad tracks to the centerline of Nineteenth Avenue South; thence
east on said centerline of Nineteenth Avenue South to the centerline of the
South Fifth Street boat ramp; thence south on said centerline of the South
Fifth Street boat ramp to the centerline of Beaver Channel, being a branch of
the Mississippi River; thence northeasterly on said centerline of Beaver
Channel and the northeasterly extension thereof to the east city limits,
being the thread of the main channel of the Mississippi River.



         (b)   Also included in Ward 1, Precinct 2 are the
following 2010 Census Blocks:



      Census Tract 2 – Blocks 1033, 1045, 1046, 1047, 1048, 1050,
1051, 1052, 1060, 1061;



      Census Tract 4 – Blocks 3057, 3085, 3087; and



      Census Tract 8 – Blocks 2001, 2002, 2005, 3003, 5006, 5016.



            The above are not included in the City of Clinton,
Iowa but as agreed to by the City of Clinton, Iowa and Clinton County, Iowa
shall be included in Ward 1, Precinct 2 for voting purposes in certain
elections.



   (B)   The Second Ward in the city shall be bounded as follows.



      (1)   Second Ward; First Precinct.  All that part of the city
bounded as follows:



   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Second Avenue South
and Thorwaldsen Place; thence east on said centerline of Second Avenue South
to the centerline of South Bluff Blvd.; thence northeast on said centerline
of South Bluff Blvd. to the centerline of First Avenue; thence east on said
centerline of First Avenue to the centerline of South Sixth Street; thence
north on said centerline of South Sixth Street to the intersection of South
Sixth Street and North Bluff Boulevard and Third Avenue North; thence east on
said centerline of Third Avenue North to the centerline of North Second
Street; thence north on said centerline of North Second Street to the
centerline of Fourth Avenue North; thence east on said centerline of Fourth
Avenue North to the intersection of Fourth Avenue North and an unnamed road
through Riverview Park; thence southeasterly along said unnamed road through
Riverview Park to the centerline of First Avenue; thence easterly on the
centerline of an extension of First Avenue to the east city limits (thread of
the main channel of the Mississippi River); thence south along the east city
limits to the easterly extension of the centerline of Fourth Avenue South;
thence west on said centerline of Fourth Avenue South to the centerline of
South First Street; thence south on said centerline of South First Street to
the centerline of Fifth Avenue South; thence west on said centerline of Fifth
Avenue South to the centerline of South Fifth Street; thence south on said
centerline of South Fifth Street to the centerline of Sixth Avenue South;
thence west on said centerline of Sixth Avenue South to the centerline of
South Sixth Street; thence south on said centerline of South Sixth Street to
the centerline of Seventh Avenue South; thence west on said centerline of
Seventh Avenue South to the centerline of South Ninth Street; thence north on
said centerline of South Ninth Street to the centerline of Fifth Avenue
South; thence west on said centerline of Fifth Avenue South to South Bluff
Blvd.; thence southwest on said centerline of South Bluff Blvd. to the
centerline of Woodlawn Avenue; thence northwest on said centerline of
Woodlawn Avenue to the centerline of Thorwaldsen Place; thence north on said
centerline of Thorwaldsen Place to the centerline of Second Avenue South, the
point of beginning.



      (2)   Second Ward; Second Precinct.  All that part of the
city bounded as follows:



   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of South Thirty-Second
Street and Second Avenue South (230 St.); thence east on said centerline of
Second Avenue South (230 St.) to the centerline of Thorwaldsen Place; thence
south on said centerline of Thorwaldsen Place to the centerline of Woodlawn
Avenue; thence southeasterly on said centerline of Woodlawn Avenue to the
centerline of South Bluff Blvd.; thence northeasterly on said centerline of
South Bluff Blvd. to the centerline of Fifth Avenue South; thence east on
said centerline of Fifth Avenue South to the centerline of South Ninth
Street; thence south on said centerline of South Ninth Street to the
centerline of Seventh Avenue South; thence east on said centerline of Seventh
Avenue South to the centerline of South Sixth Street; thence south on said
centerline of South Sixth Street to the centerline of Ninth Avenue South;
thence west on said centerline of Ninth Avenue South to the centerline of
South Eighth Street; thence south on said centerline of South Eighth Street
to the centerline of Tenth Avenue South; thence west on said centerline of
Tenth Avenue South to the centerline of South Ninth Street; thence south on
said centerline of South Ninth Street to the centerline of Eleventh Avenue
South; thence west on said centerline of Eleventh Avenue South to the
centerline of South Tenth Street; thence north on said centerline of South
Tenth Street to the centerline of Briarcliff Lane; thence southwesterly on
said centerline of Briarcliff Lane to the centerline of Eleventh Avenue
South; thence west on said centerline of Eleventh Avenue South to the
centerline of Briarcliff Lane; thence southwesterly on said centerline of
Briarcliff Lane to the centerline of Thirteenth Avenue South; thence west on
said centerline of Thirteenth Avenue South to the centerline of South
Seventeenth Street; thence north on said centerline of South Seventeenth
Street to the centerline of South Bluff Blvd.; thence southwesterly on said
centerline of South Bluff Blvd. to the centerline of Hart’s Mill Road;
thence westerly on said centerline of Hart’s Mill Road to the centerline of
South Thirty-Second Street; thence north on said centerline of South
Thirty-Second Street to the centerline of Second Avenue South, the point of
beginning.



   (C)   The Third Ward in the city shall be bounded as follows.



      (1)   Third Ward; First Precinct.  All that part of the city
bounded as follows:



   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Springdale Drive
and Thirteenth Avenue North; thence east on said centerline of Thirteenth
Avenue North to the centerline of North Fourth Street; thence north on said
centerline of North Fourth Street to the centerline of Fifteenth Avenue
North; thence west on said centerline of Fifteenth Avenue North to the
centerline of North Fifth Street; thence north on said centerline of North
Fifth Street to the centerline of Twentieth Avenue North; thence east on said
centerline of Twentieth Avenue North to the centerline of North Third Street;
thence north on said centerline of North Third Street to the centerline of
Twenty-First Avenue North; thence east on said centerline of Twenty-First
Avenue North and the easterly extension thereof to the east city limits,
being the thread of the main channel of the Mississippi River; thence
southerly on said east city limits line to the easterly extension of First
Avenue; thence west on said centerline of First Avenue to the intersection of
First Avenue and an unnamed road through Riverview Park; thence northwesterly
along said unnamed road through Riverview Park to the centerline of Fourth
Avenue North; thence west on said centerline of Fourth Avenue North to the
centerline of North Second Street; thence south on said centerline of North
Second Street to the centerline of Third Avenue North; thence west on said
centerline of Third Avenue North to the centerline of North Fourth Street;
thence north on said centerline of North Fourth Street to the centerline of
Sixth Avenue North; thence west on said centerline of Sixth Avenue North to
the centerline of North Bluff Boulevard; thence southwesterly on said
centerline of North Bluff Blvd. to the centerline of Springdale Drive; thence
northwesterly on said centerline of Springdale Drive to the centerline of
Thirteenth Avenue North, the point of beginning.



      (2)   Third Ward; Second Precinct.  All that part of the city
lying between Thirteenth Avenue North and Second Avenue South, and bounded on
the west by the west city limits and on the east by the following described
lines:



   Commencing at the intersection of the centerlines of Thirteenth Avenue
North and Springdale Drive; thence southeasterly on said centerline of
Springdale Drive to the centerline of North Bluff Blvd.; thence northeasterly
on said centerline of North Bluff Blvd. to the centerline of Sixth Avenue
North; thence east on said centerline of Sixth Avenue North to the centerline
of North Fourth Street; thence south on said centerline of North Fourth
Street to the centerline of Third Avenue North; thence west on said
centerline of Third Avenue North to the centerline of the intersection with
North Bluff Blvd. and South Sixth Street; thence south on said centerline of
South Sixth Street to the centerline of First Avenue; thence west on said
centerline of First Avenue to the centerline of South Bluff Blvd.; thence
south on said centerline of South Bluff Blvd. to the centerline of Second
Avenue South; thence west on said centerline of Second Avenue South to the
west city boundary; thence north on the west city boundary to the centerline
of Thirteenth Avenue North; thence east on said centerline of Thirteenth
Avenue North to the centerline of the intersection of Thirteenth Avenue North
and Springdale Drive, the point of beginning.



   (D)   The Fourth Ward in the city shall be bounded as follows.



      (1)   Fourth Ward; First Precinct.  All that part of the city
lying north of the following described lines:



   Commencing at the intersection of the west corporate limits of said
city and the centerline of Main Avenue, being U.S. Highway 136; thence east
on said centerline of Main Avenue to the centerline of North Third Street;
thence north on said centerline of North Third Street to the centerline of
Twenty-Sixth Avenue North; thence east on said centerline of Twenty-Sixth
Avenue North to the centerline of Pershing Blvd.; thence north on said
centerline of Pershing Blvd. to the centerline of Thirtieth Avenue North;
thence east on said centerline of Thirtieth Avenue North to the and the
easterly extension thereof to the east city limit, being the thread of the
main channel of the Mississippi River.



      (2)   Fourth Ward; Second Precinct.



   Beginning at the intersection of the west corporate limits of said city
and the centerline of Main Avenue, being U.S. Highway 136; thence east on
said centerline of Main Avenue to the centerline of North Third Street;
thence north on said centerline of North Third Street to the centerline of
Twenty-Sixth Avenue North; thence east on the centerline of Twenty-Sixth
Avenue North to the centerline of Pershing Blvd.; thence north on said
centerline of Pershing Blvd. to the centerline of Thirtieth Avenue North;
thence east on said centerline of Thirtieth Avenue North and the easterly
extension thereof to the east city limits, being the thread of the main
channel of the Mississippi River; thence southerly on said east city limits
to the centerline of the easterly extension of Twenty-First Avenue North;
thence west on said easterly extension and centerline of Twenty-First Avenue
North to the centerline of North Third Street; thence south on said
centerline of North Third Street to the centerline of Twentieth Avenue North;
thence west on said centerline of Twentieth Avenue North to the centerline of
North Fifth Street; thence south on said centerline of North Fifth Street to
the centerline of Fifteenth Avenue North; thence east on said centerline of
Fifteenth Avenue North to the centerline of North Fourth Street; thence south
on said centerline of North Fourth Street to the centerline of Thirteenth
Avenue North; thence west on said centerline of Thirteenth Avenue North to
the west city limits of the city; thence north and east on the west city
limits to the centerline of Main Avenue (U.S. Highway 136), the point of
beginning.



(Iowa Code §§ 372.4, 372.13(7))  (1999 Code, § 3.01)  (Ord. 2244, passed
8-28-2001; Ord. 2250, passed 12-11-2001; Res. 02-28, passed 1-8-2002; Ord.
2252, passed 1-8-2002; Ord. 2458, passed 8-23-2011; Ord. 2462, passed
9-2-2011)



CHAPTER 12:  SCHEDULE OF FINES



Section



   12.01   Schedule of fines



§ 12.01  SCHEDULE OF FINES.



   The following schedule of fines for violations of certain sections of
this code of ordinances is hereby established in order to standardize fines,
save court time and eliminate required court appearances for these violations.



 


Chapter or Section Number

 

Charge

 

Scheduled Fine







 

Animal control

 





91.050

 

   No license

 

$50




91.009

 

   Disturbing the peace by barking dogs

 

$50




91.004

 

   Running at large

 

$50




91.125

 

   Vicious animal

 

$100




81

 

Bicycle violations

 

$25




134.01

 

Curfew (court appearance required)

 






 

   First offense

 

$50




96.03; 135.01

 

Discharge of firearms in city limits

 

$50




95.15

 

Discharging fireworks

 

$50




93.16

 

Disturbing the peace

 





93.03

 

   Loud music

 

$50




72.12

 

Driving on dike

 

$100




93.06

 

Excessive noise with motor exhaust

 

$50




72.10

 

Excessive noise with squealing tires

 

$50




155

 

Housing standards

 

$100




50.07

 

Littering

 

$50




134.02

 

Loitering (court appearance required)

 

$50




90.04

 

Nuisance

 

$100




50.05

 

Open burning

 

$50




96

 

Park rules

 

$50




70.22

 

Parking ticket violations

 

Established fine, penalty plus $5 per violation




133.15et seq.

 

Possession of drug paraphernalia

 

$100




81.09(A)

 

Skateboards, roller blades and roller skates

 

$25




112

 

Solicitation without permit

 

$50




134.03

 

Tobacco (minors) civil penalty

 

$50




76.05

 

Trucks over 5 tons

 

$50




72.01

 

Violation of tarp or spilling load

 

$50




A second offense within a 2-year period shall have a scheduled fine/civil
penalty of twice the amount for a first offense. Third offenses within a
2-year period will require a court appearance.




Any violation of this code not listed shall carry a scheduled fine/civil
penalty of $100 for a first offense.





 



(1999 Code, § 1.12)  (Ord. 2099, passed 7-27-1999; Ord. 2346, passed
3-13-2007)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



   Chapter



      30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



      31.   CITY OFFICIALS



      32.   CITY DEPARTMENTS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES



      33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT



      34.   FIRE DEPARTMENT



      35.   FINANCIAL POLICIES



      36.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES



      37.   IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM



CHAPTER 30:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section




City Elections




   30.01   Nominating method to be used



   30.02   Candidacy



   30.03   Run-off election in lieu of primary



   30.04   Run-off election procedure



   30.05   Qualification



   30.06   Time held



   30.07   Candidates elected




City Council Standing Rules and Order of Business




   30.20   Council meetings



   30.21   Agenda



   30.22   Presiding officer



   30.23   Quorum



   30.24   Voting



   30.25   Regular Council meeting order of business



   30.26   Procedures for public hearings, resolutions, ordinances;
typical motions



   30.27   Sergeant-at-Arms



   30.28   Committee of the Whole



   30.29   Task force groups



   30.30   Citizen participation



   30.31   Scope of standing rules



   30.32   Matters not covered




Operating Procedures




   30.45   Oaths



   30.46   Bonds



   30.47   Duties; general



   30.48   Books and records



   30.49   Transfer to successor



   30.50   Meetings



   30.51   Conflict of interest



   30.52   Resignations



   30.53   Removal of appointed officers and employees



   30.54   Removal of elected officials



   30.55   Vacancies



   30.56   Maximum length of service



   30.57   Residency requirement



   30.58   Unlawful use of city property



   30.59   Grant application approval



   30.60   Gifts



   30.61   Conveyance of city-owned real property/property interests



   30.62   Advisory Appointments Committee



   30.63   Public hearing on petition



CITY ELECTIONS



§ 30.01  NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED.



   All candidates for elective municipal offices shall be nominated under
the provisions of the Iowa Code Chapter 376.



(Iowa Code § 376.3)  (1999 Code, § 6.01)



§ 30.02  CANDIDACY.



   An eligible elector of the city may become a candidate for an elective
city office by filing with the City Clerk a valid petition requesting that
the elector’s name be placed on the ballot for that office. The petition
must be signed by eligible electors equal in number to at least 2% of those
who voted to fill the same office at the last regular city election, but not
less than ten persons.



(1999 Code, § 6.02)



§ 30.03  RUN-OFF ELECTION IN LIEU OF PRIMARY.



   A run-off election shall be held in lieu of a primary election for the
choosing of persons for elective offices.



(Iowa Code § 376.6)  (1999 Code, § 6.03)



§ 30.04  RUN-OFF ELECTION PROCEDURE.



   A run-off election shall be held only for positions unfilled because of
failure of a sufficient number of candidates to receive a majority vote in
the regular city election.



(Iowa Code § 376.9)  (1999 Code, § 6.04)



§ 30.05  QUALIFICATION.



   Candidates who do not receive a majority of the votes cast for an
office, but who receive the highest number of votes cast for that office in
the regular city election, to the extent of twice the number of unfilled
positions, are candidates in the run-off elections.



(Iowa Code § 376.9)  (1999 Code, § 6.05)



§ 30.06  TIME HELD.



   Run-off elections shall be held four weeks after the date of the
regular city election and shall be conducted in the same manner as regular
city elections.



(Iowa Code § 376.9)  (1999 Code, § 6.06)



§ 30.07  CANDIDATES ELECTED.



   Candidates in the run-off election who receive the highest number of
votes cast for each office on the ballot are elected to the extent necessary
to fill the positions open.



(Iowa Code § 376.9)  (1999 Code, § 6.07)



CITY COUNCIL STANDING RULES AND ORDER OF BUSINESS



§ 30.20  COUNCIL MEETINGS.



   The Council holds its regular meetings at the Council chambers at the
City Hall on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at 7:00 p.m.
Special meetings and adjourned meetings shall be held at the same place.
Regularly scheduled meetings may be rescheduled when they fall on holidays or
because of special circumstances as determined by the Council.



(1999 Code, § 7.01)



§ 30.21  AGENDA.



   The Clerk shall prepare an agenda for regularly scheduled Council
meetings, which shall be distributed to the Council by the end of the last
work day of the week preceding the meeting. The Clerk shall assign agenda
items to appropriate Council members when necessary for introduction of
items. The individual Council member reserves the right to decline his or her
assignment of an agenda item. In that event, the agenda item may be presented
by another Council member. No matter which requires a decision by vote of the
Council shall be brought before the Council unless the matter has been listed
on the agenda prepared by the Clerk. A Council member may place individual
items on the agenda prior to deadline. Items introduced during a regular
Council meeting by Council members under old business or new business may be
discussed, but no decision shall be made. Agenda items for Council action
required by the Iowa Code or by this code of ordinances shall be placed on
the regular Council meeting agenda by the Clerk. Ongoing business requiring
policy action by the Council shall be placed on the regular Council meeting
agenda by the Clerk at the direction of the City Administrator. Other items
for regular Council meetings shall originate by majority vote of the Council
at a Council Committee of the Whole meeting, or may originate from a standing
committee. All agenda items which require the fulfillment of the legislative
function of the Council shall be of a policy nature.



(1999 Code, § 7.02)



§ 30.22  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The presiding officer of the Council is the Mayor or in the absence of
the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem. In the absence of the Mayor and the Mayor Pro
Tem, the remaining members of the Council shall elect a temporary presiding
officer by majority vote.



(1999 Code, § 7.03)



§ 30.23  QUORUM.



   Four of the seven Council members constitutes a quorum.



(1999 Code, § 7.04)



§ 30.24  VOTING.



   The unanimous consent calendar, all resolutions and all ordinances
require a roll call vote of each Council member in attendance. The voice vote
shall be a “yes” or “no.”  Each Council member’s vote shall be
recorded by the Clerk.



(1999 Code, § 7.05)



§ 30.25  REGULAR COUNCIL MEETING ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   The order of business is as follows:



   (A)   Call to order;



   (B)   Pledge of Allegiance;



   (C)   Roll call by the Clerk;



   (D)   Minutes of the previous meeting;



   (E)   Public hearings;



   (F)   Audience comment; (The purpose of the audience comment portion
of the agenda is to provide an opportunity for citizens to address the
Council on any issue of that citizen’s concern. The audience comment
opportunity is not a forum for debate with the Mayor, any Council member or
any staff member. Citizens with questions which require answers or concerns
which require discussion are encouraged to contact the appropriate individual
city official or appropriate staff member at another time. Individuals are
limited to three minutes to make their comments.)



   (G)   Unanimous consent calendar;



   (H)   Ordinances, resolutions and motions;



   (I)   Unfinished business; and



   (J)   Adjourn.



(1999 Code, § 7.06)  (Ord. 2398, passed 1-13-2009)



§ 30.26  PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS, RESOLUTIONS, ORDINANCES; TYPICAL
MOTIONS.



   (A)   Public hearings.



      (1)   Ask the Mayor to call for written or oral objections or
comments from audience.



      (2)   Motion. Move to enter the public hearing into the
record, with objections being placed on file, if any received.



   (B)   Resolutions.  Read the resolution or its title and move that
it be adopted as presented, as amended or denied.



   (C)   Ordinances.



      (1)   First consideration (alone).



         (a)   Move the Council consider an ordinance for the
first time; and



         (b)   Read the title.



      (2)   Second consideration (alone).



         (a)   Move the Council consider an ordinance for the
second time; and



         (b)   Read the title.



      (3)   Third consideration and adoption (alone).



         (a)   Move the Council consider an ordinance for the
third and final time;



         (b)   Read the title; and



         (c)   Move that the ordinance under consideration be
placed on its final passage and adopted.



      (4)   Combined second and third considerations and adoption.



         (a)   Move the Council consider an ordinance for the
second time;



         (b)   Read the title;



         (c)   Move that the rules be suspended and the ordinance
considered for the third and final time;



         (d)   Read the title; and



         (e)   Move that the rules be suspended and the ordinance
under consideration be placed on its final passage and adopted.



      (5)   Combined first, second and third considerations and
adoption.



         (a)   Move the Council consider an ordinance for the
first time;



         (b)   Read the ordinance;



         (c)   Move that the rules be suspended and the ordinance
considered for the second time;



         (d)   Read the title;



         (e)   Move that the rules be suspended and the ordinance
considered for the third and final time;



         (f)   Read the title; and



         (g)   Move that the rules be suspended and the ordinance
under consideration be placed on its final passage and adopted.



      (6)   After each consideration on any of its readings, a roll
call vote shall be taken. If a proposed ordinance or amendment to an
ordinance fails to receive sufficient votes for passage at any consideration,
the proposed ordinance or amendment shall be considered defeated. A motion to
suspend the rules requires a vote of not less than three-fourths of all the
Council members.



(1999 Code, § 7.07)



§ 30.27  SERGEANT-AT-ARMS.



   The Police Chief or designate shall serve as Sergeant-at-Arms at all
regular Council meetings. The duty of the Sergeant-at-Arms is to preserve
order if necessary and to protect the safety of the city officials.



(1999 Code, § 7.08)



§ 30.28  COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the Council Committee of the Whole
is to identify, define and investigate issues and to determine by majority
vote those questions of policy which are to be forwarded to the Council for
decision. Action on any motion during Council Committee of the Whole meetings
shall be interpreted as a determination regarding placing an item or issue on
the agenda of a regular Council meeting, and shall not constitute a decision
on the item or issue.



   (B)   Organization.  The Committee of the Whole is organized as
follows.



      (1)   Presiding officer.  The Mayor is the presiding officer
of the Committee of the Whole.



      (2)   Meetings.  Council Committee of the Whole meetings are
held following the regular Council meetings on the second and fourth Tuesdays
of each month in the Council Chambers. Regularly scheduled meetings may be
rescheduled when they fall on holidays or because of special circumstances as
determined by the Council. Additional Committee of the Whole meetings may be
held as determined by the Council. Efforts shall be made to avoid unnecessary
delays in addressing policy matters and to provide a balanced agenda by
distributing Council Committee of the Whole agenda items over the available
meeting dates of each month.



      (3)   Agenda.  Any Council member or the Mayor may request
that an item be placed on the Council Committee of the Whole agenda. The
request may be made at any Council or Council Committee of the Whole meeting.
The request may also be made in writing to the City Administrator’s office,
the request to be copied to each member of the Council. The Council Committee
of the Whole agenda is prepared under the direction of the City
Administrator. Extensive background development or staff research shall be
provided for any agenda item only by Committee of the Whole majority vote.
(This is consistent with the principle that the city government organization
works under the direction of the Council and not under the direction of one
member or of a minority of the Council.)  Ongoing business items may be
placed on the Committee of the Whole agenda by the City Administrator.



      (4)   Standing committees.  The Council Committee of the
Whole may recommend the establishment of standing committees. Each committee
shall consist of not more than three Council members. The purpose of the
standing committees is to study, discuss, review and receive citizen
communication on policy issues and to report findings and/or recommendations
to the Council Committee of the Whole or to the Council at a regular council
meeting. The standing committee shall have no power to formally and finally
decide any issue and their recommendation are to be viewed as advisory in
nature.



         (a)   Any member of the Council shall be entitled to
attend (and participate in the discussion before) any standing committee but
the members shall be seated in the area reserved for the general public and
are not entitled to vote or be counted in determining a quorum.



         (b)   The attendance by non committee members of the
Council shall not be defined or construed as constituting a meeting of the
Committee of the Whole or of a meeting of the full Council.



(1999 Code, § 7.09)  (Ord. 2105, passed 11-9-1999; Ord. 2418, passed
7-13-2010)



§ 30.29  TASK FORCE GROUPS.



   By Council majority vote, special task force groups may be organized to
gather information and make recommendations on specific issues. The
recommendations shall be of an advisory nature and nonbinding to the Council.



(1999 Code, § 7.10)



§ 30.30  CITIZEN PARTICIPATION.



   Citizens are encouraged to attend any and all regular Council meetings,
all Council Committee of the Whole meetings, all standing committee meetings
and any special task force meetings. For specific issues, such as petitions
presented by citizens, public input may be solicited by any Council member.
If citizen input is needed for information or opinion, the affected party
shall be notified of the time and place of the meeting. During Council
Committee of the Whole, standing committee meetings and task force meetings,
the public may be invited to provide information or opinion on any agenda
item by members of the Committee or by the Mayor.



(1999 Code, § 7.11)



§ 30.31  SCOPE OF STANDING RULES.



   The standing rules set out in this chapter govern the conduct of the
Council and shall be interpreted to ensure fair and open deliberation and
decision making.



(1999 Code, § 7.12)



§ 30.32  MATTERS NOT COVERED.



   Any matter or order or procedure not covered by these rules shall be
referred to the presiding officer, who shall decide the matter with the
assistance and advice of the City Attorney or a representative of the City
Attorney, in conformity with the purpose of these rules in a fair and
expeditious manner. Robert’s Rules of Order (as revised), where applicable,
unless abolished by this chapter, shall be followed.



(1999 Code, § 7.13)



OPERATING PROCEDURES



§ 30.45  OATHS.



   The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance
with the following.



   (A)   Qualify for office.  Each elected or appointed officer shall
qualify for office by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when
required, a bond. The oath shall be taken, and bond provided, after being
certified as elected but not later than noon of the first day which is not a
Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the term for which
the officer was elected.



(Iowa Code § 63.1)



   (B)   Prescribed oath.  The prescribed oath is:



      I, (name), do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution
of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Iowa, and that I
will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all
duties of the office of (name of office) in Clinton as now or hereafter
required by law.



(Iowa Code § 63.10)



   (C)   Officers empowered to administer oaths.  The following are
empowered to administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter
pertaining to the business of their respective office:



      (1)   Mayor;



      (2)   City Clerk; and



      (3)   Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by
law.



(Iowa Code § 63A.2)



(1999 Code, § 5.01)



§ 30.46  BONDS.



   Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following.



   (A)   Required.  The Council shall provide by resolution for a
surety bond or blanket position bond running to the city and covering the
Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer and other officers and employees as may be necessary
and advisable.



(Iowa Code § 64.13)



   (B)   Bonds approved.  Bonds shall be approved by the Council.



(Iowa Code § 64.19)



   (C)   Bonds filed.  All bonds, after approval and proper record,
shall be filed with the Clerk.



(Iowa Code § 64.23(6))



   (D)   Record.  The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the
“Record of Official Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds
of all city officers, elective or appointive.



(Iowa Code § 64.24(3))



(1999 Code, § 5.02)



§ 30.47  DUTIES; GENERAL.



   Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
prescribed by law and this code of ordinances, or as otherwise directed by
the Council unless contrary to state law or City Charter.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))  (1999 Code, § 5.03)



§ 30.48  BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   All books and records required to be kept by law or ordinance shall be
open to examination by the public upon request, unless some other provisions
of law expressly limit the right or require records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records which are combined with data processing software
shall be in accordance with policies and procedures established by the city.



(Iowa Code §§ 22.2, 22.3A)  (1999 Code, § 5.04)



§ 30.49  TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR.



   Each officer shall transfer to the officer’s successor in office all
books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))  (1999 Code, § 5.05)



§ 30.50  MEETINGS.



   All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any
multi-membered body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing
bodies shall be held in accordance with the following.



   (A)   Notice of meetings.  Reasonable notice, as defined by state
law, of the time, date and place of each meeting and its tentative agenda
shall be given.



(Iowa Code § 21.4)



   (B)   Meetings open.  All meetings shall be held in open session
unless closed sessions are held as expressly permitted by state law.



(Iowa Code § 21.3)



   (C)   Minutes.  Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the
date, time and place, the members present and the action taken at each
meeting. The minutes shall show the results of each vote taken and
information sufficient to indicate the vote of each member present. The vote
of each member present shall be made public at the open session. The minutes
shall be public records open to public inspection.



(Iowa Code § 21.3)



   (D)   Closed session.  A closed session may be held only by
affirmative vote of either two-thirds of the body or all of the members
present at the meeting and in accordance with the Iowa Code Chapter 21.



(Iowa Code § 21.5)



   (E)   Cameras and recorders.  The public may use cameras or
recording devices at any open session.



(Iowa Code § 21.7)



   (F)   Electronic meetings.  A meeting may be conducted by
electronic means only in circumstances where a meeting in person is
impossible or impractical and then only in compliance with the provisions of
the Iowa Code Chapter 21.



(Iowa Code § 21.8)



(1999 Code, § 5.06)



§ 30.51  CONFLICT OF INTEREST.



   A city officer or employee shall not have an interest, direct or
indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof
or services to be furnished or performed for the city, unless expressly
permitted by law. A contract entered into in violation of this section is
void. The provisions of this section do not apply to:



   (A)   Compensation of officers.  The payment of lawful compensation
of a city officer or employee holding more than one city office or position,
the holding of which is not incompatible with another public office or is not
prohibited by law;



(Iowa Code § 362.5(1))



   (B)   Investment of funds.  The designation of a bank or trust
company as a depository, paying agent or for investment of funds;



(Iowa Code § 362.5(2))



   (C)   City Treasurer.  An employee of a bank or trust company, who
serves as Treasurer of the city;



(Iowa Code § 362.5(3))



   (D)   Stock interests.  Contracts in which a city officer or
employee has an interest solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest
of the kind described in division (H) below of this section, or both, if the
contract is for professional services not customarily awarded by competitive
bid, if the remuneration of employment will not be directly affected as a
result of the contract, and if the duties of employment do not directly
involve the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract;



(Iowa Code § 362.5(5))



   (E)   Newspaper.  The designation of an official newspaper;



(Iowa Code § 362.5(6))



   (F)   Existing contracts.  A contract in which a city officer or
employee has an interest if the contract was made before the time the officer
or employee was elected or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed;



(Iowa Code § 362.5(7))



   (G)   Volunteers.  Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil
defense volunteers;



(Iowa Code § 362.5(8))



   (H)   Corporations.  A contract with a corporation in which a city
officer or employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less
than 5% of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled
directly or indirectly by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate
family of the officer or employee;



(Iowa Code § 362.5(9))



   (I)   Contracts.  Contracts made by the city upon competitive bid
in writing, publicly invited and opened;



(Iowa Code § 362.5(4))



   (J)   Cumulative purchases.  Contracts not otherwise permitted by
this section, for the purchase of goods or services which benefit a city
officer or employee, if the purchases benefitting that officer or employee do
not exceed a cumulative total purchase price of $1,500 in a fiscal year; and



(Iowa Code § 362.5(10))



   (K)   Franchise agreements.  Franchise agreements between the city
and a utility and contracts entered into by the city for the provision of
essential city utility services.



(Iowa Code § 362.5(12))



(Iowa Code § 362.5)  (1999 Code, § 5.07)



§ 30.52  RESIGNATIONS.



   An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a
resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and
considered. A person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for
appointment to the same office during the time for which the person was
elected, if during that time the compensation of the office has been
increased.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(9))  (1999 Code, § 5.08)



§ 30.53  REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   Except as otherwise provided by state or city law, all persons
appointed to city office or employment may be removed by the officer or body
making the appointment, but every removal shall be by written order. The
order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a copy
shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request
filed with the Clerk within 30 days after the date of mailing the copy, shall
be granted a public hearing before the Council on all issues connected with
the removal. The hearing shall be held within 30 days after the date the
request is filed, unless the person removed requests a later date.



(Iowa Code § 372.15)  (1999 Code, § 5.09)



§ 30.54  REMOVAL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.



   Any city officer elected by the people may be removed from office after
hearing on written charges filed with the Council for any cause which would
be ground for an equitable action for removal in the District Court, but the
removal can only be made by a two-thirds majority of the entire Council. At
least three-days’ notice of the time and place for hearing shall be given,
accompanied with a copy of the written specifications of the charges brought
against the officer. The Council shall have the power to summon witnesses and
compel production of books, papers and documents and to take testimony. The
notice to the officer so charged shall be served by the Police Chief. At the
time fixed for the hearing, the Council shall hear and determine the charges
so preferred, unless for good cause or failure of two-thirds of the Council
to attend. In that case, the hearing shall be continued to a date and time
certain. When the hearing has been completed, the vote of the Council shall
be recorded and if by a two-thirds vote of the entire Council the officer is
removed from office, the removal shall be entered of record, and the
resulting vacancy shall be forthwith filled in the manner provided by law for
filling an ordinary vacancy occurring in the office.



(1999 Code, § 5.10)



§ 30.55  VACANCIES.



   A vacancy in an elective city office during a term of office shall be
filled, at the Council’s option, by one of the two following procedures:



   (A)   Appointment.  By appointment following public notice by the
remaining members of the Council within 40 days after the vacancy occurs,
except that if the remaining members do not constitute a quorum of the full
membership, or if a petition is filed requesting an election, the Council
shall call a special election as provided by law; or



(Iowa Code § 372.13(2)(a))



   (B)   Election.  By a special election held to fill the office for
the remaining balance of the unexpired term as provided by law.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(2)(b))



(Iowa Code § 372.13(2))  (1999 Code, § 5.11)



§ 30.56  MAXIMUM LENGTH OF SERVICE.



   The maximum length of service of members appointed to boards and
commissions of the city is 12 years, provided at least two consecutive full
terms of office are served.



(1999 Code, § 5.12)



§ 30.57  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   All full-time police and fire personnel employed by the city
after May 1, 2018 must reside within or establish a residency within the
State of Iowa and shall reside within ten miles of their place of employment
within two years after their first day of work, and must remain a resident of
the state and reside within ten air miles of their place of employment
throughout their period of employment with the city. All full-time police and
fire personnel who already reside within the state at the time of hire shall
reside within ten air miles of their place of employment within one year
after their first day of work, and must retain residency within ten air miles
of their place of employment throughout their period of employment with the
city.



   (B)   All full-time city employees, except police and fire
personnel, employed by the city after May 1, 2018, must reside within the
municipal limits of the city. These residency requirements are a condition of
employment with the city.



   (C)   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT means the location of city police of fire
headquarters.



   (D)   RESIDENCY means the primary address where the full-time
employee lives at least 75% of the time, and where said employee receives
mail on a regular basis.



(1999 Code, § 5.13)  (Ord. 2570, passed 3-27-2018; Ord. 2589, passed
8-14-2018)



§ 30.58  UNLAWFUL USE OF CITY PROPERTY.



   No person shall use or permit any other person to use the property
owned by the city for any private purpose and for personal gain, to the
detriment of the city.



(Iowa Code § 721.2(5))  (1999 Code, § 5.14)



§ 30.59  GRANT APPLICATION APPROVAL.



   All administrative agencies, boards or commissions of the city shall
obtain approval by Council resolution prior to the submission of a grant
application or preapplication of any kind where city property, city funds or
city services are committed, in order to ensure that the agency, board or
commission will have its matching fund requirements approved at the time of
submission of its budget for the ensuing fiscal year.



(1999 Code, § 5.15)



§ 30.60  GIFTS.



   Except as otherwise provided in the Iowa Code Chapter 68B, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family
member, shall not, directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or
series of gifts from a restricted donor as defined in Chapter 68B and a
restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or jointly
with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of
gifts to a public official, public employee or candidate.



(Iowa Code § 68B.22)  (1999 Code, § 5.16)



§ 30.61  CONVEYANCE OF CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY/PROPERTY INTERESTS.



   The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed conveyance of
any real property owned by the city or the conveyance of any interest in real
property owned by the city, including but not limited to the conveyance of
easements, with notice of the hearing given pursuant to Iowa Code § 362.3.
The Council shall make the final determination on the conveyance of the real
property or interest therein and the total price thereof in conformity with
applicable laws of the State of Iowa.



(1999 Code, § 5.17)  (Ord. 2535, passed 3-8-2016)



§ 30.62  ADVISORY APPOINTMENTS COMMITTEE.



   (A)   An Advisory Appointments Committee is hereby established
consisting of six members, as follows:



      (1)   The Mayor;



      (2)   A member of the City Council appointed by the Mayor; and



      (3)   Four public members who are residents of the city. The
four public members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
Council.



   (B)   The terms of office of the members of the committee shall
expire on January 2 of each even-numbered year.



   (C)   Whenever a vacancy exists or will exist on a board or
commission of the City of Clinton, Iowa, the Advisory Appointments Committee
shall make a recommendation to the Mayor of a person or persons to be
appointed to the vacant position, taking account of the city's gender balance
policy.  The Advisory Appointments Committee shall also interview every
applicant for a board or commission position as part of the recommendation
process.  The Advisory Appointments Committee shall encourage and recruit
residents of the city for appointment to boards and commissions.



(1999 Code, § 5.18)  (Ord. 2475, passed 6-12-2012; Ord. 2511, passed
9-23-2014)



§ 30.63  PUBLIC HEARING ON PETITION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a petition containing signatures of eligible
electors of the city equal in number to at least 25% of the persons who voted
at the last regular city election, the Council shall refer the petition to
the Council as a Committee of the Whole and schedule a public hearing on the
petition to be held before the Council as a Committee of the Whole within 14
days.



   (B)   Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least once,
in a newspaper having general circulation in the city, not less than four nor
more than 14 days before the date of the public hearing.



   (C)   Any action on the petition shall be taken at the next regular
Council meeting following the Committee of the Whole meeting.



   (D)   In the event Council action is pending on the issue addressed
by the petition, any action by the Council on the issue shall be tabled until
the next regular Council meeting following the required Committee of the
Whole meeting, or thereafter as the Council may determine.



(1999 Code, § 5.19)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS



Section




Mayor




   31.001   Term of office



   31.002   Powers and duties



   31.003   Appointments



   31.004   Compensation




Mayor Pro Tem




   31.015   Vice President of Council



   31.016   Powers and duties



   31.017   Voting rights



   31.018   Compensation




City Council




   31.030   Number and term of Council



   31.031   Powers and duties



   31.032   Appointment of City Administrator



   31.033   Compensation




City Clerk




   31.045   Appointment and compensation



   31.046   Powers and duties; general



   31.047   Publication of minutes



   31.048   Recording measures



   31.049   Publication



   31.050   Authentication



   31.051   Certify measures



   31.052   Records



   31.053   Attendance at meetings



   31.054   Issue licenses and permits



   31.055   Notify appointees



   31.056   Elections



   31.057   City seal



   31.058   City emblem



   31.059   City flag



   31.060   City insignia limited



   31.061   Misuse of city seal, city emblem, or city flag



   31.062   City trademarks and service marks




City Administrator




   31.070   Creation of office



   31.071   Appointment and compensation



   31.072   Removal of City Administrator



   31.073   Powers and duties



   31.074   Political activity




City Attorney




   31.085   Legal Department created



   31.086   General duties of Legal Department



   31.087   Composition of Legal Department



   31.088   Appointment; general qualifications



   31.089   Specifics of appointment



   31.090   Restriction on practice after termination of city service



   31.091   Assistants



   31.092   Outside legal counsel



MAYOR



§ 31.001  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.



(Iowa Code § 376.2)  (1999 Code, § 15.01)



§ 31.002  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   In addition to the powers and duties set out in the Home Rule Charter
as set out in this code of ordinances, the powers and duties of the Mayor are
as follows.



   (A)   Chief executive officer.  Act as the chief executive officer
of the city and presiding officer of the Council and, except for the
supervisory duties which have been delegated by law to a City Manager or City
Administrator, supervise all city officers and departments.



(Iowa Code § 372.14(1))



   (B)   Proclamation of emergency.  Have authority to take command of
the police and govern the city by proclamation, upon making a determination
that a time of emergency or public danger exists. Within the city limits, the
Mayor has all the powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.



(Iowa Code § 372.14(2))



   (C)   Contracts and documents.  Whenever authorized by the Council,
sign contracts and documents on behalf of the city.



(1999 Code, § 15.02)



§ 31.003  APPOINTMENTS.



   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem and shall also
appoint, with the approval of the Council, the following officials:



      (1)   Library Board of Trustees;



      (2)   Plan Commission;



      (3)   Historic Preservation Commission;



      (4)   Civil Service Commission;



      (5)   Human Rights Commission;



      (6)   Housing Authority Board of Commissioners;



      (7)   Traffic Study Commission;



      (8)   Zoning Board of Adjustment;



      (9)   Housing Board of Appeals;



      (10)   Tree Commission;



      (11)   Airport Commission;



      (12)   Mayor’s Youth Commission;



      (13)   ADA Advisory Commission;



      (14)   Advisory Appointments Committee;



(Iowa Code § 372.4)  (1999 Code, § 15.03)



      (15)   Finance Committee;



      (16)   Neighborhood Improvement Committee;



      (17)   Capital Improvements Planning Committee;



      (18)   Parks and Recreation Advisory Board;



      (19)   Monuments Committee;



      (20)   Hometown Pride Committee;



      (21)   Grant Committee; and



      (22)   Trails Advisory Committee.



   (B)   Conflicts of interest.



      (1)   No member of any administrative or advisory board,
committee, commission or agency shall vote or participate in the discussion
before the body or any subcommittee of the body on any issue in which the
member has a direct financial interest or an interest as defined in § 30.51
of this Code, Iowa Code § 362.5 and as described in this section.  No
member of any administrative or advisory board, committee, commission or
agency shall participate in selection or in the award or administration of a
contract if a conflict of interest, real or apparent, would be involved. Such
a conflict would arise when any of the following persons has a financial or
other interest in the firm or contractor selected for award:



         (a)   The board, committee, commission or agency member;



         (b)   Any member of his or her immediate family;



         (c)   His or her partner; or



         (d)   Any organization which employs or is about to
employ any of the persons mentioned in subsections (B)(1)(a) through (c) of
this section.



      (2)   No board, committee, commission or agency member shall
solicit or accept gratuities, favors, money, rebates or anything of monetary
value from contractors, potential contractors or parties to sub-agreements.



      (3)   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code,
no two members of any administrative or advisory board, committee, commission
or agency shall be employees of the same person, firm, company, partnership
or other employing entity. For purposes of this section the owner or
proprietor of a firm, company or other employing entity and each partner in a
partnership and the spouse of each owner or proprietor or partner shall be
considered an employee of the firm, company, partnership or other employing
entity. This subsection shall not disqualify any member of a board,
committee, commission or agency serving upon the effective date of this
section.



      (4)   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code,
no member of any administrative or advisory board, committee, commission or
agency shall be appointed who is an employee of the City of Clinton or is the
spouse or partner of an elected City of Clinton officer or official. 
OFFICIAL shall be defined as a person holding a position of Department Head
or above.  This subsection shall not disqualify any member of a board,
committee, commission or agency serving upon the effective date of this
section.



      (5)   Any member who violates this section may be subject to
disciplinary action by the appointing authority, including removal from
office.



      (6)   The conflict of interest provisions in § 30.51 of this
Code and Iowa Code § 362.5 shall also apply to all members of any
administrative or advisory board, committee, commission or agency.



      (7)   Exceptions under federal law. To the extent allowed by
applicable federal law or regulation, the City Council may permit exceptions
to conflict of interest under this section which do not constitute a
violation of applicable provisions of state law. The grant of such exceptions
shall be specifically conditioned upon approval by the appropriate federal
agency.



(Ord. 2470, passed 4-24-2012; Ord. 2572, passed 4-24-2018; Ord. 2574, passed
4-24-2018; Ord. 2579, passed 5-8-2018)



§ 31.004  COMPENSATION.



   The salary of the Mayor is $15,000 per year, payable in semimonthly
installments on the fifteenth and last day of each month commencing on
January 15, 2012. The salary of the Mayor is $18,000 per year, payable in
semimonthly installments on the fifteenth and last day of each month
commencing on January 15, 2020. The Mayor will also receive a $75 per month
allowance, payable on the last day of each month for telephone usage, email
account, internet access, or other information/technology the Mayor deems
appropriate.  This salary and allowance shall be reviewed by the Council
every four years, starting with a review in the fourth year after adoption of
this section.  In addition, the Mayor, while holding office, is provided
with $20,000 in term life insurance and $20,000 in accidental death and
dismemberment insurance, subject to the plan of the non-union employees, with
the premium to be paid for by the city.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(8))  (1999 Code, § 15.04) (Ord. 2405, passed
8-25-2009; Ord. 2578, passed 5-8-2018)



MAYOR PRO TEM



§ 31.015  VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL.



   The Mayor Pro Tem is Vice President of the Council.



(Iowa Code § 372.14(3))  (1999 Code, § 16.01)



§ 31.016  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the Mayor Pro Tem
shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the
Mayor to perform the duties.



(Iowa Code § 372.14(3))  (1999 Code, § 16.02)



§ 31.017  VOTING RIGHTS.



   The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of the
Council.



(Iowa Code § 372.14(3))  (1999 Code, § 16.03)



§ 31.018  COMPENSATION.



   If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during the
Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of 15 days or more,
the Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined
by the Council, based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s
duties and upon the compensation of the Mayor.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(8))  (1999 Code, § 16.04)



CITY COUNCIL



§ 31.030  NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL.



   The Council consists of three Council Members elected at large and one
Council Member from each of four  wards as established by the code of
ordinances, elected for overlapping terms of four years.



(1999 Code, § 17.01)



§ 31.031  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   In addition to the powers and duties set out in the Home Rule Charter
as set out in this code of ordinances, the powers and duties of the Council
include, but are not limited to the following.



   (A)   Fiscal authority.  The Council shall apportion and
appropriate all funds, and audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and
claims and order payment thereof. It shall make all assessments for the cost
of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and other work, improvement or
repairs which may be specially assessed.



(Iowa Code §§ 364.2(1), 384.16, 384.38(1))



   (B)   Public improvements.  The Council shall make all orders for
the doing of work, or the making or construction of any improvements, bridges
or buildings.



(Iowa Code § 364.2(1))



   (C)   Contracts.  The Council shall make or authorize the making of
all contracts. No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the city unless
adopted by resolution of the Council.



(Iowa Code § 384.100)



(1999 Code, § 17.02)



§ 31.032  APPOINTMENT OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Council shall appoint the City Administrator and prescribe the
Administrator’s powers, duties, compensation and term of office.



(1999 Code, § 17.03)



§ 31.033  COMPENSATION.



   The salary of each Council member is $6,000 per year, payable in
semimonthly installments on the fifteenth and last day of each month
commencing on January 15, 2010. Each Council member will also receive a $75
per month allowance, payable on the last day of each month for telephone
usage, email account, internet access, or other information/technology each
Council Member deems appropriate. This salary shall be reviewed by the
Council every four years, starting with a review in the fourth year after
adoption of this section.  In addition, each member of the Council, while
holding office, is provided with $20,000 in term life insurance and $20,000
in accidental death and dismemberment insurance, subject to the plan of the
non-union employees,  with the premium to be paid for by the city.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(8))  (1999 Code, § 17.04) (Ord. 2406, passed 9-8-2009)



CITY CLERK



§ 31.045  APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.



   The City Administrator shall appoint, subject to Council approval, a
City Clerk. The City Clerk receives compensation as established by resolution
of the Council.



(1999 Code, § 18.01)  (Ord. 2374, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 31.046  POWERS AND DUTIES; GENERAL.



   The City Clerk has the powers and duties as provided in this
subchapter, this code of ordinances, the law, Council resolution and as
assigned by the City Administrator. In the City Clerk’s absence or
inability to act, the City Administrator may appoint an acting City Clerk.



(1999 Code, § 18.02)  (Ord. 2374, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 31.047  PUBLICATION OF MINUTES.



   The City Clerk or designee shall attend all regular and special Council
meetings and within 15 days following a regular or special meeting shall
cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published. The publication
shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and
shall show the gross amount of the claim.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(6))  (1999 Code, § 18.03)  (Ord. 2374, passed
6-10-2008)



§ 31.048  RECORDING MEASURES.



   The City Clerk shall promptly record each measure considered by the
Council and record a statement with the measure, where applicable, indicating
whether the Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and
whether the measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.



(Iowa Code §§ 380.7(1), 380.7(2))  (1999 Code, § 18.04)  (Ord. 2374,
passed 6-10-2008)



§ 31.049  PUBLICATION.



   The City Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances, enactments,
proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows.



   (A)   Time.  If notice of an election, hearing, or other official
action is required by the code of ordinances or law, the notice must be
published at least once, not less than four nor more than 20 days before the
date of the election, hearing or other action, unless otherwise provided by
law.



(Iowa Code § 362.3(1))



   (B)   Manner of publication.  A publication required by this code
of ordinances or law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly
and having general circulation in the city. The Clerk’s certification is
presumptive evidence of the facts stated therein.



(Iowa Code § 362.3(2))  (1999 Code, § 18.05)  (Ord. 2374, passed
6-10-2008)



§ 31.050  AUTHENTICATION.



   The City Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions with the
City Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when
required.



(Iowa Code § 380.7(4))  (1999 Code, § 18.06)  (Ord. 2374, passed
6-10-2008)



§ 31.051  CERTIFY MEASURES.



   The City Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning
district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district,
lines or limits to the County Recorder containing the affected parts of the
city.



(Iowa Code § 380.11)  (1999 Code, § 18.07)  (Ord. 2374, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 31.052  RECORDS.



   The City Clerk shall maintain the specified city records in the
following manner.



   (A)   Ordinances and codes.  Maintain copies of all effective city
ordinances and codes for public use.



(Iowa Code § 380.7(5))



   (B)   Custody.  Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping
of all writings or documents in which the city is a party in interest unless
otherwise specifically directed by law or ordinance.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))



   (C)   Maintenance.  Maintain all city records and documents, or
accurate reproductions, for at least five years except that ordinances,
resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, relating to the issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption
or replacement of public bonds or obligations shall be kept for at least 11
years following the final maturity of the bonds or obligations. Ordinances,
resolutions, Council proceedings, records and documents or accurate
reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be maintained
permanently.



(Iowa Code §§ 372.13(3), 372.13(5))



   (D)   Provide copy.  Furnish upon request to any municipal officer
a copy of any record, paper or public document under the City Clerk’s
control when it may be necessary to the officer in the discharge of the
officer’s duty; furnish a copy to any citizen when requested upon payment
of the fee set by Council resolution; under the direction of the Mayor or
other authorized officer, affix the seal of the city to those public
documents or instruments which by ordinance and code of ordinances are
required to be attested by the affixing of the seal.



(Iowa Code §§ 372.13(4), 372.13(5), 380.7(5))



   (E)   Filing of communications.  Keep and file all communications
and petitions directed to the Council. The City Clerk shall endorse thereon
the action of the Council taken upon matters considered in communications and
petitions.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))  (1999 Code, § 18.08)  (Ord. 2374, passed
6-10-2008)



§ 31.053  ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.



   At the direction of the City Administrator, the City Clerk shall attend
meetings of committees, boards and commissions. The City Clerk shall record
and preserve a correct record of the proceedings of the meetings.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))  (1999 Code, § 18.09)  (Ord. 2374, passed
6-10-2008)



§ 31.054  ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   The City Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits when
authorized by this code of ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and
permits issued which shall show date of issuance, license or permit number,
official receipt number, name of person to whom issued, term of license or
permit and purpose for which issued.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))  (1999 Code, § 18.10)  (Ord. 2374, passed
6-10-2008)



§ 31.055  NOTIFY APPOINTEES.



   The City Clerk shall inform all persons appointed by the Mayor or
Council to offices in the city government of their position and the time at
which he or she shall assume the duties of his or her office.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))  (1999 Code, § 18.11)  (Ord. 2374, passed
6-10-2008)



§ 31.056  ELECTIONS.



   The City Clerk shall perform the following duties relating to elections
and nominations:



   (A)   In the event of a change in the method of nomination process
used by the city, certify to the Commissioner of Elections the type of
nomination process to be used by the city no later than 77 days before the
date of the regular city election;



(Iowa Code § 376.6)



   (B)   Accept the nomination petition of a candidate for a city
office for filing if on its face it appears to have the requisite number of
signatures and is timely filed;



(Iowa Code § 376.4)



   (C)   Designate other employees or officials of the city who are
ordinarily available to accept nomination papers if the City Clerk is not
readily available during normal working hours;



(Iowa Code § 376.4)



   (D)   Note upon each petition and affidavit accepted for filing the
date and time that the petition was filed; and



(Iowa Code § 376.4)



   (E)   Deliver all nomination petitions, together with the text of
any public measure being submitted by the Council to the electorate, to the
County Commissioner of Elections not later than 5:00 p.m. on the day
following the last day on which nomination petitions can be filed.



(Iowa Code § 376.4)



(1999 Code, § 18.12)  (Ord. 2374, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 31.057  CITY SEAL.



   The city shall hereby have an official seal. The city seal is in the
custody of the City Clerk and shall be attached by the City Clerk to all
transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be necessary or proper to
authenticate. The city seal shall comprise the following image:







 



(1999 Code, § 18.13)  (Ord. 2374, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2594, passed
10-9-2018)



§ 31.058  CITY EMBLEM.



   (A)   The city shall hereby have an official emblem. The City Clerk,
the Mayor, a majority of the members of the City Council acting collectively,
and, with the express written consent of one or more of the above, all city
employees shall have the right to use the official emblem only respecting
official city matters, and only within the scope of their responsibilities as
officials and employees. The city emblem shall appear upon official documents
and notices only.



   (B)    The city emblem shall comprise the following image:







 



(Ord. 2594, passed 10-9-2018)



§ 31.059  CITY FLAG.



   The city shall hereby have an official flag. The City Clerk, the Mayor,
a majority of the members of the City Council acting collectively, and, with
the express written consent of one or more of the above, all city employees
shall have the right to use the official flag only respecting official city
matters, and only within the scope of their responsibilities as officials and
employees. The city flag shall be used only in conjunction with city
buildings, functions, and events. The city flag shall comprise the following
image:







 



(Ord. 2594, passed 10-9-2018)



§ 31.060  CITY INSIGNIA LIMITED.



   Other than the city seal, the city emblem, and the city flag, no
designs, logos, or symbols used by the city, its officials, or its employees
shall be used with the intent to represent the authority of the city nor
shall they be considered official city insignia for the purposes of this code.



(Ord. 2594, passed 10-9-2018)



§ 31.061  MISUSE OF CITY SEAL, CITY EMBLEM, OR CITY FLAG.



   Any use of the city seal, city emblem, or city flag in a manner
inconsistent with this chapter, or by a person not authorized by this
chapter, shall be a violation of this code.



(Ord. 2594, passed 10-9-2018)



§ 31.062  CITY TRADEMARKS AND SERVICE MARKS.



   The city may adopt trademarks and service marks for the goods or
services that it provides. These marks are used to identify the city or a
subdivision thereof as a source of goods or services and not with the intent
to represent the authority of the city.  Unauthorized use of the city's
trademarks or service marks by third parties shall be punishable under state,
federal, and common law and shall also be a violation of this code.



(Ord. 2594, passed 10-9-2018)



CITY ADMINISTRATOR



§ 31.070  CREATION OF OFFICE.



   The Office of City Administrator is hereby created.



(1999 Code, § 19.01)



§ 31.071  APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION.



   The Council shall appoint by majority vote the City Administrator for
an indefinite term. The City Administrator shall be chosen by the Council
solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with
special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practice
in respect to the duties of the office hereinafter set forth. At the time of
the appointment, the appointee need not be a resident of the city or state,
but during tenure of office, the City Administrator shall reside within the
city. During the absence of the City Administrator by leave of the City
Council, or through sickness or other unavoidable causes, or when the
position is vacant the City Council may designate some properly qualified
person to perform and execute the duties of the City Administrator's office.
The City Attorney shall be the Acting City Administrator during all excused
absences of the City Administrator or when there is a vacancy in the
position. The Administrator receives compensation as established by
resolution of the Council.



(1999 Code, § 19.02) (Ord. 2498, passed 8-13-2013)



§ 31.072  REMOVAL OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Council may remove the City Administrator at any time by a majority
vote of its members.  The Council may suspend the City Administrator from
duty but shall continue the City Administrator's salary and all benefits, and
if the removal becomes final, shall pay the salary and benefits as per the
employment agreement of the City Administrator.



(1999 Code, § 19.03) (Ord. 2499, passed 8-13-2013)



§ 31.073  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The City Administrator is the chief administrative officer of the city,
may head one or more departments and is responsible to the Council and Mayor
for the proper administration of all affairs of the city. To that end, the
City Administrator has the power and is required to do the following:



   (A)   Supervise enforcement and execution of city laws;



   (B)   Attend all meeting of the Council and take part in the
discussion of all matters coming before the Council. The City Administrator
is entitled to notice of all regular and special meetings of the Council;



   (C)   Recommend to the Council the adoption of measures as deemed
necessary or expedient for the health, safety or welfare of the city or for
the improvement of administrative services;



   (D)   Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service,
suspend, remove or discipline all officers of the city except as otherwise
provided by law or this code of ordinances and except authorizing the head of
a department to appoint, suspend, remove or discipline subordinates in the
department. The City Administrator has the power to appoint and remove the
following department heads subject to the approval of the Council:



      (1)   Clerk;



      (2)   Fire Chief;



      (3)   Police Chief;



      (4)   Recreation Director;



      (5)   Public Works Director;



      (6)   Planning/Community Development Director;



      (7)   Director of Finance;



      (8)   Building and Neighborhood Services;



      (9)   City Planner;



      (10)   Engineering; and



      (11)   Human Resources.



   (E)   Supervise the official conduct of all officers of the city.
The City Administrator is responsible to the Council for the performance of
all department activities. All department heads, regardless of their method
of appointment, are responsible to the City Administrator for the conduct of
his or her department;



   (F)   Direct and coordinate all city services provided through the
various departments;



   (G)   Prepare and submit to the Council for approval the necessary
budget and be responsible for its administration after adoption. A
preliminary budget review with the Council shall be held prior to November 1
for the next fiscal year. There shall be a budget status update for the new
budget presented to the Committee of the Whole semimonthly commencing on or
about January 2;



   (H)   Keep the Mayor and Council fully advised and informed
concerning the operation of all aspects of the city government, of the
financial condition of the city and of the future needs of the city;



   (I)   Conduct the business affairs of the city and cause accurate
records to be kept by modern and efficient accounting methods;



   (J)   Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the fiscal
year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
city for the preceding year;



   (K)   Supervise the performance of all contracts for work to be done
for the city, make all purchases of material and supplies and see that the
material and supplies are received and are of the quality and character
called for by the contract;



   (L)   Supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance
and management of all city property, capital improvements and undertakings of
the city, including the making and preservation of all surveys, maps, plans,
drawings, specifications and estimates for capital improvements;



   (M)   Cooperate with any administrative agency;



   (N)   Provide for and cause records to be kept of the issuance and
revocation of licenses and permits authorized by city laws;



   (O)   Recommend to the Council a standard schedule of pay for each
appointive office and position in the city service, including minimum,
intermediate and maximum rates;



   (P)   Employ, reclassify or discipline all employees subject to
civil service provisions and of the Iowa Code Chapter 35C;



   (Q)   Appoint administrative assistants with the approval of the
Council;



   (R)   Make all appointments not otherwise provided for;



   (S)   Investigate the affairs of the city or any department or
division thereof and investigate all complaints in relation to matters
concerning the administration of the government of the city;



   (T)   Devote his or her entire time to the discharge of all official
duties;



   (U)   Perform other duties at the Council’s direction; and



   (V)   Administer oaths.



(1999 Code, § 19.04)  (Ord. 2239, passed 6-12-2001; Ord. 2427, passed
9-14-2010; Ord. 2011-2444, passed 4-26-2011)



§ 31.074  POLITICAL ACTIVITY.



   The City Administrator shall not take part in any election for Council
members, other than by casting a vote, and shall not appoint a Council member
to city office or employment, nor shall any Council member accept an
appointment.



(1999 Code, § 19.05)



CITY ATTORNEY



§ 31.085  LEGAL DEPARTMENT CREATED.



   There is created the Legal Department of the city, to provide for the
Mayor, the Council, all city commissions or bodies and all city employees
legal services required by and for the city.



(1999 Code, § 20.01)



§ 31.086  GENERAL DUTIES OF LEGAL DEPARTMENT.



   The general duties of the Legal Department are as follows:



   (A)   Prosecute and defend suits.  Appear for the city, prosecute
and defend all causes in all the state or federal courts and any
administrative proceeding in which the city is a party or interested;



   (B)   Represent the city.  When requested to do so by the Mayor or
the Council, or when the interests of the city require, appear for the city
before any other court or tribunal and prosecute or defend all actions or
proceedings in which the city may be a party or interested;



   (C)   Prosecute and defend.  Prosecute or defend all actions and
proceedings brought by or against any city officer in his or her official
capacity or any city employee growing out of acts connected with his or her
employment;



   (D)   Give opinions.  When requested, give an opinion in writing
upon all questions of law submitted by the Mayor, the Council or any member
thereof, or by the heads of any city department now existing or hereafter
created;



   (E)   Draft contracts, forms and the like.  When requested, prepare
drafts of contracts, forms and other writings which may be required for use
by the city;



   (F)   Prepare ordinances.  Prepare ordinances as the Council from
time to time may direct and examine and report in writing to the Council
whenever so requested an opinion as to the validity of ordinances previously
passed by present or former City Councils, or of proposed ordinances, prior
to their final passage by the Council;



   (G)   Perform other duties.  Perform other and further duties as
are now or may hereafter be required of the Legal Department or the members
thereof by the Iowa Code, other ordinances of the city, or state or federal
law;



   (H)   Advise Council.  Advise the Council or its committees or any
city officer or any commission or board, when requested, upon all legal
questions arising in the conduct of city business;



   (I)   Attend Council meetings.  Attend all Council meetings for the
purpose of giving the Council any legal advice requested by the Council, the
Mayor or any city officer;



   (J)   Prepare legal instruments.  Prepare for execution all
contracts and instruments to which the city is a party and approve, as to
form, all bonds and insurance required to be submitted to the city;



   (K)   Prosecute offenders.  Prepare all charges and complaints
against and appear in the appropriate court in the prosecution of every
person charged with the violation of a city ordinance or any regulations
adopted, or with the commission of a misdemeanor, and, in any prosecution for
violation of any regulation adopted by any board or commission created under
authority of the Council, act under the directions of any board or commission;



   (L)   Settle claims.  Have the power to adjust, settle, compromise
or submit to arbitration any action, causes of action, accounts, debts,
claims, demands, disputes and matters in favor of or against the city or in
which the city is concerned as debtor or creditor, now existing or which may
hereafter arise, subject to the approval of the Council;



   (M)   Make reports.  Report the outcome of any litigation in which
the city has an interest to the Mayor and Council;



   (N)   Control legal services incidental to Council action.  Have
charge of all legal services auxiliary to Council action in connection with
the appropriating of property to public use and in the levying of
assessments; and



   (O)   Keep records of suits.  Keep a complete record of all suits
in which the city had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties,
the court where brought, the nature of the action, the disposition of the
case, or its condition if pending, and the briefs of counsel.



(1999 Code, § 20.02)



§ 31.087  COMPOSITION OF LEGAL DEPARTMENT.



   The Legal Department of the city is composed of one City Attorney and
assistants as are provided in this subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 20.03)



§ 31.088  APPOINTMENT; GENERAL QUALIFICATIONS.



   The City Attorney must be admitted to practice of law in the state and
must be a resident of the city. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the
City Council. The appointment and removal of the City Attorney shall be by a
majority vote of the members of the City Council. The City Attorney shall
hold office until a successor is appointed and qualified as provided by law.



(1999 Code, § 20.04)  (Ord. 2239, passed 6-12-2001; Ord. 2506, passed
5-27-2014)



§ 31.089  SPECIFICS OF APPOINTMENT.



   (A)   The Office of City Attorney shall be filled by a competent
attorney with broad experience in the general practice of law.



   (B)   The City Attorney shall be a full-time employee of the city
and shall not engage in the private practice of law or other form of
employment.



   (C)   The City Attorney, once appointed, shall not be dismissed
except for cause. Should sufficient cause indicate that dismissal should be
considered, he or she shall be dismissed in the same manner as originally
appointed.



   (D)   The compensation of the City Attorney is fixed by resolution
of the Council.



   (E)   The City Attorney is individually responsible to the Council
and the Mayor for the performance of the duties as set forth in § 31.086 of
this subchapter, and in addition has the following duties:



      (1)   Account promptly for all moneys received by the Legal
Department and to pay the same into the city treasury;



      (2)   Submit a budget for the operation of the Legal
Department upon request by the Council; and



      (3)   Perform other duties as are now or hereafter may be
required of the Legal Department or members thereof by the Iowa Code, this
subchapter, other chapters in this code of ordinances, or by requests of the
Mayor or Council or individual members thereof in the interest of the city.



(1999 Code, § 20.05)



§ 31.090  RESTRICTION ON PRACTICE AFTER TERMINATION OF CITY SERVICE.



   No person who has been employed as City Attorney shall for a period of
one year after termination of employment by the city represent any person or
entity in any matter in which the city or any agency, commission or
department thereof, or the like, is directly or indirectly involved.



(1999 Code, § 20.06)



§ 31.091  ASSISTANTS.



   To assist the Legal Department in the performance of its duties, the
City Attorney may employ special assistant City Attorneys for individual
legal matters of a peculiar nature; provided, however, that the employment
shall be subject to approval of a majority vote of the Council. No
compensation shall be paid to any person for services as an attorney or
counselor to the Mayor, the Council, or to any department, commissions or
boards of the city government or the heads thereof, except in cases as
specifically authorized by resolution of the Council.



(1999 Code, § 20.07)



§ 31.092  OUTSIDE LEGAL COUNSEL.



   The City Council may contract for legal services for the City of
Clinton instead of staffing a Legal Department.  If the City Council
contracts for legal services, the contract service provider will be
considered the "City Attorney" for all official purposes.  The City of
Clinton residency requirement, applicable to an employee serving as City
Attorney under § 31.088, shall not apply to a contract service provider.



(Ord. 2506, passed 5-27-2014)



CHAPTER 32:  CITY ORGANIZATIONS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES



Section




Recreation Department




   32.001   Established



   32.002   Parks and Recreation Director



   32.003   Duties




Public Works Department




   32.015   Public Works Department established



   32.016   Public Works Director



   32.017   Duties




Finance Department




   32.030   Established



   32.031   Municipal accounting officer



   32.032   Funds



   32.033   Separate accounts



   32.034   Reports



   32.035   Receipts



   32.036   Disbursements



   32.037   Budget



   32.038   Director of Finance




Airport Commission




   32.050   Airport Commission



   32.051   Appointment and term



   32.052   Vacancies



   32.053   Compensation



   32.054   Bond



   32.055   Officers



   32.056   Powers and duties



   32.057   Annual report




Library Board of Trustees




   32.070   Public library



   32.071   Library Trustees



   32.072   Qualifications of Trustees



   32.073   Organization of the Board



   32.074   Powers and duties



   32.075   Contracting with other libraries



   32.076   Nonresident use



   32.077   Expenditures



   32.078   Annual report



   32.079   Injury to books or property



   32.080   Theft



   32.081   Notice posted




Civil Service Commission




   32.095   Purpose



   32.096   Appointment and term



   32.097   Qualifications



   32.098   Human Rights Commission



   32.099   Compensation



   32.100   Chairperson



   32.101   Clerk



   32.102   Records



   32.103   Rooms and supplies



   32.104   Powers and duties




Historic Preservation Commission




   32.115   Purpose and intent



   32.116   Definitions



   32.117   Structure of Commission



   32.118   Powers of Commission



   32.119   Designation of districts



   32.120   Designating a historic landmark



   32.121   Project review



   32.122   Appeals




Human Rights Commission




   32.135   Purposes



   32.136   Civil Rights Act



   32.137   Commission on Human Rights



   32.138   Powers and duties



   32.139   Records and confidentiality




Municipal Housing Authority




   32.170   Agency created



   32.171   Board of Commissioners



   32.172   Organization




City Planning Commission




   32.185   Planning Commission



   32.186   Term of office



   32.187   Vacancies



   32.188   Compensation



   32.189   Powers and duties




Community Development Department




   32.200   Established



   32.201   Community Development Director



   32.202   Duties



   32.203   Expenditures



ADA Advisory Commission



   32.301   Purpose



   32.302   Definitions



   32.303   Establishment of ADA Advisory Commission



   32.304   Membership and term



   32.305   Powers and duties



   32.306   Staff support



Finance Committee



   32.400   Purpose



   32.401   Membership



   32.402   Powers and duties



   32.403   Staff support



Neighborhood Improvement Committee



   32.500   Purpose



   32.501   Membership



   32.502   Powers and duties



Capital Improvements Planning Committee



   32.600   Purpose



   32.601   Membership



   32.602   Powers and duties



   32.603   Staff support



Parks and Recreation Advisory Board



   32.700   Purpose



   32.701   Membership



   32.702   Powers and duties



Board of Appeals



   32.800   Purpose



   32.801   Membership



   32.802   Power and duties



Monument Committee



   32.900   Purpose



   32.901   Membership



   32.902   Powers and duties



   32.903   Staff support



Hometown Pride Committee



   32.1000   Purpose



   32.1001   Membership



   32.1002   Powers and duties



   32.1003   Staff support



Grant Committee



   32.1100   Purpose



   32.1101   Membership



   32.1102   Powers and duties



   32.1103   Staff support



Trails Advisory Committee



   32.1200   Purpose



   32.1201   Membership



   32.1202   Powers and duties



   32.1203   Staff support



Cross-reference:



   Deer Management Committee, see Chapter 100



RECREATION DEPARTMENT



§ 32.001  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby created a Parks and Recreation Department to provide
all necessary functions and services relating to parks and recreation, which
may include, but may  but not limited to, acquisition, improvement,
maintenance, operation and supervision of park land and recreational programs
and recreational facilities in the city.



(1999 Code, § 21.01)  (Ord. 2380, passed 7-8-2008; Ord. 2530, passed
11-24-2015)



§ 32.002  PARKS AND RECREATION DIRECTOR.



   The Department shall be headed by a Parks and Recreation Director,
appointed by the City Administrator, subject to approval by resolution of the
City Council. The Parks and Recreation Department shall be comprised of such
employees deemed essential for the efficient operation of the Department, and
as approved by resolution of the City Council. The Parks and Recreation
Director shall be under the direct supervision of the City Administrator. The
salary of the Parks and Recreation Director shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 21.02)  (Ord. 2380, passed 7-8-2008; Ord. 2530, passed
11-24-2015)



§ 32.003  DUTIES.



   The Parks and Recreation Director shall:



   (A)   Prepare and administer departmental work programs and budgets,
assign staff, determine schedules and review progress on same;



   (B)   Direct a staff of parks and recreation personnel and office
personnel in the operation and maintenance of the park system,  recreation
programs,  and related work;



   (C)   Seek and apply for federal and state funds as approved by the
City Council;



   (D)   Administer the collective bargaining agreement affecting
employees of the Department;



   (E)   Perform other duties as assigned by the City Administrator or
by resolution or ordinance of the City Council, and as required by 
applicable state or federal statutes and regulations; and



   (F)   Perform other duties as designated in the job description of
the Parks and Recreation Director, which shall be prepared by the City
Administrator and updated from time to time as appropriate.



(1999 Code, § 21.03)  (Ord. 2380, passed 7-8-2008; Ord. 2530, passed
11-24-2015)



PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT



§ 32.015  PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby created and established a Public Works Department in
the city to provide for the city all necessary functions and services
relating to wastewater treatment, garbage collection, street maintenance and
repair, managing and maintaining of city owned grounds and facilities,
transit issues, parks, and maintaining and managing of city owned vehicles.



(1999 Code, § 23.01)  (Ord. 2379, passed 7-8-2008; Ord. 2401, passed
2-24-2009)



§ 32.016  PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.



   The Department is headed by a Director known as the Public Works
Director, appointed by the City Administrator subject to Council approval.
The Public Works Department is comprised of those additional employees as
deemed essential for the efficient operation of the Department as approved by
resolution of the Council. The Public Works Director is under the direct
administrative supervision of the City Administrator. The salary of the
Public Works Director shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 23.02)  (Ord. 2379, passed 7-8-2008; Ord. 2401, passed
2-24-2009)



§ 32.017  DUTIES.



   The Public Works Director shall:



   (A)   Supervise the Street Maintenance and Solid Waste Division, the
duties of which shall include, but not be limited to: street, alley, sidewalk
and curb maintenance, maintain materials and supplies inventory, traffic
obstruction removal, snow and ice operations, aid law enforcement, traffic
controls and street identification, prepare specifications and
recommendations for new equipment, special projects, major capital projects,
oversee contractor work,  implement new techniques and equipment, street
sweeping, solid waste collection;



   (B)   Supervise the Water Pollution Control Division, the duties of
which shall include, but not be limited to: wastewater treatment plant
operations, storm and sanitary operations, collection systems, flood control,
major capital projects, prepare specifications and recommendations for new
equipment, short and long range planning, regulatory compliance, pretreatment
program, industrial user permits, lab work;



   (C)   Supervise the Transportation and Fleet Maintenance Division,
the duties of which shall include, but not be limited to: city vehicle
maintenance and replacement, preventative maintenance on equipment, mass
transit authority operations, routes and parking systems, grant issues,
special event transportation, accident and incident review committee
activities;



   (D)   Prepare and administer the departmental work programs and
budgets;



   (E)   Confer with the Mayor and Council on matters concerning major
departmental activities and furnish technical advice on public works problems;



   (F)   Act as a liaison between municipalities, counties and state
and federal agencies. Seek and apply for federal and state funds as approved
by the Council;



   (G)   Administer the collective bargaining agreement affecting
employees of the Department and perform other duties as assigned by the Mayor
or by resolution or ordinance of the Council or applicable state or federal
statutes or regulations; and



   (H)   Perform other duties as designated in the Public Works
Director job description.



(1999 Code, § 23.03)  (Ord. 2379, passed 7-8-2008; Ord. 2401, passed
2-24-2009; Ord. 2530, passed 11-24-2015)



FINANCE DEPARTMENT



§ 32.030  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby created and established a Finance Department in the
city to provide for the city all necessary functions of a finance nature
including, but not limited to, financial reports, payroll, managing treasury,
utility customer service, purchasing functions, budget administration and
monitoring of insurance and debt management services.



(Ord. 2375, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 32.031  MUNICIPAL ACCOUNTING OFFICER.



   The Finance Director is the chief accounting officer of the city.



(Ord. 2375, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 32.032  FUNDS.



   The Finance Director shall:



   (A)   Custody of funds.  Be responsible for the safe custody of all
funds of the city in the manner provided by law and Council direction;



   (B)   Record of fund.  Keep the records of each fund;



   (C)   Special assessments.  Keep a separate account of all money
received from special assessments; and



   (D)   Warrant register.  Keep a warrant register wherein all
warrants issued by the Finance Director shall be listed in numerical order.
The warrant register shall also show the date, amount, payee’s name, upon
what fund drawn and for what purpose each warrant is issued.



(Ord. 2375, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 32.033  SEPARATE ACCOUNTS.



   The Finance Director shall keep separate accounts for every
appropriation, department, public improvement or undertaking and for each
public utility owned or operated by the city. Each account shall be
maintained in the manner provided by law and generally accepted accounting
principles.



(Ord. 2375, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 32.034  REPORTS.



   The Finance Director shall:



   (A)   Monthly report to Council.  Report to the City Council each
month the status of each city account; and



   (B)   Annual public report.  Prepare the annual public report,
cause the same to be published and send a certified copy to the State Auditor
as provided by law.



(Ord. 2375, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 32.035  RECEIPTS.



   The Finance Director shall:



   (A)   Accounting.  Keep an accurate account of all money or
securities received by the Finance Director on behalf of the city, and
specify the date, amount and from whom and upon what account received;



   (B)   Receipt for funds.  Prepare receipts for all funds received
and give the original to the party delivering the funds and retain a
duplicate; and



   (C)   Deposit of moneys.  Immediately upon receipt of money payable
to the city and to be held in the Finance Director’s custody, deposit the
same in depositories to be designated by the Council and in amounts not
exceeding the depository limits established by the Council.



(Ord. 2375, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 32.036  DISBURSEMENTS.



   The Finance Director shall keep an accurate account of all
disbursements of money or property, specifying the date, amount to whom, from
what fund and for what account paid.



(Ord. 2375, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 32.037  BUDGET.



   The Finance Director shall prepare the annual budget, under the
supervision of the City Administrator.



(Ord. 2375, passed 6-10-2008)



§ 32.038  DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.




   The Finance Department shall be headed by the City Administrator unless
and until a Finance Director is employed. If a Finance Director is employed
the Finance Department shall be headed by the Director of Finance who shall
be the Chief Accounting Officer of the city. The Finance Director shall be
appointed by the City Administrator, subject to Council approval and shall
receive the compensation as established by resolution of the Council.





(Ord. 2426, passed 9-14-2010; Ord. 2455, passed 7-26-2011)





Statutory reference:




   Similar provisions, see Iowa Code § 364.12(2)(b)



AIRPORT COMMISSION



§ 32.050  AIRPORT COMMISSION.



   There shall be an Airport Commission consisting of five resident voters
of the city.



(Iowa Code § 330.20)  (1999 Code, § 26.01)



§ 32.051  APPOINTMENT AND TERM.



   Commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to Council
approval, for staggered terms of six years.



(Iowa Code § 330.20)  (1999 Code, § 26.02)



§ 32.052  VACANCIES.



   Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor, subject to
Council approval, to fill out the unexpired term for which the appointment
was made.



(Iowa Code § 330.20)  (1999 Code, § 26.03)



§ 32.053  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.



(Iowa Code § 330.20)  (1999 Code, § 26.04)



§ 32.054  BOND.



   Each Commissioner shall execute and furnish a bond in the amount of
$1,000 which bond shall be filed with the Clerk. The cost of the bond shall
be paid from the General Fund of the city.



(Iowa Code § 330.20)  (1999 Code, § 26.05)



§ 32.055  OFFICERS.



   The Commission shall elect from its own members a Chairperson and
Secretary who shall serve for a term as the Commission shall determine.



(Iowa Code § 330.20)  (1999 Code, § 26.06)



§ 32.056  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties.



   (A)   General.  The Commission has all the powers in relation to
airports granted to cities under state law except powers to sell the airport.



(Iowa Code § 330.21)



   (B)   Budget.  The Commission shall annually certify the amount of
tax to be levied for airport purposes, and upon the certification the Council
may include all or a portion of the amount in its budget.



(Iowa Code § 330.21)



   (C)   Funds.  All funds derived from taxation or otherwise for
airport purposes shall be under the full and absolute control of the
Commission for the purposes prescribed by law, and shall be deposited with
the Clerk to the credit of the Airport Commission, and shall be disbursed
only on the written orders of the Airport Commission, including the payment
of all indebtedness arising from the acquisition and construction of airports
and the maintenance, operation and extension thereof.



(Iowa Code § 330.21)  (1999 Code, § 26.07)



§ 32.057  ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Airport Commission shall immediately after the close of each
municipal fiscal year, file with the Clerk a detailed and audited written
report of all money received and disbursed by the Commission during the
fiscal year, and shall publish a summary thereof in an official newspaper.



(Iowa Code § 330.22)  (1999 Code, § 26.08)



LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES



§ 32.070  PUBLIC LIBRARY.



   The public library for the city is known as the Clinton Public Library.
It is referred to in this subchapter as the library.



(1999 Code, § 27.01)



§ 32.071  LIBRARY TRUSTEES.



   The Board of Trustees of the library, hereinafter referred to as the
Board, consists of nine resident members. All members are to be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the Council.



(1999 Code, § 27.02)



§ 32.072  QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES.



   All members of the Board shall be bona fide citizens and residents of
the city. Members shall be over the age of 18 years.



(1999 Code, § 27.03)



§ 32.073  ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD.



   The organization of the Board shall be as follows.



   (A)   Term of office.  All appointments to the Board shall be for
six years, except to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1.
Appointments shall be made every two years of one-third the total number or
as near as possible, to stagger the terms.



   (B)   Vacancies.  The position of any Trustee shall be vacated if
the member moves permanently from the city and shall be deemed vacated if the
member is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except
in the case of sickness or temporary absence from the city. Vacancies in the
Board shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment except
that the new Trustee shall fill out the unexpired term for which the
appointment is made.



   (C)   Compensation.  Trustees shall receive no compensation for
their services.



(1999 Code, § 27.04)



§ 32.074  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Board shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:



   (A)   Officers.  To meet and elect from its members a President, a
Secretary and other officers as it deems necessary;



   (B)   Physical plant.  To have charge, control and supervision of
the library, its appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same;



   (C)   Charge of affairs.  To direct and control all affairs of the
Library;



   (D)   Hiring of personnel.  To employ a librarian, and authorize
the librarian to employ assistants and employees as may be necessary for the
proper management of the library, and fix their compensation; provided,
however, that prior to employment, the compensation of the librarian,
assistants and employees shall have been fixed and approved by a majority of
the members of the Board voting in favor thereof;



   (E)   Removal of personnel.  To remove the librarian, by a
two-thirds vote of the Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the
assistants or employees for misdemeanor, incompetence or inattention to duty,
subject however, to the provisions of the Iowa Code Chapter 35C;



   (F)   Purchases.  To select, or authorize the librarian to select,
and make purchases of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps,
journals, other library materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and
supplies for the library within budgetary limits set by the Board;



   (G)   Use by nonresidents.  To authorize the use of the library by
nonresidents and to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service
exists;



   (H)   Rules and regulations.  To make and adopt, amend, modify or
repeal rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this code of ordinances
and the law, for the care, use, government and management of the library and
the business of the Board, fixing and enforcing penalties for violations;



   (I)   Expenditures.  To have exclusive control of the expenditure
of all funds allocated for library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys
available by gift or otherwise for the erection of library buildings, and of
all other moneys belonging to the library including fines and rentals
collected under the rules of the Board;



   (J)   Gifts.  To accept gifts of real property, personal property
or mixed property, and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take
the title to the property in the name of the library; to execute deeds and
bills of sale for the conveyance of the property; and to expend the funds
received by them from gifts, for the improvement of the library;



   (K)   Enforce the performance of conditions on gifts.  To enforce
the performance of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests
accepted by the city on behalf of the library;



(Iowa Code Chapter 661)



   (L)   Record of proceedings.  To keep a record of its proceedings;
and



   (M)   County Historical Association.  To have authority to make
agreements with the local County Historical Association where such exists,
and to set apart the necessary room and to care for articles as may come into
the possession of the association. The Trustees are further authorized to
purchase necessary receptacles and materials for the preservation and
protection of articles as are in their judgment of a historical and
educational nature and pay for the same out of funds allocated for library
purposes.



(1999 Code, § 27.05)   (Ord. 2479, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 32.075  CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES.



   The Board has power to contract with other libraries in accordance with
the following:



   (A)   Contracting.  The Board may contract with any other Boards of
Trustees of free public libraries, with any other city, school corporation,
private or semiprivate organization, institution of higher learning, township
or county, or with the trustees of any county library district for the use of
the library by their respective residents; and



(Iowa Code § 392.5 and Chapter 28E)



   (B)   Termination.  A contract may be terminated at any time by
mutual consent of the contracting parties.



(1999 Code, § 27.06)



§ 32.076  NONRESIDENT USE.



   The Board may authorize the use of the library by persons not residents
of the city or county in any one or more of the following ways:



   (A)   Lending.  By lending the books or other materials of the
library to nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of
the city or county, or upon payment of a special nonresident library fee;



   (B)   Depository.  By establishing depositories of library books or
other materials to be loaned to nonresidents;



   (C)   Bookmobiles.  By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling
library so that books or other library materials may be loaned to
nonresidents; and



   (D)   Branch library.  By establishing branch libraries for lending
books or other library materials to nonresidents.



(1999 Code, § 27.07)



§ 32.077  EXPENDITURES.



   All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and maintenance
of the library shall be set aside in an account for the library. Expenditures
shall be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by its President and
Secretary.



(Iowa Code §§ 384.20, 392.5)  (1999 Code, § 27.08)



§ 32.078  ANNUAL REPORT.



   The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately after the
close of the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the
condition of the library, the number of books added, the number circulated,
the amount of fines collected, and the amount of money expended in the
maintenance of the library during the year, together with further information
as may be required by the Council.



(1999 Code, § 27.09)



§ 32.079  INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY.



   It is unlawful for a person willfully, maliciously or wantonly to tear,
deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any newspaper,
periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging
to the library or reading room.



(Iowa Code § 716.1)  (1999 Code, § 27.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 32.080  THEFT.



   No person shall take possession or control of property of the library
with the intent to deprive the library thereof.



(Iowa Code §§ 714.1 and 714.5)  (1999 Code, § 27.11)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 32.081  NOTICE POSTED.



   There shall be posted in clear public view within the library notices
informing the public of the following:



   (A)   Failure to return.  Failure to return library materials for
two months or more after the date the person agreed to return the library
materials, or failure to return library equipment for one month or more after
the date the person agreed to return the library equipment, is evidence of
intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable attempt, including the
mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that the material or equipment
is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim the
materials or equipment; and



(Iowa Code § 714.5)



   (B)   Detention and search.  Persons concealing library materials
may be detained and searched pursuant to law.



(Iowa Code § 808.12)  (1999 Code, § 27.12)



CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION



§ 32.095  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the appointment,
powers and duties of a Civil Service Commission in accordance with the
requirements of state law.



(1999 Code, § 28.01)



§ 32.096  APPOINTMENT AND TERM.



   A Civil Service Commission consisting of three members shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council for staggered terms
of four years.



(Iowa Code § 400.1)  (1999 Code, § 28.02)



§ 32.097  QUALIFICATIONS.



   Commissioners must be citizens of the state, eligible electors and
residents of the city preceding their appointment. No person while on the
Commission shall hold or be a candidate for any office of public trust.



(Iowa Code § 400.2)  (1999 Code, § 28.03)



§ 32.098  HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 32.097, when a Human Rights
Commission has been established, the Director thereof shall ex officio be a
member, without vote, of the Civil Service Commission.



(Iowa Code § 400.2)  (1999 Code, § 28.04)



§ 32.099  COMPENSATION.



   Civil Service Commissioners shall serve without compensation.



(Iowa Code § 400.2)  (1999 Code, § 28.05)



§ 32.100  CHAIRPERSON.



   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members.



(Iowa Code § 400.4)  (1999 Code, § 28.06)



§ 32.101  CLERK.



   The City Clerk or a designee of the City Clerk shall be Clerk of the
Commission.



(Iowa Code § 400.4)  (1999 Code, § 28.07)



§ 32.102  RECORDS.



   The Civil Service Commission shall keep a record of all its meetings
and also a complete individual service record of each civil service employee
which record shall be permanent and kept up to date.



(Iowa Code § 400.4)  (1999 Code, § 28.08)



§ 32.103  ROOMS AND SUPPLIES.



   The Council shall provide suitable rooms in which the Commission may
hold its meetings and supply the Commission with all necessary equipment and
a qualified shorthand reporter or an electronic voice recording device to
enable it to properly perform its duties.



(Iowa Code § 400.5)  (1999 Code, § 28.09)



§ 32.104  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall administer the civil service procedure as
contained in the Iowa Code Chapter 400, and amendments thereto and shall
have, exercise and perform all powers and duties as provided thereby.



(1999 Code, § 28.10)



HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION



§ 32.115  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purposes of this subchapter are to:



   (A)   Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general
welfare of the public through the recognition, enhancement and perpetuation
of sites and districts of historical and cultural significance;



   (B)   Safeguard the city’s historic, aesthetic and cultural
heritage by preserving sites and districts of historic and cultural
significance;



   (C)   Stabilize and improve property values;



   (D)   Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the
past;



   (E)   Protect and enhance the city’s attractions to tourists and
visitors and the support and stimulus to business thereby provided;



   (F)   Strengthen the economy of the city; and



   (G)   Promote the use of sites and districts of historic and
cultural significance as places for the education, pleasure and welfare of
the people of the city.



(1999 Code, § 30.01)  (Ord. 2276, passed 5-25-2004)



§ 32.116  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALTERATION.  Any act of process which changes the exterior
architectural appearance of a structure, site or area, including but not
limited to, the erection, construction, rehabilitation, reconstruction,
restoration, removal or demolition of any structure or part thereof,
excavation,  or the addition of an improvement. This definition excludes
routine maintenance.



   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.  A certificate issued by the Historic
Preservation Commission approving any alteration or improvement to an
individual site or property, property with a Historic Overlay District or a
property within a designated historic preservation district.



   COMMISSION.  The Clinton Historic Preservation Commission, as
established by this subchapter.



   DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR HISTORIC PROPERTIES.  The Secretary of
Interior’s Standards of Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating
Historic Buildings and design guidelines developed by the Historic
Preservation Commission.



   HISTORIC DISTRICT.  An area which contains a significant portion of
buildings, structures or other improvements which, considered as a whole,
possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling and association, and which area as a whole:



      (1)   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period or method of construction, or represents the work of a master, or
possesses high artistic values, or represents a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction;



      (2)   Is associated with events that have made significant
contributions to the broad patterns of our local, state or national history;



      (3)   Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or
integrity based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting,
workmanship, materials or combinations thereof which is deemed to add
significantly to the value and attractiveness of properties within the area;



      (4)   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in
our past; or



      (5)   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information
important in prehistory or history.



   HISTORIC LANDMARK.  A site and structure or building which:



      (1)   Is associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of the city’s history;



      (2)   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in
our past;



      (3)   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period or method of construction or represents the work of a master, or
possesses high artistic values, or represents a significant and
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or



      (4)   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information
important in prehistory or history.



   HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT.  The official zoning district map
designation for properties or areas designated as a historic district.



   STATE.  The Iowa State Historic Preservation Office, Historical
Division of the Department of Cultural Affairs.



   SUBSTANTIAL HARDSHIP.  A hardship, caused by unusual and compelling
circumstances, based on one or more of the following:



      (1)   There are no other reasonable means of saving the
property from deterioration or collapse; and/or



      (2)   The property is owned by a nonprofit organization and it
is not feasible financially or physically to achieve the charitable purposes
of the organization while maintaining the property appropriately.



(1999 Code, § 30.02)  (Ord. 2106, passed 11-9-1999; Ord. 2276, passed
5-25-2004)



§ 32.117  STRUCTURE OF COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Commission shall consist of seven members who are
residents of the city.



   (B)   Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council. Members shall demonstrate a positive
interest in historic preservation, possessing interest or expertise in
architecture, architectural history, historic preservation, city planning,
building rehabilitation, conservation in general or real estate. At least one
member shall have expertise in history and one member shall have expertise in
architecture. Each historic district shall have a representative on the
Commission.



   (C)   The Commission members are appointed for staggered terms of
six years.



   (D)   Vacancies occurring in the Commission, other than expiration
of term of office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the
member replaced. Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor with the approval of
the Council.



   (E)   Members shall serve without compensation.



   (F)   A simple majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business.



   (G)   The Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside
over all Commission meetings and elect a Secretary who shall be responsible
for maintaining written records of the Commission’s proceedings. The
Commission shall adopt its own rules of operation.



   (H)   The Commission shall meet at least monthly.



(1999 Code, § 30.03)  (Ord. 2106, passed 11-9-1999; Ord. 2276, passed
5-25-2004; Ord. 2394, passed 11-25-2008)



§ 32.118  POWERS OF COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Commission may conduct inventory studies for the
identification and designation of historic districts and sites meeting the
definitions established by this subchapter. The Commission may proceed at its
own initiative or upon a petition from any person, group or association.



   (B)   The Commission shall maintain records of all studies and
inventories for public use.



   (C)   The Commission may make a recommendation to the state for the
listing of an district or single property in the National Register of
Historic Places and may conduct a public hearing thereon.



   (D)   The Commission may investigate and recommend to the Council
the adoption of ordinances designating historic landmarks and historic
districts if they qualify as defined herein.



   (E)   The Commission shall review all projects, requiring a building
permit or demolition permit, that are located within a designated historic
district or that have been designated a historic landmark  to consider the
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness.



   (F)   In addition to those duties and powers specified above, the
Commission may, with Council approval:



      (1)   Accept unconditional gifts and donations of real and
person property, including money, for the purpose of historic preservation;



      (2)   Acquire in the name of the city, by purchase, bequest or
donation, fee and lesser interests in historic properties, including
properties adjacent to or associated with historic properties;



      (3)   Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic
properties under the ownership or control of the Commission;



      (4)   Recommend to the City Council for lease, sale, transfer
or disposal of historic properties subject to rights of public access and
other covenants and in a manner that will preserve the property;



      (5)   Contract, with the approval of the City Council, with
state or federal government or other organizations;



      (6)   Cooperate with federal, state and local governments in
the pursuance of the objectives of historic preservation;



      (7)   Provide information for the purpose of historic
preservation to the City Council; and



      (8)   Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive
program on historic properties within its jurisdiction.



(1999 Code, § 30.04)  (Ord. 2106, passed 11-9-1999; Ord. 2276, passed
5-25-2004)



§ 32.119  DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Historic Overlay Districts shall be designated in the
following manner. Any person may request the designation of an area as a
historic district by submitting a written application for the designation to
the Commission. The application must contain the following information:



      (1)   A petition must contain the signatures of at least 80%
of the property owners within the proposed district;



      (2)   A map showing the boundaries of the proposed district
and the lots that lie within it and a list of names and addresses of property
owners within the district;



      (3)   Description of the proposed district, including a
statement of significance which describes how the district, or individual
property, meets the significance criteria in this subchapter; and



      (4)   Sketches, photographs or drawings showing the property
or properties and streetscapes and fully completed state site inventory forms
for the properties to be included.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the application for designating a historic
district, the Commission shall submit the petition and the application to the
state for review and comment. The state’s comments on the proposed
designation will be made available to the public.



   (C)   The Commission shall hold a public hearing concerning the
proposed designation. Notice of public hearing shall be published and all
affected property owners must be notified by ordinary mail prior to the
hearing. At the public hearing, comments will be accepted concerning the
establishment of the historic district. After hearing all comments and other
relevant information, the Commission shall determine if the area is an area
of historic significance that meets one or more of the following:



      (1)   Has integrity of location, design, setting, materials,
skill, feeling and association;



      (2)   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period, method of construction, represents the work of a master, possesses
high artistic value, represents a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinction;



      (3)   Is associated with events that have been a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our local, state or national history;



      (4)   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in
our past; and/or



      (5)   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information
important in prehistory or history.



   (D)   The Commission shall prepare an ordinance designating the
district and submit the ordinance to the state for review and comment.



   (E)   The Commission shall submit the application, statement of
significance and context, proposed ordinance and state’s comments to the
City Council. Upon receipt, the City Council shall:



      (1)   Hold a public hearing; 



      (2)   At the public hearing, consider whether the application
for the Historic Overlay District or historic landmark demonstrates that the
significance criterion or criteria are met;



      (3)   Will either approve if the application meets the
significance criteria  or deny the designation if the criteria fails to meet
the designation; and



      (4)   Written notification on the public hearing shall be
mailed to all property owners within the proposed historic district and the
following:



         (a)   Building Official;



         (b)   City Clerk; and



         (c)   Planner Director.



   (F)   If approved, the petition shall be submitted to the City Plan
Commission, for review, to amend the zoning map designating the  area as a
Historic Overlay District. The Historic Overly District may be combined with
any zoning district established in the city’s zoning regulations and shall
be shown on the official zoning map. The City Planner  shall notify the
Building Official and the City Engineer of the designation. When so
designated, any improvement requiring a building permit or demolition permit
shall be subject to the provisions set forth in this subchapter.



(Ord. 2276, passed 5-25-2004; Ord. 2394, passed 11-25-2008)



§ 32.120  DESIGNATING A HISTORIC LANDMARK.



   (A)   (1)   Any person may request the designation of a historic
landmark by submitting a written application for the designation to the
Historic Preservation Commission. The application must contain the following
information:



         (a)   A map showing the boundaries of the proposed
historic landmark and the name and address of the property owner;



         (b)   Description of the proposed historic landmark,
including a statement of significance which describes how the site meets the
significance criteria in this subchapter; and



         (c)   Sketches, photographs or drawings of the property
and fully completed Iowa Site Inventory Form for the property.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a request, and before taking further
action, the Historic Preservation Commission shall contact the property owner
and obtain their consent to have their property designated as a historical
landmark.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the application for designating a historic
landmark, the Commission shall submit the application to the state for review
and comment. The state’s comments on the proposed designation will be made
available to the public.



   (C)   The Commission shall hold a public hearing concerning the
proposed designation. Notice of public hearing shall be published and all
affected property owners must be notified by ordinary mail prior to the
hearing. At the public hearing, comments will be accepted concerning the
establishment of the historic landmark. After hearing all comments and other
relevant information, the Commission shall determine if the area is an area
of historic significance that meets one or more of the following:



      (1)   Has integrity of location, design, setting, materials,
skill, feeling and association;



      (2)   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type,
period, method of construction, represents the work of a master, possesses
high artistic value, represents a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components may lack individual distinction;



      (3)   Is associated with events that have been a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our local, state or national history;



      (4)   Is associated with the lives of persons significant in
our past; and/or



      (5)   Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information
important in prehistory or history.



   (D)   The Commission shall prepare an ordinance designating the
historic landmark and submit the ordinance to the state for review and
comment.



   (E)   The Commission shall submit the application, statements of
significance and contexts, proposed ordinance and state’s comments to the
City Council. Upon receipt, the City Council shall:



      (1)   Hold a public hearing;



      (2)   At the public hearing, consider whether the application
for the historic landmark demonstrates that the significance criterion or
criteria are met;



      (3)   Will either approve if the application meets the
significance criteria or deny the designation if the criteria fails to meet
the designation;



      (4)   Written notification of the public hearing shall be
mailed to the owners of the proposed historic site and the following:



         (a)   Building Official;



         (b)   City Clerk; and



         (c)   City Planner.



   (F)   If approved, the application shall be submitted to the City
Plan Commission for review to amend the zoning map designating the historic
landmark  as an Historic Overlay District. The Historic Overly District may
be combined with any zoning district established in the city’s zoning
regulations and shall be shown on the official zoning map. The City Planner
will notify the  Building Official and City Engineer of the designation.
When so designated, any improvement requiring a building permit or demolition
permit shall be subject to the provisions set forth in this subchapter.



(Ord. 2276, passed 5-25-2004; Ord. 2394, passed 11-25-2008)



§ 32.121  PROJECT REVIEW.



   The Commission shall review all projects requiring a building permit or
demolition permit that are located within a designated historic district or
that have been designated a historic landmark to consider the issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness. The Community Development Department shall
forward a copy of all demolition and building permit applications related to
any designated historic district or historic landmark to the Historic
Preservation Commission.



   (A)   An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be
obtained from the Building Official, and when completed, filed with the
appropriate administrative official as designated by the Commission.



   (B)   For projects requiring a building permit, the applicant shall
submit a complete description of the project, including plans and photographs
30 days prior to the monthly meeting of the Commission. The applicant will be
notified of the meeting and shall have the opportunity to present his or her
request for a certificate of appropriateness.



   (C)   The Commission’s review shall be based on the Secretary of
the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and the Commission design
guidelines.



   (D)   The Commission shall approve, approve with modification or
deny the issuance of the certificate. The findings of the Commission on each
application shall be contained in a written resolution setting forth the full
reason for its decision and the vote of each member participating therein.
The resolution shall be placed on file for public inspection in the office of
the City Clerk within ten business days after the meeting at which the
application was acted upon. Thereafter, a copy of the resolution shall be
sent to the applicant by ordinary mail. If the application is approved or
approved with modifications acceptable to the applicant, a certificate of
appropriateness will be issued, signed by the Chairperson, and immediately
transmitted along with the application to the Building Official. If the
application is disapproved, the application will be immediately transmitted,
along with the written resolution of the Commission’s findings, to the
Building Official.



(Ord. 2276, passed 5-25-2004; Ord. 2394, passed 11-25-2008)



§ 32.122  APPEALS.



   Any person aggrieved by any provision of this subchapter may appeal to
the City Council by filing a written appeal with City Clerk. The appeal shall
state the reasons why the decision is being contested.



   (A)   Repealing historic district designation.



      (1)   Eighty percent of the property owners within a
designated historic district may file an appeal to the City Council
requesting rescinding an area’s designation as a historic district.



      (2)   The rescinding process will proceed in the same manner
as the original designation process. The petition will be accompanied by an
application which contains the following:



         (a)   A map showing the boundaries of the designated
historic district and the names and addresses of all property owners;



         (b)   Description of the historic district including a
statement which describes why the district no longer meets the significance
criteria in this subchapter; and



         (c)   Sketches, photographs or drawings of the property
or fully completed state site inventory forms for the properties in the
district, documenting that the district no longer meets the significance
criteria.



      (3)   The Historic Preservation Commission will consider the
request to rescind at a public hearing. The Commission will convey its
recommendation regarding the request to the Mayor and City Council for their
consideration within ten days following the public hearing.



      (4)   Upon receipt of the recommendation, the City Council
shall schedule a public hearing to consider same at a specific place, date
and time, not more than 30 days after the receipt, by giving notice as
required by law.



      (5)   The City Council, after public hearing, may approve or
disapprove the Commission’s recommendation by a majority vote of its
membership.



      (6)   If not satisfied with the decision of the City Council,
any party to the appeal before the City Council may appeal to the County
District Court within 60 days after the Council’s decision.



      (7)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall not have the
power or authority to appeal a decision of the City Council to District Court.



   (B)   Repealing historic landmark designation.



      (1)   A historic landmark may be rescinded in the same manner
as the original designation process. The petition will be accompanied by an
application which contains the following:



         (a)   A map showing the boundaries of the designated
historic landmark and the name and address of all property owners;



         (b)   Description of the historic landmark including a
statement which describes why the landmark no longer meets the significance
criteria in this subchapter; and



         (c)   Sketches, photographs or drawings of the property
or fully completed state site inventory form for the landmark which documents
that the landmark no longer meets the significance criteria.



      (2)   The Historic Preservation Commission will consider the
request to rescind at a public hearing. The Commission will convey its
recommendation regarding the request to the Mayor and City Council for their
consideration within ten days following the public hearing.



      (3)   Upon receipt of the recommendation, the City Council
shall schedule a public hearing to consider same at a specific place, date
and time, not more than 30 days after the receipt, by giving notice as
required by law.



      (4)   The City Council, after public hearing, may approve or
disapprove the Commission’s recommendation by a majority vote of its
membership.



      (5)   If not satisfied with the decision of the City Council,
any party to the appeal before the City Council may appeal to the County
District Court within 60 days after the Council’s decision.



   (C)   Denial of certificate of appropriateness.



      (1)   In the event a certificate of appropriateness is denied,
the property owner may apply for an exemption based on the substantial
hardship of maintaining the property according to the design guidelines for
historic properties. Substantial hardship is to be considered by the
Commission where one or more of the following unusual and compelling
circumstances exists:



         (a)   There are no other reasonable means of saving the
property from deterioration or collapse; and/or



         (b)   The property is owned by a nonprofit organization
and it is not feasible financially or physically to achieve the charitable
purposes of the organization while maintaining the property appropriately.



      (2)   The owner will be required to submit documents to show
that he or she cannot comply with the design guidelines and earn a reasonable
rate of return on his or her investment in the property. Information required
will include:



         (a)   Costs of the proposed development with and without
modification needed to comply with the design guidelines as determined by the
Commission;



         (b)   Structural report and/or a feasibility report
prepared by a qualified preservation architect or engineer;



         (c)   Market value of the property in its present
condition and after completion of the proposed project;



         (d)   Cost of the property, date purchased,
relationship, if any, between seller and buyer, terms of financing;



         (e)   Annual gross income for the past two years from
the property with operating and maintenance expenses, depreciation and annual
cash flow before and after debt service during that time;



         (f)   Any other information considered necessary by the
Commission to determine whether or not the property may yield a reasonable
return; and



         (g)   If the property owner is  a nonprofit
organization, the organization will be asked to provide documentation that it
is not feasible financially or physically to achieve the charitable purposes
of the organization while maintaining the property appropriately.



      (3)   If the Commission denies, or postpones for 180 days, a
request to demolish a historic building, the Commission shall work closely
with the owner to find an appropriate use for the property, to help find a
buyer or to obtain funding for rehabilitation, including low interest loans
or grants. The Commission shall inform the community concerning the threat to
the building, its value as part of the fabric of the community and, through
publicity and contacts with civic groups, seek to provide assistance in
preserving the property.



      (4)   When an applicant disagrees with the Commission’s
decision to deny issuance of a certificate of substantial hardship or
conditions attached to the certificate, an  appeal shall be reviewed  by
the City Council. The Commission shall be submit a report to the City Council
explaining the denial or required conditions.



      (5)   When an applicant disagrees with City Council’s
decision regarding issuance of a certificate of substantial hardship or
conditions attached to the certificate, an appeal may be made to the County
District Court.



   (D)   Demolition permit.  If denied a certificate of
appropriateness for the demolition of a property, the property owners may
appeal to the City Council on the grounds of economic hardship and follow the
process outlined in division (C) above.



(Ord. 2106, passed 11-9-1999; Ord. 2276, passed 5-25-2004; Ord. 2394, passed
11-25-2008)



HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION



§ 32.135  PURPOSES.



   The purposes of this subchapter are:



   (A)   To secure for all individuals within the city freedom from
discrimination in connection with employment, public accommodation, housing,
education and credit; and thereby to protect the personal dignity of these
individuals, to ensure their full productive capacities, to preserve the
public safety, health and general welfare, and to promote the interests,
rights and privileges of individual citizens within the city;



   (B)   To provide for the execution within the city of the policies
embodied in the Iowa Civil Rights Act of 1965 and in the Federal Civil Rights
Act and to promote cooperation between the city and the state and federal
agencies enforcing these acts; and



   (C)   To provide, at the local level, a Commission on Human Rights,
dedicated to the following:  effective enforcement of the Iowa Civil Rights
Act, service as a source of information to employers, laborers, business
persons, employees, tenants and other citizens relative to various civil
rights legislation and regulations; and active assistance to prevent and
eliminate the effect of discriminatory practices.



(1999 Code, § 31.01)



§ 32.136  CIVIL RIGHTS ACT.



   Pursuant to the Iowa Code § 380.10, and after published notice and
public hearing, as required by law, the Iowa Code Chapter 216 entitled the
Iowa Civil Rights Act of 1965 is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety.



(1999 Code, § 31.02)



§ 32.137  COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS.



   There is hereby established in the city government a Commission to be
known as the Human Rights Commission, which Commission shall consist of seven
members broadly representative of the community. Members of the Commission
are appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. Each member is
appointed for a term of six years. The terms of the members shall be
staggered with each term of office to expire on September 30. Vacancies shall
be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Commission shall elect
a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from the members of the Commission. Any
four members constitute a quorum. All members of the Commission serve without
compensation, but are reimbursed for travel and other necessary expenses out
of the funds appropriated for the Commission.



(1999 Code, § 31.03)



§ 32.138  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall administer the Iowa Civil Rights Act as contained
in the Iowa Code Chapter 216, and amendments thereto and shall have, exercise
and perform all applicable powers and duties as provided thereby and the
following:



   (A)   Establish rules to govern, expedite and effectuate the
procedures of the Civil Rights Act and its own actions thereunder;



   (B)   Appoint and prescribe the duties of employees as the
Commission deems necessary for the enforcement of this subchapter, subject to
the funds appropriated by the Council for that purpose;



   (C)   Issue publications and reports of investigations and research
as in the judgment of the Commission tend to promote good will among the
various racial, religious and ethnic groups within the city and which tend to
minimize or eliminate discrimination in public accommodations, employment,
apprenticeship and on-the-job training programs, vocational schools or
housing, because of race, creed, color, sex, national origin, religion,
disability or ancestry;



   (D)   Prepare and transmit to the Mayor and to the Council from time
to time, but not less than once each year, reports describing its proceedings
investigations, hearings conducted and the outcome thereof, decisions
rendered and the other work performed by the Commission;



   (E)   Make recommendations to the Mayor and Council for further
legislation as may be necessary and desirable, and adopt, publish, amend and
rescind regulations consistent with and necessary for the enforcement of this
subchapter;



   (F)   Enter into contracts with federal and state civil rights
agencies which would further the purposes of this subchapter;



   (G)   Hold meetings at intervals of not less than one per month at a
time and place to be determined by the Commission;



   (H)   Establish and administer a positive affirmative action plan
for the city, and administer any fair housing programs as are necessitated by
federal and state regulations;



   (I)   Assist all city contracting authorities in preparing equal
employment opportunity and anti-discrimination provisions for contract
specifications and advise them as to the compliance records of prospective
contractors; and



   (J)   Require that all city agencies, boards and commissions forward
to the agency all equal opportunity documents for review and evaluation prior
to their submission thereof to any state or federal agency.



(1999 Code, § 31.04)



§ 32.139  RECORDS AND CONFIDENTIALITY.



   All records of the Commission shall be public, except:



   (A)   Complaints of discrimination, reports of investigations,
statements and other documents or records obtained in investigation of any
charge shall be closed records, unless public hearing is scheduled or
District Court action is commenced as provided in this subchapter;



   (B)   The minutes of any session which is closed under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be closed records; and



   (C)   No member of the Commission or of its staff shall disclose the
filing of a complaint, the information gathered during the investigation, or
the endeavors to eliminate discriminatory or unfair practice by conference,
conciliation or persuasion, unless disclosure is made in connection with the
conduct of an investigation or after public hearing is scheduled or district
court action is commenced upon a complaint filed as provided in this
subchapter. This section does not prevent any complainant, respondent,
witness or other persons from publicizing the filing of a complaint or the
matter therein complained of. Any violation of this section is punishable by
a fine not to exceed $100.



(1999 Code, § 31.05)



MUNICIPAL HOUSING AUTHORITY



§ 32.170  AGENCY CREATED.



   There is hereby created a public body, corporate and politic, known as
the Municipal Housing Agency. The Municipal Housing Agency is authorized to
transact business and exercise all municipal housing powers in accordance
with the Iowa Code Chapter 403A.



(Iowa Code § 403A.5)  (1999 Code, § 33.01)



§ 32.171  BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.



   A Board of Commissioners consisting of five members shall be appointed
by the Mayor, subject to Council approval, for overlapping two-year terms.
Commissioners shall be eligible for reappointment for two additional terms.
Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be
entitled to the necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in
the discharge of his or her duties. The powers of the Municipal Housing
Agency shall be exercised by the Board of Commissioners.



(Iowa Code § 403A.5)  (1999 Code, § 33.02)



§ 32.172  ORGANIZATION.



   The Mayor shall designate a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among
the Commissioners. The Commission may employ a director, technical experts
and other agents and employees as may be necessary and the Commission shall
prescribe their qualifications, duties and compensation. The Commission shall
adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings.



(Iowa Code § 403A.5)  (1999 Code, § 33.03)



CITY PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 32.185  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   There shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval
of the Council, a City Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
Commission, consisting of seven members, who shall be residents of the city
and qualified by knowledge or experience to act in matters pertaining to the
development of a city plan and who shall not hold any elective office in the
city government.



   (B)   The Mayor, pursuant to existing authority under Chapter 31 of
the City of Clinton Code of Ordinances, shall appoint the seven members of
the Commission.  The Mayor may appoint the seven members from the existing
membership of the Commission, or from outside the Commission.



(Iowa Code §§ 414.6, 392.1)  (1999 Code, § 34.01) (Ord. 2515, passed
10-14-2014)



§ 32.186  TERM OF OFFICE.



   The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be six years.
The terms of office shall be staggered, with each term to expire on March 31.



(Iowa Code § 392.1)  (1999 Code, § 34.02)



§ 32.187  VACANCIES.



   If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or
otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the
same manner as the original appointee.



(Iowa Code § 392.1)  (1999 Code, § 34.03)



§ 32.188  COMPENSATION.



   All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, except
their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the Council.



(Iowa Code § 392.1)  (1999 Code, § 34.04)



§ 32.189  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall have and exercise the following powers and duties.



   (A)   Selection of officers.  The Commission shall choose annually
at its first regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and
another as Vice Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the
Chairperson during the Chairperson’s absence or disability.



(Iowa Code § 392.1)



   (B)   Adopt rules and regulations.  The Commission shall adopt
rules and regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem
necessary.



(Iowa Code § 392.1)



   (C)   Zoning.  The Commission shall have and exercise all the
powers and duties and privileges in establishing the city zoning regulations
and other related matters and may from time to time recommend to the Council
amendments, supplements, changes or modifications, all as provided by the
Iowa Code Chapter 414. When proposed changes in the zoning regulations or
districts are referred to the Commission by the Council, the Commission shall
within 30 days thereafter file its recommendations approving, disapproving or
modifying the proposed changes with the Council.



(Iowa Code § 414.6)



   (D)   Recommendations of improvements.  No statuary, memorial or
work of art in a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct,
street fixtures, public structure or appurtenances, shall be located or
erected, or site therefor obtained, nor shall any permit be issued by any
department of the city for the erection or location thereof until and unless
the design and proposed location of any improvement shall have been submitted
to the Commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except the
requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any
improvement when the Commission after 30-days’ written notice requesting
recommendations, shall have failed to file same.



(Iowa Code § 392.1)



   (E)   Review and comment on plats.  All plans, plats or re-plats of
subdivision or re-subdivisions of land embraced in the city or adjacent
thereto, laid out in lots or plats with the streets, alleys or other portions
of the same intended to be dedicated to the public in the city, shall first
be submitted to the Commission and its recommendations obtained before
approval by the Council.



(Iowa Code § 392.1)



   (F)   Fiscal responsibilities.  The Commission shall have full,
complete and exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the city all
sums of money appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts, donations
or payments whatsoever which are received by the city for city planning and
zoning purposes.



(Iowa Code § 392.1)



   (G)   Limitation on entering contracts.  The Commission shall have
no power to contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended
appropriation as approved by the Council for the present year.



(Iowa Code, § 392.1)



   (H)   Annual report.  The Commission shall each year make a report
to the Mayor and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its
receipts, disbursements and the progress of its work during the preceding
fiscal year.



(Iowa Code § 392.1)



(1999 Code, § 34.05)



COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT



§ 32.200  ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby created and established a Community Development
Department in the city to provide for the city all necessary functions and
services relating to planning, community development activities and
engineering.



(1999 Code, § 22.01)  (Ord. 2377, passed 6-24-2008)



§ 32.201  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR.



   The Department is headed by a Director known as the Community
Development Director, appointed by the City Administrator subject to Council
approval. The Community Development Department is comprised of those
additional employees as deemed essential for the efficient operation of the
Department as approved by resolution of the Council. The Community
Development Director is under the direct administrative supervision of the
City Administrator. The salary of the Community Development Director shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.



(1999 Code, § 22.02)  (Ord. 2377, passed 6-24-2008)



§ 32.202  DUTIES.



   The Community Development Director shall:



   (A)   Supervise the Engineering and Planning Division, the duties of
which shall include, but not be limited to; plan review, developer
assistance, engineering design and inspections, grant administration, capital
improvement planning, utility locates, economic development, contractor
oversight, planning ordinance updates, subdivision code updates, citizen
relations, land use planning and Plan Commission relations;



   (B)   Supervise the Building and Neighborhood Services Division, the
duties of which shall include, but not be limited to; plan review, housing
inspections, commercial and industrial inspections, property maintenance and
nuisance enforcement, public sector housing initiatives, commercial and
downtown redevelopment, citizen relations, zoning permits, economic
development, contractor oversight and  Zoning Board of Adjustment relations;



   (C)   Prepare annual budgets for services under the jurisdiction of
the Community Development Director;



   (D)   Perform other and further duties as now or may hereafter be
required by resolution or ordinance of the city and by applicable federal or
state statutes or regulations; and



   (E)   Perform other duties as designated in the Community
Development Director job description.



(1999 Code, § 22.03)  (Ord. 2377, passed 6-24-2008)



§ 32.203  EXPENDITURES.



   The Community Development Department shall follow all resolutions,
ordinances and city policies including those governing expenditures of funds
and travel. The Department shall utilize federal or state funds for all
operations connected with any state or federal financial aid program
functions of the Department and shall not utilize General Fund revenues for
programs or other expenses incurred as a result of actions initiated as a
result of these activities unless the expenditure of the General Fund
revenues is specifically authorized by resolution of the Council prior to the
commitment of the funds.



(1999 Code, § 22.04)  (Ord. 2377, passed 6-24-2008)



ADA ADVISORY COMMISSION



§ 32.301  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a seven-member ADA
Advisory Commission to assist the ADA Coordinator in achieving compliance
with the ADA.



(Ord. 2469, passed 3-13-2012)



§ 32.302  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADA.  Americans with Disabilities Act.



   DISABLED PERSON.  Any person:



      (1)   Who has a physical or mental impairment which
substantially limits one or more major life activities, has a record of such
an impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment; and



      (2)   Whose impairment, in reference to employment, is a
disability within the meaning of the ADA.



   MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES.  Functions such as caring for one’s self,
performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing,
learning and working.



   QUALIFIED DISABLED PERSON.  Any disabled person who otherwise meets
the minimum qualifications of the job for which application is made.



(Ord. 2469, passed 3-13-2012)



§ 32.303  ESTABLISHMENT OF ADA ADVISORY COMMISSION.



   The ADA Advisory Commission is hereby established to examine new and
existing local, state and federal laws and applicable regulations to assure
that disabled individuals are integrated, absorbed and “mainstreamed”
wherever and whenever possible into every facet of city employment, programs
and activities and advise and assist the ADA Coordinator accordingly.



(Ord. 2469, passed 3-13-2012)



§ 32.304  MEMBERSHIP AND TERM.



   The Commission shall be composed of seven members, appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by the Council, who shall serve without compensation. All
members shall be residents of the city. The nine members shall include three
disabled persons, two representatives of small and/or large business, and two
members of the general public. The members shall be appointed for terms of
six years commencing on January 1 and the terms of office of members of the
Commission are staggered so that three members are appointed every two years.
In the event of a vacancy in the office of a Commission member, the new
appointee shall serve for the balance of his or her predecessor’s term. The
Commission shall establish its own rules and elect officers as it deems
necessary.



(Ord. 2469, passed 3-13-2012)



§ 32.305  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   To familiarize and sensitize city staff and the general public
to the access problems of the disabled.



   (B)   To develop a collection of accessibility planning information
to be located in the city’s ADA Coordinator’s office and made available
to city staff and the general public.



   (C)   To survey city buildings, programs and services for potential
accessibility problems and recommend to the Council proposed resolutions of
these problems in accordance with the city’s Section 504 Compliance Program.



   (D)   To review all proposed new architectural designs for city
facilities and to recommend appropriate revisions to such designs as needed
to address the accessibility requirements of the 504 Program.



   (E)   To review all city codes and recommend amendments where
necessary to assure accessibility problems are adequately dealt with and that
the requirements of the 504 Program are met.



   (F)   To assist in resolution of any reasonable accommodation issues
which arise in the recruitment, selection and placement of qualified disabled
persons in the city workforce.



   (G)   To develop recommendations on the future role of the
accessibility program in the city.



   (H)   To serve as an advisor to other public or private entities on
accessibility issues where it appears the Commission can make a positive
contribution to resolution of such problems.



(Ord. 2469, passed 3-13-2012)



§ 32.306  STAFF SUPPORT.



   Staff support for the ADA Advisory Commission shall be provided as
directed by the city’s ADA Coordinator.



(Ord. 2469, passed 3-13-2012)



FINANCE COMMITTEE



§ 32.400  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a Finance Committee to
make recommendations on financial matters of the city and to monitor the
integrity of the city's financial reporting process.



(Ord. 2509, passed 7-22-2014)



§ 32.401  MEMBERSHIP.



   Membership of the Finance Committee is comprised of five persons: three
representatives from the City Council; and two members of the business
community, appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, who
shall serve without compensation, for a term of two years.



   (A)   The Finance Committee will meet monthly;



   (B)   The Finance Committee will designate a chair and a recording
secretary;



   (C)   The Finance Director will prepare an agenda or work plan for
each meeting;



   (D)   A record of the proceedings will be kept in the same manner as
official minutes of the City Council.



(Ord. 2509, passed 7-22-2014)



§ 32.402  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Finance Committee shall have the following powers and duties: 



   (A)   To monitor the budget and finance activities through monthly
review and discussion of monthly financial reports;



   (B)   To assist with the development of financial policies and make
recommendations to the City Council;



   (C)   To review the city's annual audited financial statements prior
to acceptance by the City Council;



   (D)   To assist with the development of rate structures and fee
schedules for city services; and



   (E)   To assist with the development and implementation of internal
controls procedures and practices with regard to finance, accounting, and
legal compliance.



(Ord. 2509, passed 7-22-2014)



§ 32.403  STAFF SUPPORT.



   City staff support for the Finance Committee shall be the City of
Clinton Finance Director or his or her designee and the City Administrator.



(Ord. 2509, passed 7-22-2014)



NEIGHBORHOOD IMPROVEMENT COMMITTEE



§ 32.500  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a Neighborhood
Improvement Committee to develop programs to incentivize property owners to
invest in and improve existing housing in the city.



(Ord. 2513, passed 9-23-2014)



§ 32.501  MEMBERSHIP.



   Membership of the Neighborhood Improvement Committee shall consist of
individuals representing as wide of a variety of community interests as
possible.  The Committee shall be comprised of nine persons, each serving a
term of six years.  The Mayor shall also appoint a Council Liaison to the
Committee who shall ensure regular communication between the Committee and
the Council.



(Ord. 2513, passed 9-23-2014)



§ 32.502  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Neighborhood Improvement Committee shall have the following powers
and duties: 



   (A)   To make recommendations to the City Council regarding housing
conditions and availability issues;



   (B)   To make recommendations to the City Council regarding
incentive programs for housing development and redevelopment;



   (C)   To evaluate applications related to Community Development
Block Grants; and



   (D)   To perform such other appropriate committee functions which
are consistent with the Committee's purpose.



(Ord. 2513, passed 9-23-2014)



CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLANNING COMMITTEE



§ 32.600  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a Capital Improvements
Planning Committee to review and prioritize major capital projects of the
City of Clinton.



(Ord. 2512, passed 9-23-2014)



§ 32.601  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   Membership of the Capital Improvements Planning Committee
shall be comprised of nine persons recruited from the following organizations:



      (1)   Clinton Community School District Board Member - one
member



      (2)   Supervisor from the Clinton County Board of Supervisors
- one member



      (3)   City of Clinton Plan Commission - two members



      (4)   City Council of the City of Clinton - three members



      (5)   Citizen of the City of Clinton - two members



      (6)   Convention and Visitors Bureau - one member



   (B)   The term of each member's service shall be for a period
consistent with the term of their elected position or office, or for four
years, whichever is shorter.



(Ord. 2512, passed 9-23-2014; Ord. 2533, passed 1-26-2016)



§ 32.602  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Capital Improvements Planning Committee shall have the following
powers and duties: 



   (A)   To recommend capital projects as part of the city's
comprehensive Capital Improvement Plan;



   (B)   To receive and consider information from city staff regarding
proposed capital projects; and



   (C)   To develop, review, and/or revise, by January 15 of each year,
a six-year Capital Improvement Plan for the City Council's consideration and
approval.



(Ord. 2512, passed 9-23-2014)



§ 32.603  STAFF SUPPORT.



   Staff support for the Capital Improvement Planning Committee shall be
provided by the City Administrator, City Finance Director, and City Engineer,
and such other personnel as the City Administrator may direct.



(Ord. 2512, passed 9-23-2014)



PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD



§ 32.700  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a Parks and Recreation
Advisory Board to recommend to the City Council the need for facilities and
programs and to hear citizens' concerns and suggestions for the city's Parks
and Recreation departments.



(Ord. 2514, passed 9-23-2014)



§ 32.701  MEMBERSHIP.



   Membership of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of
individuals representing as wide of a variety of community interests as
possible.  The Committee shall be comprised of five persons, each serving a
term of four years.  Appointees may include such members of the abolished
Parkland and Facilities Committee as the Mayor may select, and/or such other
persons as the Mayor may select. The Mayor shall also appoint a Council
Liaison to the Board who shall ensure regular communication between the Board
and the Council.



(Ord. 2514, passed 9-23-2014)



§ 32.702  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall have the following powers
and duties: 



   (A)   To make recommendations to the City Council regarding the need
for new parkland and/or recreation locations and capital improvements to
existing parks and recreation facilities;



   (B)   To assist with development of a Parks Master Plan; and



   (C)   To hear citizen recommendations and complaints on parks and
recreation issues.



(Ord. 2514, passed 9-23-2014)



BOARD OF APPEALS



§ 32.800  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a Board of Appeals to
review appeals of denials, suspensions or revocations of a vehicle for hire
business permit or vehicle for hire driver’s license pursuant to Chapter
114 of this code.



(Ord. 2563, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 32.801  MEMBERSHIP.



   Membership of the Board of Appeals shall consist of the City
Administrator, the Chief of Police, the Transit and Fleet Superintendent and
two individuals from the community. The two individuals from the community
shall be selected by the Mayor. The individuals from the community shall
serve four year terms.



(Ord. 2563, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 32.802  POWER AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Approve insignias, identifying designs, or monograms submitted
by vehicle for hire business permit applicants for use on the company’s
vehicles;



   (B)   To hear appeals of denials, suspensions, or revocations of a
vehicle for hire business permit or vehicle for hire driver’s license
initiated pursuant to Chapter 114 of this code; and



   (C)   To make a final determination on issue appealed. Final written
rulings on the issue appealed shall be made no later than 30 days after the
conclusion of the appeal proceeding.



(Ord. 2563, passed 1-9-2018)



MONUMENT COMMITTEE



§ 32.900  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a Monument Committee to
create and maintain monuments in the city.



(Ord. 2573, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 32.901  MEMBERSHIP.



   Membership of the Committee is comprised of seven persons, appointed by
the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, who shall serve without
compensation, for staggered terms of two years.



   (A)   Membership shall ideally, but not necessarily include at least
one member from the Historic Preservation Commission, one military veteran,
one middle or high school student, one resident of the city, one city staff
person, and two members of the City Council.



   (B)   The Committee will meet monthly;



   (C)   The Committee will designate a chair and a recording secretary;



   (D)   The Committee secretary will prepare an agenda or work plan
for each meeting;



   (E)   A record of the proceedings will be kept in the same manner as
official minutes of the City Council.



(Ord. 2573, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 32.902  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Committee shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   General.  Create and maintain monuments in the City of
Clinton.



   (B)   Budget. The Committee shall utilize funds allocated by the
City Council, as well as donations and grants to complete projects and
maintenance within the scope of division (A).



(Ord. 2573, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 32.903  STAFF SUPPORT.



   City staff support for the Committee shall be the City Administrator or
his or her designee.



(Ord. 2573, passed 4-24-2018)



HOMETOWN PRIDE COMMITTEE



§ 32.1000  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a Hometown Pride
Committee pursuant to the Keep Iowa Beautiful Program.



(Ord. 2573, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 32.1001  MEMBERSHIP.



   Membership of the Committee shall consist of five persons, including a
city staff person and four members of the community. The Committee members
shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, and shall
serve without compensation, for a term of five years.



   (A)   The Committee will meet monthly;



   (B)   The Committee will designate a chair and a recording secretary;



   (C)   The secretary will prepare an agenda or work plan for each
meeting;



   (D)   A record of the proceedings will be kept in the same manner as
official minutes of the City Council.



(Ord. 2573, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 32.1002  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Committee shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   General.  Determine, advise upon, and implement projects that
promote hometown pride and economic and cultural vitality within the city.



   (B)   Budget. The Committee shall procure donations and grants to
fund projects within the scope of division (A) above.



(Ord. 2573, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 32.1003  STAFF SUPPORT.



   City staff support for the Committee shall be the City Clerk or his or
her designee.



(Ord. 2573, passed 4-24-2018)



GRANT COMMITTEE



§ 32.1100  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a Grant Committee to
identify and collect information pertaining to state, federal and/or private
grants available to the City of Clinton.



(Ord. 2575, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 32.1101  MEMBERSHIP.



   Membership of the Committee is comprised of nine persons, appointed by
the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, who shall serve without
compensation, for staggered terms of two years.



   (A)   Membership shall consist of the following:



      (1)   Mayor;



      (2)   City Administrator;



      (3)   One member of the City Council;



      (4)   One representative from downtown;



      (5)   One representative from Lyons;



      (6)   One representative from the Clinton Regional Development
Corporation;



      (7)   One representative from the Clinton Chamber of Commerce;
and



      (8)   Two residents from the City of Clinton.



   (B)   The Committee will meet monthly;



   (C)   The Committee will designate a chair and a recording secretary;



   (D)   The Committee Secretary will prepare an agenda or work plan
for each meeting;



   (E)   The Committee shall create and staff subcommittees as
necessary to formally apply for and/or pursue specific grants identified and
selected by the Committee;



   (F)   A record of the proceedings will be kept in the same manner as
official minutes of the City Council.



(Ord. 2575, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 32.1102  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Committee shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   General.  The Committee shall research/identify grants
available to the city, conduct fact-finding with respect to such grants, and
make determinations as to which grants, if any, the city shall apply for. The
Committee shall have the authority to create any and all subcommittees deemed
necessary for the effective administration of the duties and objectives
identified in this section.



   (B)   Budget. The Committee shall utilize funds allocated by the
City Council, as well as donations and grants to complete projects and
maintenance within the scope of division (A).



(Ord. 2575, passed 4-24-2018)



§ 32.1103  STAFF SUPPORT.



   City staff support for the Committee shall be the City Administrator or
his or her designee.



(Ord. 2575, passed 4-24-2018)



TRAILS ADVISORY COMMITTEE



§ 32.1200  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a Trails Advisory
Committee that will advise the City Council on matters concerning recreation
trails, bike lanes, proposed sidewalks, and other similar enhancements within
the City of Clinton.



(Ord. 2580, passed 5-8-2018)



§ 32.1201  MEMBERSHIP.



   Membership of the Committee is comprised of seven persons, appointed by
the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, who shall serve without
compensation, for staggered terms of two years.



   (A)   Membership shall ideally, but not necessarily include at least
one member from the City Planning and Zoning Commission, one member of the
City Council, and five Clinton residents, with appropriate representation by
members of local biking/running clubs among those five appointed residents.



   (B)   The Committee will meet monthly;



   (C)   The Committee will designate a chair and a recording secretary;



   (D)   The Committee secretary will prepare an agenda or work plan
for each meeting;



   (E)   A record of the proceedings will be kept in the same manner as
official minutes of the City Council.



(Ord. 2580, passed 5-8-2018)



§ 32.1202  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Committee shall have the following powers and duties:



   (A)   General. The Committee shall have the following general powers
and duties:



      (1)   Define the Trails Master Plan and assist with the
creation of documents necessary to carry out and/or administer this function;



      (2)   Assist with the creation of sidewalk infill policies and
prioritization of infill locations;



      (3)   Provide general advice to the City Council on matters
concerning recreation trails, bike lanes, and other similar enhancements.



   (B)   Budget. The Committee shall utilize funds allocated by the
City Council, as well as any and all available donations and grants to carry
out the objectives/functions within the scope of division (A).



(Ord. 2580, passed 5-8-2018)



§ 32.1203  STAFF SUPPORT.



   (A)   City staff support for the Committee shall be as follows:



      (1)   City Administrator or designee;



      (2)   Designee from the Parks and Recreation Department;



      (3)   Assistant City Engineer or other designee from the City
Engineering Department.



   (B)    Committee shall coordinate with representative(s) from ECIA
as is necessary or beneficial to advance the Committee’s objectives.



(Ord. 2580, passed 5-8-2018)



CHAPTER 33:  POLICE DEPARTMENT



Section




General Provisions




   33.01   Department established



   33.02   Organization



   33.03   Summoning aid



   33.04   Taking weapons



   33.05   Maltreatment of police dogs




Peace Officers




   33.20   Peace officer qualifications



   33.21   Required training



   33.22   Compensation




Police Chief




   33.35   Police Chief; appointed



   33.36   Police Chief; duties




Burglar Alarm Service Charge




   33.50   Purpose



   33.51   Service charge established



   33.52   Removal of alarm system



   33.53   Appeal procedure



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 33.01  DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.



   The Police Department of the city is established to provide for the
preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the city.



(1999 Code, § 35.01)



§ 33.02  ORGANIZATION.



   The Department shall consist of a Police Chief and other positions as
the City Council shall determine by budget resolution.



(1999 Code, § 35.02)  (Ord. 2222, passed 8-22-2000)



§ 33.03  SUMMONING AID.



   Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as many
persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in
making the arrest.



(Iowa Code § 804.17)  (1999 Code, § 35.08)



§ 33.04  TAKING WEAPONS.



   Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person arrested all
items which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may
have within the person’s control to be disposed of according to law.



(Iowa Code § 804.18)  (1999 Code, § 35.09)



§ 33.05  MALTREATMENT OF POLICE DOGS.



   It is unlawful for any person to willfully beat, kick, strike, torment,
injure, disable, torture, mutilate or kill any dog used by the Police
Department in the performance of the functions or duties of the Department or
to interfere with any police dog while it is being used by the Police
Department or any officer or member thereof in the performance of any of the
duties or functions of the Department or of any officer or member.



(1999 Code, § 35.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PEACE OFFICERS



§ 33.20  PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.



   In no case shall any person be selected or appointed as a law
enforcement officer unless the person meets the minimum qualification
standards established by the State Law Enforcement Academy.



(Iowa Code § 80B.11)  (1999 Code, § 35.03)



§ 33.21  REQUIRED TRAINING.



   All peace officers shall have received the minimum training required by
law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of
employment. Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as
required by law.



(I.A.C. §§ 501-3, 501-8)  (Iowa Code § 80B.11(2))  (1999 Code, § 35.04)



§ 33.22  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Department are designated by rank and receive
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.



(1999 Code, § 35.05)



POLICE CHIEF



§ 33.35  POLICE CHIEF; APPOINTED.



   The City Administrator shall appoint the Police Chief, subject to
Council approval.



(Iowa Code § 400.13)  (1999 Code, § 35.06)



§ 33.36  POLICE CHIEF; DUTIES.



   The Police Chief has the following powers and duties.



   (A)   General.  The general administration and control of the
Police Department is vested in the Police Chief, who is responsible for the
government, efficiency and conduct of the Department. The Police Chief, in
the exercise of duties, has the power to prescribe, promulgate and enforce
rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the members of the
Department, which shall, however, not be inconsistent with this code of
ordinances or the laws of the state. It is the duty of the Police Chief to
cause public peace to be preserved and to enforce all the laws and ordinances
of the city and state.



   (B)   Command.  It is the duty of the Police Chief to be in command
of all officers appointed for police work and to be responsible for the care,
maintenance and use of all vehicles and equipment for the Department. All
members of the Police Department shall observe and obey the orders of their
superior officers. The Police Chief may peremptorily suspend or discharge any
subordinates then under the direction of the Police Chief pursuant to state
law.



   (C)   Record of arrests.  The Police Chief shall cause to be kept a
record of all arrests made by members of the Department.



   (D)   Other duties.  The Police Chief shall perform other duties as
may be provided by Council resolution and state statute.



   (E)   Acting Police Chief.  The Police Chief shall designate an
acting Police Chief to perform the duties of the Police Chief when the Police
Chief is absent from the city or unable to perform duties.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))  (1999 Code, § 35.07)



BURGLAR ALARM SERVICE CHARGE



§ 33.50  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a service charge for
owners of burglar alarm systems directly connected to the City Police
Department which cause an excessive occurrence of false burglar alarms
responded to by the Police Department. This subchapter also provides the
power to the Police Chief to order the removal of burglar alarm systems from
the Police Department Alarm Board and/or special alarm lines in cases of
excessive false burglar alarms and nonpayment of service charges.



(1999 Code, § 38.01)



§ 33.51  SERVICE CHARGE ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   Upon the receipt of a false burglar alarm, whether the false
alarm is intentional or unintentional, and a police response is requested by
the activation of the alarm system, the alarm system user will be notified by
the Police Chief of the occurrence of the alarm and a warning will be issued.



   (B)   Upon the fourth false burglar alarm occurrence and each false
burglar alarm occurrence thereafter within any calendar year, whether the
false alarm was intentional or unintentional, and a police response is
requested by the activation of the alarm system, the alarm system user will
be charged a service charge of $75 for each occurrence due to employee error
or negligence.



   (C)   Alarm malfunctions caused by other than employee error or
owner error or employee negligence or owner negligence shall not be counted
as a false burglar alarm for purposes of levying a service charge or ordering
the removal of an alarm system. The failure of the owner to promptly repair a
malfunctioning alarm system is considered owner negligence.



(1999 Code, § 38.02)  (Ord. 2270, passed 10-28-2003)



§ 33.52  REMOVAL OF ALARM SYSTEM.



   Upon the occurrence of the sixteenth false burglar alarm within any
calendar year, whether the false alarm was intentional or unintentional, and
a police response is required by the activation of the alarm system, or upon
the nonpayment of a service charge within 30 days of being billed therefor,
the Police Chief shall order the removal of the burglar alarm system and/or
special alarm line from the City Police Department Alarm Board. The order of
removal shall be in writing, delivered to the burglar alarm system user and
specify the reason for the removal and the time when the removal is to be
completed. If the burglar alarm system is not removed within the specified
time, the Police Chief shall cause the burglar alarm system and/or special
alarm line to be removed. The order of removal shall also advise the burglar
alarm system user of the right to appeal the order to the City Administrator.



(1999 Code, § 38.03)



§ 33.53  APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Police Chief with reference
to a service charge or an order to remove a burglar alarm system has the
right to appeal the decision to the City Administrator. An appeal must be
made within ten days after notice of the Police Chief’s decision or order
of removal, by filing with the City Administrator a letter of appeal briefly
stating therein the basis for the appeal. Failure to file a letter of appeal
within ten days shall constitute a waiver of appellant’s right to have the
decision reviewed. The City Administrator may either affirm, modify or
reverse the decision of the Police Chief. The decision of the City
Administrator will be final.



(1999 Code, § 38.04)



CHAPTER 34:  FIRE DEPARTMENT



Section




General Provisions




   34.01   Establishment and purpose



   34.02   Organization



   34.03   Departmental rules



   34.04   Calls outside city



   34.05   Mutual aid



   34.06   Authority to cite violations




Fire Department Members




   34.20   Training



   34.21   Compensation



   34.22   First class firefighter requirements




Fire Chief




   34.35   Fire Chief; appointed



   34.36   Fire Chief; duties



   34.37   Fire Inspector designated



   34.38   Obedience to Fire Chief




Emergency Ambulance Service




   34.50   Emergency ambulance service




Hazardous Substance Spills




   34.65   Purpose



   34.66   Definitions



   34.67   Cleanup required



   34.68   Liability for cleanup costs



   34.69   Notifications



   34.70   Police authority



   34.71   Liability



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 34.01  ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.



   A Fire Department is hereby established to prevent and extinguish fires
and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire prevention
and fire safety, to provide emergency ambulance service, respond to rescue
calls and to answer all emergency calls for which there is no other
established agency.



(Iowa Code § 364.16)  (1999 Code, § 36.01)



§ 34.02  ORGANIZATION.



   The Department shall consist of a Fire Chief and other positions as the
City Council shall determine by budget resolution.



(1999 Code, § 36.02)  (Ord. 2115, passed 5-9-2000; Ord. 2221, passed
8-22-2000)



§ 34.03  DEPARTMENTAL RULES.



   The Fire Chief shall establish rules, not in conflict with this code of
ordinances and rules of the Civil Service Commission and subject to the
approval of the Council, as may be necessary for the operation of the
Department.



(1999 Code, § 36.09)



§ 34.04  CALLS OUTSIDE CITY.



   The Department shall answer calls to fires and other emergencies
outside the city limits if the Fire Chief determines that an emergency exists
and that action will not endanger persons and property within the city limits.



(Iowa Code §§ 364.4(2), 364.4(3))  (1999 Code, § 36.10)



§ 34.05  MUTUAL AID.



   Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the Department may
enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire
departments. Copies of any agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.



(Iowa Code §§ 364.4(2), 364.4(3))  (1999 Code, § 36.11)



§ 34.06  AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS.



   Fire officials acting under the authority of the Iowa Code Chapter 100
may issue citations in accordance to the Iowa Code Chapter 805, for
violations of state and/or local fire safety regulations.



(Iowa Code § 100.41)  (1999 Code, § 36.12)



FIRE DEPARTMENT MEMBERS



§ 34.20  TRAINING.



   All members of the Department shall attend and actively participate in
regular or special training drills or programs as directed by the Chief.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))  (1999 Code, § 36.03)



§ 34.21  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Department shall be designated by rank and receive
compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))  (1999 Code, § 36.04)



§ 34.22  FIRST CLASS FIREFIGHTER REQUIREMENTS.



   Prior to promotion to firefighter first class, Fire Department
employees shall be required to obtain certification as a state paramedic
specialist, firefighter I and firefighter II and shall maintain the
certification throughout his or her employment. The Fire Chief, with
agreement of the employee may extend the employee’s probationary period up
to two years in order to obtain the required certifications.



(Ord. 2240, passed 6-12-2001; Ord. 2383, passed 7-8-2008)



FIRE CHIEF



§ 34.35  FIRE CHIEF; APPOINTED.



   The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City Administrator, subject to
Council approval.



(1999 Code, § 36.05)



§ 34.36  FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES.



   The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire Chief by
law or ordinance, including but not limited to the following:



   (A)   Enforce laws.  Enforce all ordinances and, when enabled,
state laws regulating fire prevention;



   (B)   Authority at fires.  When in charge of a fire scene, direct
an operation as necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue
operation, investigate the existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas
leak or other hazardous condition, or take any other action deemed necessary
in the reasonable performance of the Department’s duties;



(Iowa Code § 102.2)



   (C)   Control of scenes.  Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel
from approaching a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle,
vessel or individual that may impede or interfere with the operation of the
Fire Department;



(Iowa Code § 102.2)



   (D)   Authority to barricade.  When in charge of a fire scene,
place or erect ropes, guards, barricades or other obstructions across a
street, alley, right-of-way or private property near the location of the fire
or emergency so as to prevent accidents or interference with the firefighting
efforts of the Fire Department, to control the scene until any required
investigation is complete or to preserve evidence related to the fire or
other emergency;



(Iowa Code § 102.3)



   (E)   Command.  Be charged with the duty of maintaining the
efficiency, discipline and control of the Fire Department. The members of the
Fire Department shall, at all times, be subject to the direction of the Fire
Chief;



   (F)   Property.  Exercise and have full control over the
disposition of all fire apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used
by or belonging to the Fire Department;



   (G)   Notification.  Whenever death, serious bodily injury or
property damage in excess of $200,000 has occurred as a result of a fire, or
if arson is suspected, notify the State Fire Marshal’s Division
immediately. For all fires causing an estimated damage of $50 or more or
emergency responses by the Fire Department, file a report with the Fire
Marshal’s Division within ten days following the end of the month. The
report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the name of the
owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire, the value of
the property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of the fire as
determined by investigation, and other facts, statistics and circumstances
concerning the fire incidents;



(Iowa Code §§ 100.2, 100.3)



   (H)   Right of entry.  Have the right, during reasonable hours, to
enter any building or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the
purpose of making an investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance
may be necessary to be made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare;



(Iowa Code § 100.12)



   (I)   Recommendation.  Make recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards;



(Iowa Code § 100.13)



   (J)   Assist State Fire Marshal.  At the request of the State Fire
Marshal, and as provided by law, aid the Marshal in the performance of duties
by investigating, preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires;



(Iowa Code § 100.4)



   (K)   Records.  Cause to be kept records of the Fire Department
personnel, firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and
apparatus, the number of responses to alarms, their cause and location, and
an analysis of losses by value, type and location of buildings; and



   (L)   Reports.  Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an
annual report of the status and activities of the Department as well as other
reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))  (1999 Code, § 36.06)



§ 34.37  FIRE INSPECTOR DESIGNATED.



   The Fire Chief shall appoint and designate the Fire Marshal of the Fire
Department as a Fire Inspector. If certified by the Iowa Law Enforcement
Academy, the Fire Marshal shall have full powers of arrest to effectuate the
primary duty of enforcing this code of ordinances and state statutes relating
to fire prevention and arson.



(1999 Code, § 36.07)



§ 34.38  OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of the Fire Chief.



(1999 Code, § 36.08)



EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE



§ 34.50  EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE.



   The Department is authorized to provide emergency ambulance or rescue
services.



(1999 Code, § 36.13)



HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS



§ 34.65  PURPOSE.



   In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety and welfare
from the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are
promulgated to establish responsibility for the treatment, removal and
cleanup of hazardous substance spills within the city limits.



(1999 Code, § 37.01)



§ 34.66  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CLEANUP.  Actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify,
analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a hazardous
substance.



(Iowa Code § 455B.381(1))



   HAZARDOUS CONDITION.  Any situation involving the actual, imminent or
probable spillage, leakage or release of a hazardous substance onto the land,
into a water of the state or into the atmosphere which creates an immediate
or potential danger to the public health or safety or to the environment.



(Iowa Code § 455B.381(4))



   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE.  Any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not
limited to, a substance that is toxic, corrosive or flammable, or that is an
irritant or that generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other
means. HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE may include any hazardous waste identified or
listed by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as amended by the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic pollutant listed under §
307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977,
or any hazardous substance designated under § 311 of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous
material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.



(Iowa Code § 455B.381(5))



   PERSON HAVING CONTROL OVER A HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE.  A person who at any
time produces, handles, stores, uses, transports, refines or disposes of a
hazardous substance, the release of which creates a hazardous condition,
including bailees, carriers and any other person in control of a hazardous
substance when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the person owns the
hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract or other
agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance.



(Iowa Code § 455B.381(7))



(1999 Code, § 37.02)



§ 34.67  CLEANUP REQUIRED.



   Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the
hazardous substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the
environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters,
including ground waters, the responsible person shall cause the condition to
be remedied by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as rapidly as
feasible to an acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be
borne by the responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the
cleanup to begin in a reasonable time in relation to the hazard and
circumstances of the incident, the city may, by an authorized officer, give
reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous condition, the
notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the
city will proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible person
for all costs associated with the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished
within the deadline. In the event that it is determined that immediate
cleanup is necessary as a result of the present danger to the public health,
safety and welfare, then no notice shall be required and the city may proceed
to procure the cleanup and bill the responsible person for all costs
associated with the cleanup. If the bill for those services is not paid
within 30 days, the City Attorney shall proceed to obtain payment by all
legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the city to
finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the Council and
immediately seek any state or federal funds available for the cleanup.



(1999 Code, § 37.03)



§ 34.68  LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS.



   The responsible person shall be strictly liable for all of the
following:



   (A)   The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the city as a result
of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a hazardous substance
involved in a hazardous condition;



   (B)   The reasonable costs incurred by the city to evacuate people
from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person; and



   (C)   The reasonable damages to the city for the injury to,
destruction of, or loss of city property, including parks and roads,
resulting from a hazardous condition caused by that person, including the
costs of assessing the injury, destruction or loss.



(1999 Code, § 37.04)



§ 34.69  NOTIFICATIONS.



   (A)   A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting or
disposing of a hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of
Natural Resources and the Police Department of the occurrence of a hazardous
condition as soon as possible but not later than six hours after the onset of
the hazardous condition or discovery of the hazardous condition. The Police
Chief shall immediately notify the Department of Natural Resources.



   (B)   Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall
notify the Police Department, which shall then notify the Department of
Natural Resources.



(1999 Code, § 37.05)



§ 34.70  POLICE AUTHORITY.



   (A)   If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law
enforcement officer, Fire Department personnel or an authorized
representative may:



      (1)   Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the
site of a hazardous condition; and



      (2)   Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the
site of a hazardous condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.



   (B)   No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement
officer issued under this section.



(1999 Code, § 37.06)



§ 34.71  LIABILITY.



   The city shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages,
injuries or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the city is
the person having control over a hazardous substance as defined in § 34.66.



(1999 Code, § 37.07)



CHAPTER 35:  FINANCIAL POLICIES



Section




Hotel and Motel Tax




   35.001   Definitions



   35.002   Tax imposed



   35.003   Payment of tax




Industrial Property Tax Exemptions




   35.015   Purpose



   35.016   Definitions



   35.017   Period of partial exemption



   35.018   Amounts eligible for exemption



   35.019   Limitations



   35.020   Applications



   35.021   Approval



   35.022   Exemption repealed



   35.023   Dual exemptions prohibited




Speculative Shell Buildings Property Tax Exemption




   35.035   Purpose



   35.036   Definitions



   35.037   Property tax exemption for buildings of certain
organizations



   35.038   Term and amount of exemption



   35.039   Exceptions



   35.040   Application for exemption



   35.041   Prior approval



   35.042   Eligibility for industrial tax exemption under Iowa Code
Chapter 427B




Urban Renewal




   35.050   Purpose



   35.051   Liberty Avenue Urban Renewal Area; Plaza West Development
Project



   35.052   Manufacturing Meadows Urban Renewal Area; Kirchhoff
Development Project



   35.053   Lyons Urban Renewal Area; Rivers Edge Development Project



   35.054   Manufacturing Meadows Urban Renewal Area; Target Store
Development Project



   35.055   Manufacturing Meadows Urban Renewal Area; Manufacturing
Meadows III Project



   35.056   Central Business District Urban Renewal Area; Hy-Vee
Redevelopment Project



   35.057   Manufacturing Meadows Urban Renewal Area; Mill Creek
Development Project



   35.058   Business Park Development Project



   35.059   Liberty Square Urban Renewal Area



   35.060   Ashford University Urban Renewal Area



   35.061   City Housing Partnership Urban Renewal Area



   35.062   West View Heights Urban Renewal Area



   35.063   Lincolnway Industrial Rail and Air Park Urban Renewal Area



   35.064   Washington Middle School Urban Renewal Area



   35.065   Saddle Ridge Urban Renewal Area




Urban Revitalization Area




   35.075   Designation of urban revitalization areas




Municipal Improvement District




   35.085   Self-supported Municipal Improvement District established



HOTEL AND MOTEL TAX



§ 35.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HOTEL and MOTEL.  Any hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house, rooming
house or tourist court or any place where sleeping accommodations are
furnished to transient guests for rent, whether with or without meals, except
the gross receipts from the renting of sleeping rooms in dormitories and in
memorial unions of all state universities and colleges.



   RENTING and RENT.  Any kind of direct or indirect charge for any room,
apartment or sleeping quarters in a hotel or motel, as defined in this
subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 129.01)



§ 35.002  TAX IMPOSED.



   A tax is hereby imposed upon the gross receipts from the renting of any
and all rooms, apartments or sleeping quarters in any hotel or motel as
defined in this subchapter at the rate of 7% of the gross receipts derived
from the renting of a room, apartment or sleeping quarters while rented by
the same person for a period of not more than 31 consecutive days.



(1999 Code, § 129.02)  (Ord. 2246, passed 9-17-2001)



§ 35.003  PAYMENT OF TAX.



   The tax shall be paid as is provided in Iowa Code Chapter 423A, and the
proceeds of the tax shall be used for the purposes stated in Iowa Code
Chapter 423A.



(1999 Code, § 129.03)



INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS



§ 35.015  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for a partial exemption
from property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by
the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses, distribution centers and the acquisition of or improvement to
machinery and equipment assessed as real estate.



(1999 Code, § 8.01)



§ 35.016  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACTUAL VALUE ADDED.  The actual value added as of the first year for
which the exemption is received, except that actual value added by
improvements to machinery and equipment means the actual value as determined
by the local assessor as of January 1 of each year for which the exemption is
received.



   DISTRIBUTION CENTER.  A building or structure used primarily for the
storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail
outlets. DISTRIBUTION CENTER does not mean a building or structure used
primarily to store raw agricultural products, used primarily by a
manufacturer to store goods to be used in the manufacturing process, used
primarily for the storage of petroleum products or used for the retail sale
of goods.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  New buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing
buildings and structures. NEW CONSTRUCTION does not include reconstruction of
an existing building or structure which does not constitute complete
replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing
building or structure unless the reconstruction of an existing building or
structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the reconstruction is
necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the manufacturing
and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required for
the owner of the building or structure to continue competitively to
manufacture or process those products, which determination shall receive
prior approval from the City Council of the city upon the recommendation of
the Iowa Department of Economic Development.



   NEW MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT ASSESSED AS REAL ESTATE.  New machinery
and equipment assessed as real estate pursuant to the Iowa Code §
427A.1(1)(e), unless the machinery or equipment is part of the normal
replacement or operating process to maintain or expand the existing
operational status.



   RESEARCH-SERVICE FACILITIES.  A building or group of buildings devoted
primarily to research and development activities, including, but not limited
to, the design and production or manufacture of prototype products for
experimental use, and corporate research services which do not have a primary
purpose of providing on-site services to the public.



   WAREHOUSE.  A building or structure used as a public warehouse for the
storage of goods pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 554, Article 7, except that it
does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw
agricultural products or from which goods are sold at retail.



(1999 Code, § 8.02)



§ 35.017  PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION.



   The actual value added to industrial real estate by the new
construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities,
warehouses, distribution centers and the acquisition of or improvement to
machinery and equipment assessed as real estate, is eligible to receive a
partial exemption from taxation for a period of five years.



(Iowa Code § 427B.3)  (1999 Code, § 8.03)



§ 35.018  AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION.



   The amount of actual value added which is eligible to be exempt from
taxation shall be as follows: 



   (A)   For the first year, 75%;



   (B)   For the second year, 60%;



   (C)   For the third year, 45%;



   (D)   For the fourth year, 30%; and



   (E)   For the fifth year, 15%.



(Iowa Code § 427B.3)  (1999 Code, § 8.04)



§ 35.019  LIMITATIONS.



   The granting of the exemption under this subchapter for new
construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or
structure shall not result in the assessed value of the industrial real
estate being reduced below the assessed value of the industrial real estate
before the start of the new construction added.



(1999 Code, § 8.05)



§ 35.020  APPLICATIONS.



   An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual
value added for which an exemption is claimed.



   (A)   The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of
the property with the City Assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in
which the value added is first assessed for taxation.



   (B)   Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed
by the Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the
nature of the improvement, its cost and other information deemed necessary by
the Director of Revenue.



(Iowa Code § 427B.4)  (1999 Code, § 8.06)



§ 35.021  APPROVAL.



   A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior
approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the City
Council resolves to consider the proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a
public hearing thereon. Thereafter, at least 30 days after the hearing the
City Council, by ordinance, may give its prior approval of a tax exemption
for new construction if the new construction is in conformance with city
zoning. Prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption from taxation
until the new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real
estate.



(Iowa Code § 427B.4)  (1999 Code, § 8.07)



§ 35.022  EXEMPTION REPEALED.



   When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of the exemption
granted by this subchapter ceases to be of benefit to the city, the City
Council may repeal this subchapter, but all existing exemptions shall
continue until their expiration.



(Iowa Code § 427B.5)  (1999 Code, § 8.08)



§ 35.023  DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED.



   A property tax exemption under this subchapter shall not be granted if
the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other
property tax exemption authorized by law.



(Iowa Code § 427B.6)  (1999 Code, § 8.09)



SPECULATIVE SHELL BUILDINGS PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION



§ 35.035  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide a partial property tax
exemption to speculative shell buildings constructed by certain organizations
on a sliding scale for up to five years. Upon the sale or use of the
building, the property may be eligible for an industrial property tax
exemption if certain criteria are used.



(Ord. 2290, passed 4-12-2005)



§ 35.036  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION.



      (1)   An organization, which meets the membership requirements
of division (2) below, formed within a city or county or multicommunity group
for one or more of the following purposes:



         (a)   To promote, stimulate, develop and advance the
business prosperity and economic welfare of the community, area or region and
its citizens;



         (b)   To encourage and assist the location of new
business and industry;



         (c)   To rehabilitate and assist existing business and
industry; and/or



         (d)   To stimulate and assist in the expansion of
business activity.



      (2)   For purposes of this definition, a COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
ORGANIZATION must have at least 15 members with representation from the
following:



         (a)   A representative from government at the level or
levels corresponding to the community development organization’s area of
operation;



         (b)   A representative from a private sector lending
institution;



         (c)   A representative of a community organization in
the area;



         (d)   A representative of business in the area; and



         (e)   A representative of private citizens in the
community, area or region.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  New buildings or structures and includes new
buildings or structures which are constructed as additions to existing
buildings or structures. NEW CONSTRUCTION also includes reconstruction or
renovation of an existing building or structure which constitutes complete
replacement of an existing building or structure or refitting of an existing
building or structure, if the reconstruction or renovation of the existing
building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence, if the
reconstruction or renovation is necessary to implement recognized industry
standards for the manufacturing or processing of products and the
reconstruction or renovation is required in order to competitively
manufacture or process products or for community development organizations,
not for profit cooperative associations under Iowa Code Chapter 499, or
for-profit speculative shell building, which determination must receive prior
approval from the City Council.



   SPECULATIVE SHELL BUILDING.  A building or structure owned and
constructed or reconstructed by a community development organization, a
not-for-profit cooperative association under Iowa Code Chapter 499, or a
for-profit entity without a tenant or buyer for the purpose of attracting an
employer or user which will complete the building to the employer’s or
user’s specification for manufacturing, processing or warehousing the
employer’s or user’s product line.



(Ord. 2290, passed 4-12-2005)



§ 35.037  PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION FOR BUILDINGS OF CERTAIN ORGANIZATIONS.



   New construction for shell buildings by community development
organizations, not for profit cooperative associations under Iowa Code
Chapter 499 or for profit entities for speculative purposes or the portion of
the value added to buildings being reconstructed or renovated by community
development organizations, not for profit cooperative associations under Iowa
Code Chapter 499 or for-profit entities in order to become speculative shell
buildings may be exempt from taxation pursuant to Iowa Code § 427.1(27). The
exemption shall be effective for the assessment year in which the building is
first assessed for property taxation or the assessment year in which the
reconstruction or renovation first adds value and all subsequent years until
the property is leased or sold or until the exemption is terminated by
ordinance of the City Council. Eligibility for an exemption as a speculative
shell building shall be determined as of January 1 of the assessment year.
However, an exemption shall not be granted a speculative shell building of a
not for profit cooperative association under Iowa Code Chapter 499 if the
building is used by the cooperative association, for other than as a
speculative shell building. If the shell building or any portion of the shell
building which is leased or sold, the portion of the shell building leased or
sold shall not be entitled to an exemption under this section for subsequent
years. An application shall be filed pursuant to Iowa Code § 427B.4 for each
project for which an exemption is claimed.



(Ord. 2290, passed 4-12-2005)



§ 35.038  TERM AND AMOUNT OF EXEMPTION.



   The actual value added by new construction of a speculative shell
building as defined in this subchapter is eligible to receive a partial
exemption from taxation for a period of five years. The amount of exemption
from taxation for actual value added shall be as follows:



   (A)   For the first year, 75%;



   (B)   For the second year, 60%;



   (C)   For the third year, 45%;



   (D)   For the fourth year, 30%; and



   (E)   For the fifth year, 15%.



(Ord. 2290, passed 4-12-2005)



§ 35.039  EXCEPTIONS.



   A property tax exemption under this subchapter shall not be granted if
the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other
property tax exemption authorized by law.



(Ord. 2290, passed 4-12-2005)



§ 35.040  APPLICATION FOR EXEMPTION.



   An application shall be filed for each speculative shell building
resulting in actual value added for which an exemption is claimed in the
manner provided by Iowa Code § 427B.4. The application for exemption shall
be filed by the owner of the property with the local assessor by February 1
of the assessment year in which the value added is first assessed for
taxation. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Director of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of
the improvement, its cost and other information deemed necessary by the
Director of Revenue.



(Ord. 2290, passed 4-12-2005)



§ 35.041  PRIOR APPROVAL.



   A person may submit a proposal to the City Council for prior approval
for eligibility for a tax exemption. The City Council, by ordinance, may give
its prior approval of a tax exemption for a new construction if the
speculative shell building is in conformance with the zoning plans for the
city, provided the ordinance shall not be finally adopted until at least 30
days after a public hearing as required by Iowa Code § 427B.1. Prior
approval shall not entitle the owner to the exemption until the new
construction has been completed and found to be qualified real estate.
However, if the exemption for new construction is not approved, the person
may submit an amended proposal to the City Council to approve or reject.



(Ord. 2290, passed 4-12-2005)



§ 35.042  ELIGIBILITY FOR INDUSTRIAL TAX EXEMPTION UNDER IOWA CODE CHAPTER
427B.



   Upon the sale or use of the speculative shell building or a part
thereof, the building shall qualify as new construction for the purpose of
Iowa Code Chapter 427B entitling the building or a part thereof to the
industrial tax exemption for five years if the use has been recommended for
tax exemption by the “Quality Jobs 4A Strong Future Action Team” as
meeting their program’s target criteria. If the use does not meet the
program’s target criteria, it shall not qualify for the industrial tax
exemption for the entire five years, but the building shall qualify for the
industrial tax exemption for the number of years it had remaining on the
speculative shell building exemption at the exemption rate set forth for
those remaining years.



(Ord. 2290, passed 4-12-2005)



URBAN RENEWAL



§ 35.050  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the division of taxes
levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal areas of the city each
year by and for the benefit of the state, city, county, school districts or
other taxing districts after the effective dates of the ordinances codified
in this subchapter in order to create a special fund to pay the principal of
and interest on loans, advances or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to
be issued by the city, to finance projects in those areas.



(1999 Code, § 9.01)



§ 35.051  LIBERTY AVENUE URBAN RENEWAL AREA; PLAZA WEST DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the Liberty Avenue
Urban Renewal Area, the area having been identified in the urban renewal plan
approved by the Council by resolution adopted on December 27, 1988. For use
in this section, the following areas are described:



      (1)   Liberty Avenue Urban Renewal Area includes the lots and
parcels within the boundaries as follows:



         Commencing at a point of reference at a point on the
centerline of U.S. Highways 30 and 67 and Eighteenth Place; thence
southeasterly on the said Eighteenth Place centerline to the northerly
boundary of the right-of-way of the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad; thence
southwesterly on the said northerly boundary of the right-of-way of the
Chicago and Northwestern Railroad to the centerline of U.S. Highway 67;
thence northerly on the said U.S. Highway 67 centerline to the centerline of
U.S. Highway 30; thence easterly on the said centerline of U.S. Highways 30
and 67 to the centerline of Eighteenth Place (being the point of beginning);
and



      (2)   The Plaza West Development Project, a designated urban
renewal project contained within the Liberty Avenue Urban Renewal Area,
includes the lots and parcels within the boundaries as follows:



         A part of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
Section 14, and a part of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of
Section 23, all in Township 81 North, Range 6, East of the 5th P.M., within
the City of Clinton, Clinton County, Iowa, described as commencing at a
one-inch iron rod stake in concrete marking the quarter corner between said
Section 14 and Section 23, as shown on the plat of Miracle Mile Commercial
Addition; thence north 00°14' east, along the west line of said Miracle Mile
Commercial Addition, also being along the east line of the said southeast
quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 14, a distance of 155.9 feet to
the south right-of-way line of U.S. Highways No. 30 and 67, thence south 87º
12' west along said south line of U.S. Highways No. 30 and 67, being a line
70 feet normally distant from the centerline of said highway, a distance of
188.14'; thence south 04°01'13" east a distance of 146.32 feet to the line
between the said southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 14 and
the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 23; thence north
89°46' west along the said line between the southeast quarter of the
southwest quarter of Section 14 and the northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of Section 23, a distance of 178.07 feet; thence north 02°48' west a
distance of 136.9 feet to the said south right-of-way line of U.S. Highways
No. 30 and 67; thence south 87°12' west along said south right-of-way line
of U.S. Highways No. 30 and 67 a distance of 275.0 feet; thence south 37°32'
west continuing along the said south right-of-way line of U.S. Highways No.
30 and 67 a distance of 153.70 feet to the said line between the southeast
quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 14 and the northeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of Section 23; thence north 89°46' west along the said
south right-of-way line of U.S. Highways No. 30 and 67, being along the said
line between the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 14 and
the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 23, a distance of
599.41 feet to the northwest corner of the said northeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of Section 23, as now monumented by a 1-inch iron rod stake
replacing a rail monument over a stone monument; thence south 00° 12'11"
west along the west line of the said northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of Section 23, a distance of 632.44 feet to the north line of a
60-foot wide Liberty Avenue per deed recorded at instrument number 6796-87,
Clinton County, Iowa Recorder’s office; thence south 65°47'49" east, along
said north line of 60-foot wide Liberty Avenue, a distance of 146.3 feet;
thence south 79°47'49" east, along said north line of 60-foot wide Liberty
Avenue, a distance of 188.63 feet; thence north 78°43'25" east along the
north line of Liberty Avenue a distance of 324.78 feet to a point relocated
per former ancient fence, which was in place and located, tied, by James F.
Tallett, Registered Land Surveyor in past years; thence north 69°06'47" east
along said north line of Liberty Avenue per said former ancient fence a
distance of 240.43 feet; thence north 65°41'42" east along said north line
of Liberty Avenue per said former fence a distance of 513.55 feet, to the
said west line of Miracle Mile Commercial Addition and also being the east
line of the said northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 23;
thence north 00°14' east along the said west line of Miracle Mile Commercial
Addition and also being the said east line of the northeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of Section 23, a distance of 359.60 feet to the point of
beginning.



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal
project area known as the Plaza West Development Project, by and for the
benefit of the state, the city, the county, the Clinton Community School
District and all other taxing districts, from and after the effective date of
this section, shall be divided as follows:



      (1)   The portion of the taxes which would be produced by the
rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing
districts taxing property in the urban renewal area upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project, as shown
on the January 1 assessment roll last equalized prior to the effective date
of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid;



      (2)   The portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes determined as provided by division (B)(1) above shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund
hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances
or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds issued under the authority of Iowa Code §§ 403.9 and 403.12, incurred
by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, the Plaza West
Development Project, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest
of each taxing district levying taxes on said project area shall be collected
against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation
as hereinafter provided;



      (3)   All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property
in the Plaza West Development Project shall be paid into the funds of the
taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing district in the same manner as
all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed valuation of the
taxable property in the urban renewal project shall exceed the total assessed
value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project on the date of the
adoption of the urban renewal plan, as shown by the last equalized assessment
rolls prior to the effective date of this section; and



      (4)   At the time as the moneys advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the city referred to in division (B)(2) above
have been paid, all moneys thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
property in the urban renewal project known as the Plaza West Development
Project shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing district in
the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(1999 Code, § 9.02)  (Ord. 1872, passed - -)



§ 35.052  MANUFACTURING MEADOWS URBAN RENEWAL AREA; KIRCHHOFF DEVELOPMENT
PROJECT.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the Manufacturing
Meadows Urban Renewal Area, the area having been identified in the urban
renewal plan approved by the Council by resolution adopted on August 8, 1989.
For use in this section, the following areas are described:



      (1)   Manufacturing Meadows Urban Renewal Area includes the
lots and parcels within the boundaries as follows:



         Commencing as a point of beginning at the intersection of
the centerlines of South Bluff Boulevard and South Nineteenth Street; thence
southerly on the centerline of South Nineteenth Street to the centerline of
Harrison Drive; thence southwesterly on the centerline of Harrison Drive to
the south line of the north half of the southwest quarter of Section 14,
Township 81 North, Range 6, East of the 5th P.M., thence west on the south
line of the north half of the southwest quarter of Section 14, Township 81
North, Range 6, East of the 5th P.M. and the south line of the north half of
the southeast quarter of Section 15, Township 81 North, Range 6, East of the
5th P.M. to the north/south centerline of Section 15, Township 81 North,
Range 6, East of the 5th P.M.; thence north on said north/south centerline to
the centerline of Harts Mill Road; thence easterly on the centerline of Harts
Mill Road and South Bluff Boulevard to the centerline of South Nineteenth
Street, the point of beginning, all in the City of Clinton, Clinton County,
Iowa; and



      (2)   The Kirchhoff Development Project, a designated urban
renewal project contained within the Manufacturing Meadows Urban Renewal
Area, includes the lots and parcels within the boundaries described as
follows:



         The north half of the northeast quarter of Section 15,
Township 81 North, Range 6, East of the 5th P.M., except that part of the
west 60 feet lying south of Harts Mill Road, subject to public highways.



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal
project area known as the Kirchhoff Development Project, by and for the
benefit of the state, the city, the county, the Clinton Community School
District and all other taxing districts, from and after the effective date of
this section, shall be divided as follows:



      (1)   The portion of the taxes which would be produced by the
rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing
districts taxing property in the urban renewal area upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project, as shown
on the January 1 assessment roll last equalized prior to the effective date
of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid;



      (2)   The portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes determined as provided by division (B)(1) above shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund
hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances
or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds issued under the authority of Iowa Code §§ 403.9 and 403.12, incurred
by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, the Kirchhoff
Development Project, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest
of each taxing district levying taxes on said project area shall be collected
against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation
as hereinafter provided;



      (3)   All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property
in the Kirchhoff Development Project shall be paid into the funds of the
taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing district in the same manner as
all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed valuation of the
taxable property in the urban renewal project shall exceed the total assessed
value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project on the date of the
adoption of the urban renewal plan, as shown by the last equalized assessment
rolls prior to the effective date of this section; and



      (4)   At the time as the moneys advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the city referred to in division (B)(2) above
have been paid, all moneys thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
property in the urban renewal project known as the Kirchhoff Development
Project shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing district in
the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(1999 Code, § 9.03)  (Ord. 1882, passed - -)



§ 35.053  LYONS URBAN RENEWAL AREA; RIVERS EDGE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the Lyons Urban
Renewal Area, the area having been identified in the urban renewal plan
approved by the Council by resolution adopted on March 13, 1990. For use in
this section, the following areas are described:



      (1)   Lyons Urban Renewal Area includes the lots and parcels
within the boundaries as follows:



         The portion of the City of Clinton starting at the
intersection of Pershing Boulevard and Fourteenth Avenue North, thence
northerly a distance of 4,350 feet along the centerline of Pershing Boulevard
to the intersection of Pershing Boulevard and Twenty-Third Avenue North,
thence westerly a distance of 346 feet along the centerline of Twenty-Third
Avenue North to the intersection of Twenty-Third Avenue North and Cleveland
Street, thence southerly a distance of 180 feet along the centerline of
Cleveland Street to the intersection of Cleveland Street and Twenty-Third
Avenue North, thence westerly for a distance of 230 feet along the centerline
of Twenty-Third Avenue North to the intersection of Twenty-Third Avenue North
and North Third Street, thence northerly for a distance of 1,200 feet along
the centerline of North Third Street to the intersection of North Third
Street and Twenty-Fifth Avenue North, thence easterly for a distance of 1,040
feet along the centerline of Twenty-Fifth Avenue North to the intersection of
Twenty-Fifth Avenue North and North Second Street, thence northerly for a
distance of 1,420 feet along the centerline of North Second Street to the
centerline of North Second Street and Twenty-Eighth Avenue North, thence
easterly for a distance of 350 feet along the centerline of Twenty-Eighth
Avenue North to the intersection of Twenty-Eighth Avenue North and Roosevelt
Street, thence northerly for a distance of 1,910 feet along the centerline of
Roosevelt Street to the intersection of Roosevelt Street and Thirty-second
Avenue North, thence easterly for a distance of 1,050 feet along the
centerline of Thirty-Second Avenue North to the west meander of the ordinary
high water line of the Mississippi River, thence southerly along the west
meander of the ordinary high water line to the centerline of Fourteenth
Avenue North, thence westerly for a distance of 866 feet along the centerline
of Fourteenth Avenue North to the intersection of Pershing Boulevard and
Fourteenth Avenue North and the point of beginning; and



      (2)   The Rivers Edge Development Project, a designated urban
renewal project contained within the Lyons Urban Renewal Area, includes the
lots and parcels within the boundaries described as follows:



         Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of
Thirty-First Avenue North and Garfield Street in the City of Clinton, Clinton
County, Iowa, thence easterly on the centerline of Thirty-First Avenue North
to the east city limits of the City of Clinton, Iowa, (said east city limit
being the center of the main channel of the Mississippi River), thence
southerly on said east city limit to where it intersects with the centerline
of Twenty-Sixth Avenue North if said centerline were extended easterly,
thence westerly on the centerline of Twenty-Sixth Avenue North to the
centerline of McKinley Street, thence northerly on the centerline of McKinley
Street to the centerline of Thirtieth Avenue North, thence westerly on the
centerline of Thirtieth Avenue North to the centerline of Garfield Street,
thence northerly on the centerline of Garfield Street to the centerline of
Thirty-First Avenue North, the point of beginning.



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal
project area known as the Rivers Edge Development Project, by and for the
benefit of the state, the city, the county, the Clinton Community School
District and all other taxing districts, from and after the effective date of
this section, shall be divided as follows:



      (1)   The portion of the taxes which would be produced by the
rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing
districts taxing property in the urban renewal area upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project, as shown
on the January 1 assessment roll last equalized prior to the effective date
of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid;



      (2)   The portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes determined as provided by division (B)(1) above shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund
hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances
or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds issued under the authority of Iowa Code §§ 403.9 and 403.12, incurred
by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, the Rivers Edge
Development Project, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest
of each taxing district levying taxes on said project area shall be collected
against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation
as hereinafter provided;



      (3)   All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property
in the Rivers Edge Development Project shall be paid into the funds of the
taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing district in the same manner as
all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed valuation of the
taxable property in the urban renewal project shall exceed the total assessed
value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project on the date of the
adoption of the urban renewal plan, as shown by the last equalized assessment
rolls prior to the effective date of this section; and



      (4)   At the time as the moneys advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the city referred to in division (B)(2) above
have been paid, all moneys thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
property in the urban renewal project known as the Rivers Edge Development
Project shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing district in
the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(1999 Code, § 9.04)  (Ord. 1893, passed - -)



§ 35.054  MANUFACTURING MEADOWS URBAN RENEWAL AREA; TARGET STORE
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the Manufacturing
Meadows Urban Renewal Area, the area having been identified in the urban
renewal plan approved by the Council by resolution adopted on August 8, 1989,
and amended by the Council by resolution adopted on November 23, 1993. For
use in this section, the following areas are described:



      (1)   Manufacturing Meadows Urban Renewal Area includes the
lots and parcels within the boundaries as follows:



         Commencing as a point of beginning at the intersection of
the centerlines of South Bluff Boulevard and South Nineteenth Street; thence
southerly on the centerline of South Nineteenth Street to the centerline of
Harrison Drive; thence southwesterly on the centerline of Harrison Drive to
the centerline of U.S. Highway 30, thence west on the centerline of U.S.
Highway 30 to the north/south centerline of Section 15, Township 81 North,
Range 6, East of the 5th P.M.; thence north on said north/south centerline to
the centerline of Harts Mill Road; thence easterly on the centerline of Harts
Mill Road and South Bluff Boulevard to the centerline of South Nineteenth
Street, the point of beginning, all in the City of Clinton, Clinton County,
Iowa; and



      (2)   The Target Store Development Project, a designated urban
renewal project contained within the Manufacturing Meadows Urban Renewal
Area, includes the lots and parcels within the boundaries described as
follows:



         Commencing at the point of intersection of the centerline
of U.S. Highway No. 30 and the north/south quarter line of Section 15,
Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the 5th P.M.; thence north on the said
north/south quarter line of Section 15 to the center of said Section 15;
thence east on the east/west quarter line of Section 15 and Section 14 to the
centerline of South Nineteenth Street; thence southerly on the centerline of
South Nineteenth Street to the centerline of Harrison Drive; thence
southwesterly on the centerline of Harrison Drive to the centerline of U.S.
Highway No. 30; thence westerly on the centerline of said U.S. Highway No. 30
to the point of beginning, all in the City of Clinton, Clinton County, Iowa.



         However, Lot 1 and Lot 2 of The Landing Subdivision, which
are a re-plat of Lots 10 through 18 in the Valley Bluff Horizons Second
Addition, are expressly excluded from this area and are not subject to the
division of taxes under Iowa Code § 403.19.



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal
project area known as the Target Store Development Project, by and for the
benefit of the state, the city, the county, the Clinton Community School
District and all other taxing districts, from and after the effective date of
this section, shall be divided as follows:



      (1)   The portion of the taxes which would be produced by the
rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing
districts taxing property in the urban renewal area upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project, as shown
on the January 1 assessment roll last equalized prior to the effective date
of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid;



      (2)   The portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes determined as provided by division (B)(1) above shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund
hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances
or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds issued under the authority of Iowa Code §§ 403.9 and 403.12, incurred
by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, the Target Store
Development Project, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest
of each taxing district levying taxes on said project area shall be collected
against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation
as hereinafter provided;



      (3)   All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property
in the Target Store Development Project shall be paid into the funds of the
taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing district in the same manner as
all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed valuation of the
taxable property in the urban renewal project shall exceed the total assessed
value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project on the date of the
adoption of the urban renewal plan, as shown by the last equalized assessment
rolls prior to the effective date of this section; and



      (4)   At the time as the moneys advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the city referred to in division (B)(2) above
have been paid, all moneys thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
property in the urban renewal project known as the Target Store Development
Project shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing district in
the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(1999 Code, § 9.05)  (Ord. 1981, passed - - ; Ord. 2548, passed 11-8-2016)



§ 35.055  MANUFACTURING MEADOWS URBAN RENEWAL AREA; MANUFACTURING MEADOWS
III PROJECT.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the Manufacturing
Meadows Urban Renewal Area, the area having been identified in the urban
renewal plan approved by the Council by resolution adopted on August 8, 1989,
and amended by the Council by resolution adopted on November 23, 1993. For
use in this section, the following areas are described:



      (1)   Manufacturing Meadows Urban Renewal Area includes the
lots and parcels within the boundaries as follows:



         Commencing as a point of beginning at the intersection of
the centerlines of South Bluff Boulevard and South Nineteenth Street; thence
southerly on the centerline of South Nineteenth Street to the centerline of
Harrison Drive; thence southwesterly on the centerline of Harrison Drive to
the centerline of U.S. Highway 30, thence west on the centerline of U.S.
Highway 30 to the north/south centerline of Section 15, Township 81 North,
Range 6, East of the 5th P.M.; thence north on said north/south centerline to
the centerline of Harts Mill Road; thence easterly on the centerline of Harts
Mill Road and South Bluff Boulevard to the centerline of South Nineteenth
Street, the point of beginning, all in the City of Clinton, Clinton County,
Iowa; and



      (2)   The Manufacturing Meadows III Project, a designated
urban renewal project contained within the Manufacturing Meadows Urban
Renewal Area, includes the lots and parcels within the boundaries described
as follows:



         Commencing at the point of intersection of the north/south
quarter line of Section 15, Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the 5th P.M.
and the centerline of Harts Mill Road; thence easterly and northeasterly on
the centerline of Harts Mill Road and South Bluff Boulevard to the centerline
of South Nineteenth Street; thence south on the centerline of South
Nineteenth Street to the south line of the northwest quarter of Section 14,
Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the 5th P.M.; thence west on said south
line and the east/west quarter line of Section 15 to the center of Section
15, Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the 5th P.M.; thence north on the
north/south quarter line of said Section 15 to the point of beginning, all in
the City of Clinton, Clinton County, Iowa.



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal
project area known as the Manufacturing Meadows III Project, by and for the
benefit of the state, the city, the county, the Clinton Community School
District and all other taxing districts, from and after the effective date of
this section, shall be divided as follows:



      (1)   The portion of the taxes which would be produced by the
rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing
districts taxing property in the urban renewal area upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project, as shown
on the January 1 assessment roll last equalized prior to the effective date
of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid;



      (2)   The portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes determined as provided by division (B)(1) above shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund
hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances
or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds issued under the authority of Iowa Code §§ 403.9 and 403.12, incurred
by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, the Manufacturing
Meadows III Project, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest
of each taxing district levying taxes on the project area shall be collected
against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation
as hereinafter provided;



      (3)   All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property
in the Manufacturing Meadows III Project shall be paid into the funds of the
taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing district in the same manner as
all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed valuation of the
taxable property in the urban renewal project shall exceed the total assessed
value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project on the date of the
adoption of the urban renewal plan, as shown by the last equalized assessment
rolls prior to the effective date of this section; and



      (4)   At the time as the moneys advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the city referred to in division (B)(2) above
have been paid, all moneys thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
property in the urban renewal project known as the Manufacturing Meadows III
Project shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing district in
the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(1999 Code, § 9.06)  (Ord. 1991, passed - -)



§ 35.056  CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT URBAN RENEWAL AREA; HY-VEE
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the Central Business
District Urban Renewal Area, the area having been identified in the urban
renewal plan approved by the Council by resolution adopted on August 8, 1989.
The Hy-Vee Redevelopment Project, a designated urban renewal project
contained within the Central Business District Urban Renewal Area, includes
the lots and parcels within the boundaries described as follows:



      Commencing as a point of beginning at the intersection of the
centerlines of the now vacated portion of Thirteenth Avenue South and South
Fifth Street; thence north on said South Fifth Street centerline to the
centerline of Fifth Avenue South; thence east on said Fifth Avenue South
centerline to the centerline of South Fourth Street; thence north on said
centerline of South Fourth Street to the centerline of Third Avenue South;
thence east on said Third Avenue South centerline to the centerline of South
First Street; thence south on said South First Street centerline and the now
vacated portion of South First Street located south of Seventh Avenue South
to the north boundary of the right-of-way of the Canadian Pacific Railroad
Company property; thence southwesterly on the northern right-of-way line of
the Canadian Pacific Railroad tracks to the centerline of the now vacated
Thirteenth Avenue South; thence westerly on said centerline of the now
vacated Thirteenth Avenue South to the centerline of South Fifth Street and
the point of beginning.



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Central
Business District Urban Renewal Area known as the Hy-Vee Redevelopment
Project, by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county, the
Clinton Community School District and all other taxing districts, from and
after the effective date of this section, shall be divided as follows:



      (1)   The portion of the taxes which would be produced by the
rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing
districts taxing property in the urban renewal area upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project, as shown
on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
first calendar year in which the city certified to the County Auditor the
amount of loans, advances, indebtedness or bonds payable from the division of
property tax revenues, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into
the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid;



      (2)   The portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes determined as provided by division (B)(1) above shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund
hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances
or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds issued under the authority of Iowa Code §§ 403.9 and 403.12, incurred
by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, the Hy-Vee
Redevelopment Project, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and
interest of each taxing district levying taxes on said project area shall be
collected against all taxable property within the project area without any
limitation as hereinafter provided;



      (3)   All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property
in the urban renewal project shall be paid into the funds of the taxing
districts as taxes by or for the taxing district in the same manner as all
other property taxes unless or until the total assessed valuation of the
taxable property in the urban renewal project shall exceed the total assessed
value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project on the date of the
adoption of the urban renewal plan, as shown by the last equalized assessment
rolls prior to the effective date of this section; and



      (4)   At the time as the moneys advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the city referred to in division (B)(2) above
have been paid, all moneys thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
property in the urban renewal project known as the Hy-Vee Redevelopment
Project shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing district in
the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(1999 Code, § 9.07)  (Ord. 2036, passed - -)



§ 35.057  MANUFACTURING MEADOWS URBAN RENEWAL AREA; MILL CREEK DEVELOPMENT
PROJECT.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the Manufacturing
Meadows Urban Renewal Area, the area having been identified in the urban
renewal plan approved by the Council by resolution adopted on August 8, 1989.
For use in this section, the following areas are described:



      (1)   Manufacturing Meadows Urban Renewal Area includes the
lots and parcels within the boundaries as follows:



         Commencing as a point of reference at a point where the
centerline of Harts Mill Road and of South Thirtieth Street intersect, thence
southerly on the said centerline to the north line of the south half of the
southwest quarter of Section 22, Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the 5th
P.M., thence east on the said north line to the northerly right-of-way line
of the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad Company (now Union Pacific Railroad)
main line track, thence northeasterly along said northerly right-of-way line
to the centerline of U.S. Highway 67, thence northerly along said centerline
to the centerline of U.S. Highway 30, thence east on the centerline of U.S.
Highway 30 to the centerline of Harrison Drive, thence northeasterly on the
centerline of Harrison Drive to the centerline of South Nineteenth Street,
thence northerly on the centerline of South Nineteenth Street to the
centerline of South Bluff Boulevard; thence westerly on the centerline of
South Bluff Boulevard to the centerline of Harts Mill Road; thence westerly
on the centerline of Harts Mill Road to the centerline of South Thirtieth
Street, the point of beginning, all in the City of Clinton, Clinton County,
Iowa; and



      (2)   The Mill Creek Development Project, a designated urban
renewal project contained within the Manufacturing Meadows Urban Renewal
Area, includes the lots and parcels within the boundaries described as
follows:



         Commencing as a point of reference at a point where the
centerlines of Harts Mill Road and of South Thirtieth Street intersect,
thence southerly on the centerline of South Thirtieth Street to the north
line of the south half of the southwest quarter of Section 22, Township 81
North, Range 6 East of the 5th P.M., thence east on the said north line to
the northerly right-of-way line of the Chicago and Northwestern Railroad
Company (now Union Pacific Railroad) main line track, thence northeasterly
along the said northerly right-of-way line to the centerline of U.S. Highway
67, thence northerly along said centerline to the centerline of U.S. Highway
30, thence west on the centerline of U.S. Highway 30 to the north/south
quarter section line of Section 15, Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the
5th P.M., thence north on said north/south section line to the centerline of
Harts Mill Road, thence west along said centerline to the centerline of South
30th Street, the point of beginning, all in the City of Clinton, Clinton
County, Iowa.



         However, Lot 1 and Lot 2 of The Landing Subdivision, which
are a re-plat of Lots 10 through 18 in the Valley Bluff Horizons Second
Addition, are expressly excluded from this area and are not subject to the
division of taxes under Iowa Code § 403.19.



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal
project area known as the Mill Creek Development Project, by and for the
benefit of the state, the city, the county, the Clinton Community School
District and all other taxing districts, from and after the effective date of
this section, shall be divided as follows:



      (1)   The portion of the taxes which would be produced by the
rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing
districts taxing property in the urban renewal area upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project, as shown
on the January 1 assessment roll last equalized prior to the effective date
of this section, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the
fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid;



      (2)   The portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes determined as provided by division (B)(1) above shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund
hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, advances
or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds issued under the authority of Iowa Code §§ 403.9 and 403.12, incurred
by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, the Mill Creek
Development Project, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest
of each taxing district levying taxes on the project area shall be collected
against all taxable property within the project area without any limitation
as hereinafter provided;



      (3)   All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property
in the Mill Creek Development Project shall be paid into the funds of the
taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing district in the same manner as
all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed valuation of the
taxable property in the urban renewal project shall exceed the total assessed
value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project on the date of the
adoption of the urban renewal plan, as shown by the last equalized assessment
rolls prior to the effective date of this section; and



      (4)   At the time as the moneys advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the city referred to in division (B)(2) above
have been paid, all moneys thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
property in the urban renewal project known as the Mill Creek Development
Project shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing district in
the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(1999 Code, § 9.08)  (Ord. 2054, passed - - ; Ord. 2549, passed 11-8-2016)



§ 35.058  BUSINESS PARK DEVELOPMENT PROJECT.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:



      ORIGINAL AREA. That portion of the City of Clinton, State of
Iowa, described in the Urban Renewal Plan for the Clinton Business Park Urban
Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 02-388 on the 22nd day of October,
2002, which original area includes the lots and parcels located within the
area legally described as follows:



      A tract of land in parts of Section 35 and 36, Township 82 North,
Range 6 East of the 5th P.M., City of Clinton; described as commencing at the
point of beginning of said tract at the northwest corner of said Section 36;
thence easterly on the north line of Section 36 to the north quarter (n ¼)
corner thereof; thence southerly on the north-south quarter line of Section
36 to the south quarter (s ¼) corner thereof, thence westerly on the south
line of Section 36 to the southeast corner of Section 35; thence continuing
westerly along the south line of Section 35 to the centerline of 16th Street
N.W.; thence northerly along the centerline of 16th Street N.W. to the north
line of Section 35; thence easterly on the north line of Section 35 to the
northwest corner of Section 36, being the point of beginning, all within the
city of Clinton, Clinton County, Iowa.



      AMENDMENT NO. 1 AREA. That portion of the City of Clinton, State
of Iowa, described in Amendment No. 1 to the Urban Renewal Plan for the
Clinton Business Park Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution No. 2013-099
on the 12th day of March, 2013, which Amendment No. 1 Area removes the lots
and parcels located within the area legally described as follows:



      Part of Southwest Quarter of Section 36, Township 82 North, Range
6 East of the 5th Principal Meridian in the City of Clinton, County of
Clinton, State of Iowa.



      Beginning at the Northeast Corner of West View Heights 1st
Addition; thence, along the north line of said 1st Addition, South 87 degrees
45 minutes 30 seconds West, a distance of 391.04 feet; thence continuing
along said north line for the next two courses, South 65 degrees 41 minutes
31 seconds West, a distance of 419.84 feet;



      thence, South 87 degrees 45 minutes 30 seconds West, to the east
line of Prince of Peace Catholic Parish 1st Addition, a distance of 78.05
feet; thence along said east line, North 01 degrees 56 minutes 24 seconds
West, to the Southerly Right of Way line of Lametta Wynn Drive, a distance of
745.73 feet; thence, along said southerly line, North 87 degrees 44 minutes
55 seconds East, to the East line of the Southwest Quarter of Section 36, a
distance of 856.82 feet; thence, along said East line, South 01 degrees 59
minutes 31 East, a distance of 588.14 feet, to the point of beginning,
containing 12.556 acres more or less. 



      For the purposes of this description the east line of the
southwest quarter of Section 36 bears South 01 degrees 59 minutes 31 seconds
East.



      AMENDED AREA. That portion of the City of Clinton, State of Iowa,
included within the original area except the portion removed by Amendment No.
1.



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the amended area,
legally described in division (A) hereof, by and for the benefit of the State
of Iowa, County of Clinton, Iowa, Clinton Community School District, and all
other taxing districts from and after the effective date of this section
shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.



   (C)   (1)   As to the original area (less the Amendment No. 1
area), that portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which
the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts taxing
property in the original area (less the Amendment No. 1 area) upon the total
sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the original area (less
the Amendment No. 1 area) as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1,
2002, (being the first day of the calendar year preceding the first calendar
year in which the municipality certified to the county auditor the amount of
loans, advances, indebtedness or bonds payable from the division of
revenues), shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for
the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into
which all other property taxes are paid. The taxes so determined shall be
referred herein as the "base period taxes" for such area.



      (2)   As to Amendment No. 1 area, no base period taxes are
applicable because such area has been removed from the Clinton Business Park
Urban Renewal Area.



   (D)   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes for the amended area, determined as provided in division (C),
shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the special tax
increment fund previously established by the city to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, monies advanced to, or indebtedness, whether funded,
refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under authority of
Iowa Code § 403.9 or 403.12, incurred by the city to finance or refinance,
in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the amended
area pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan, as amended, except that (i) taxes
for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a
school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code § 298.2  and taxes for the
instructional support program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa
Code § 257.19  (but in each case only to the extent required under Iowa
Code § 403.19(2)); (ii) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each
taxing district; (iii)  taxes imposed under Iowa Code § 346.27(22) related
to joint county-city buildings; and (iv) any other exceptions under Iowa Code
§ 403.19 shall be collected against all taxable property within the amended
area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.



   (E)   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the areas of the amended area exceeds the total assessed value of
the taxable property in the areas shown by the assessment rolls referred to
in division (C), all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable
property in the amended area shall be paid into the funds for the respective
taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in the same manner
as all other property taxes.



   (F)   At such time as the loans, monies advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the city referred to in division (D) have been
paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in
the amended area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(Ord. 2260, passed 11-12-2002; Ord. 2492, passed 5-28-2013)



§ 35.059  LIBERTY SQUARE URBAN RENEWAL AREA.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the Liberty Square
Urban Renewal Area, the area having been identified in the urban renewal plan
approved by the Council by resolution adopted on November 25, 2003. For use
in this section, the following areas are described:



      Commencing at a point of reference at a point on the centerline
of U.S. Highway 30 and 67 and South Fifth Street; thence southerly on the
said South Fifth Street centerline to the northerly boundary of the
right-of-way of Union Pacific Railroad; thence southwesterly on said
northerly boundary of the right-of-way of the Union Pacific Railroad to the
centerline of U.S. Highway 67, thence northerly on said U.S. Highway 67
centerline to the centerline of U.S. Highway 30; thence easterly on said
centerline of U.S. Highway 30 and 67 to the centerline of South Nineteenth
Street; thence northerly on said centerline of South Nineteenth Street to the
centerline of Twenty-Seventh Avenue South; thence easterly on said centerline
of Twenty-Seventh Avenue South to the centerline of South Sixteenth Street;
thence southerly on said centerline of South Sixteenth Street to the
centerline of U.S. Highway 30 and 67; thence northeasterly on said centerline
of U.S. Highway 30 and 67 to the centerline of South Fifth Street, being the
point of beginning, all within the City of Clinton, Clinton County, Iowa.



   Projects contained within the Home Depot Development Project are
potential urban renewal projects within the Liberty Square Urban Renewal
Area, and whose boundaries are as follows:



      Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4, Windmill Hill Addition in the City of
Clinton, Clinton County, Iowa.



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the urban renewal
project area known as the Home Depot Development Project, by and for the
benefit of the state, the city, the county, the Clinton Community School
District and all other taxing districts from and after the effective date of
this section, shall be divided as follows:



      (1)   The portion of the taxes which would be produced by the
rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing
districts taxing property in the urban renewal area upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project as shown
on the January 1 assessment roll last equalized prior to the date of the
effective date of this section shall be allocated to and when collected, be
paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the
taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid;



      (2)   The portion of the taxes each year, in excess of the
base period taxes, determined as provided in division (B)(2) above, shall be
allocated to and when collected, be paid into a special tax increment fund
hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies
advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise,
including bonds issued under the authority of Iowa Code §§ 403.9 and
403.12, incurred by the city, to finance or refinance in whole or in part the
Home Depot Development Project, except that taxes for the payment of bonds
and interest of each taxing district levying taxes on the project area shall
be collected against all taxing property within the project area without any
limitation as hereinafter provided;



      (3)   All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property
in the Home Depot Development Project shall be paid into the funds of the
taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing district in the same manner as
all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed valuation of the
taxable property in the urban renewal project shall exceed the total assessed
value of the taxable property in the urban renewal project on the date of
adoption of the urban renewal plan, as shown by the last equalized assessment
rolls prior to the effective date of this section; and



      (4)   At the time as the moneys advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the city referred to in division (B)(2) above
have been paid, all moneys hereinafter received from taxes upon taxable
property in the urban renewal project, known as the Home Depot Development
Project, shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in
the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(Ord. 2274, passed 2-24-2004)



§ 35.060  ASHFORD UNIVERSITY URBAN RENEWAL AREA.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the Ashford University
Urban Renewal Area, the area having been identified in the urban renewal plan
approved by the Council by resolution adopted on November 28, 2005. For use
in this section, the following areas are described:



      A part of the northeast quarter and part of the southeast quarter
of Section 1, Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the 5th P.M., and part of
the southwest quarter and part of the northwest quarter of Section 6,
Township 81 North, Range 7 East of the 5th P.M., and part of Lot 1 and Lot 2
of Iowa Land Company Subdivision of part of said Sections 1 and 6, according
to the plat thereof recorded in the records of Clinton County in Book 18,
Page 262, located in the City of Clinton, Iowa, described as follows:



      Parcel 1:  beginning at the northwest corner of the southwest
quarter of Section 6, thence north 89°23' 55" east (assumed bearings), along
the northerly line thereof, a distance of 485.85 feet, thence south
62°28'29" east, a distance of 342.19 feet to a point on the east line of Lot
1 of said Iowa Land Company Subdivision, being also the centerline of North
Bluff Boulevard, thence south 33°34'45" west, along said east line, a
distance of 769.12 feet to the southeast corner of said Lot 1, thence north
53°46'59" west, along the south line of said Lot 1 and Lot 2, a distance of
610.50 feet, thence north 42°25'43" west, along the south line of Lot 2, a
distance of 582.12 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 2, thence north
89°37'23" east, along the north line thereof, a distance of 52.57 feet to a
point on the northeasterly right-of-way line of Springdale Drive, thence
north 41°57'15" west, along said right-of-way line, a distance of 158.05
feet, thence north 37°42'15" west along said right-of-way line, a distance
of 75.89 feet, thence north 58°02'50" east, a distance of 330.61 feet,
thence south 76°51'40" east, a distance of 349.38 feet to a point on the
east line of said northeast quarter of Section 1, thence south 00°01'58"
east, along said east line, a distance of 270.05 feet to the point of
beginning.



      Parcel 2:  beginning at the southwest corner of said northwest
quarter of Section 6, thence north 89°23'55" east (assumed bearings), along
the southerly line thereof, a distance of 175.00 feet, thence north
33°08'42" west, a distance of 320.33 feet to a point on the west line of
said northwest quarter, thence south 00°01'58" east, along said west line, a
distance of 270.05 feet to the point of beginning.



      Parcels 1 and 2 also described as parcels A and C respectively on
the plat of survey recorded September 27, 1996, as instrument no. 6939-96.



      Excepting therefrom the following:  part of the southwest
quarter of Section 6, Township 81 North, Range 7, East of the 5th P.M.,
Clinton County, Iowa, bounded and described as follows, to-wit:  beginning
at a point on the north line of said southwest quarter of Section 6, said
point being north 89°09'51" east, a distance of 343.74 feet from the
northwest corner thereof, thence south 13°20'44" west, a distance of 64.37
feet, thence south 79°58'21" east, a distance of 50.08 feet, thence north
13°20'44" east, a distance of 74.11 feet to the north line of said southwest
quarter of Section 6, thence south 89°09'51" west along said north line, a
distance of 51.57 feet to the point of beginning.



      Reserving unto the grantor and its successors an easement for the
purpose of ingress and egress over, across and through a 22 foot strip of
land lying 11 feet on each side of the following described centerline.
Commencing at the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of said Section
6, thence north 89°09'51" east, along the north line thereof, a distance of
395.31 feet, thence south 13°20'44" west, a distance of 63.11 feet to the
point of beginning of the hereinafter described centerline, thence south
48°18'33" east, a distance of 53.62 feet; thence south 60°49'50" east, a
distance of 135.67 feet, thence south 85°23'58" east, a distance of 54.67
feet, thence north 85°48'03" east, a distance of 57.71 feet, thence south
83°39'18" east, a distance of 27.72 feet, thence south 69°37'20" east, a
distance of 55.24 feet to the northwesterly right-of-way line of Bluff
Boulevard, and the point of termination of said centerline.



      Subject to any and all existing rights-of-way for public
highways, utilities and other easements, covenants, restrictions and
reservations of record.



      Projects contained within the Ashford University Urban Renewal
Area are potential urban renewal projects within said urban renewal area, and
whose boundaries are as follows:



      A part of the northeast quarter and part of the southeast quarter
of Section 1, Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the 5th P.M., and part of
the southwest quarter and part of the northwest quarter of Section 6,
Township 81 North, Range 7 East of the 5th P.M., and part of Lot 1 and Lot 2
of Iowa Land Company Subdivision of part of said Sections 1 and 6, according
to the plat thereof recorded in the records of Clinton County in Book 18,
Page 262, located in the City of Clinton, Iowa, described as follows:



      Parcel 1:  beginning at the northwest corner of the southwest
quarter of Section 6, thence north 89°23' 55" east (assumed bearings), along
the northerly line thereof, a distance of 485.85 feet, thence south
62°28'29" east, a distance of 342.19 feet to a point on the east line of Lot
1 of said Iowa Land Company Subdivision, being also the centerline of North
Bluff Boulevard, thence south 33°34'45" west, along said east line, a
distance of 769.12 feet to the southeast corner of said Lot 1, thence north
53°46'59" west, along the south line of said Lot 1 and Lot 2, a distance of
610.50 feet, thence north 42°25'43" west, along the south line of Lot 2, a
distance of 582.12 feet to the northwest corner of said Lot 2, thence north
89°37'23" east, along the north line thereof, a distance of 52.57 feet to a
point on the northeasterly right-of-way line of Springdale Drive, thence
north 41°57'15" west, along said right-of-way line, a distance of 158.05
feet, thence north 37°42'15" west along said right-of-way line, a distance
of 75.89 feet, thence north 58°02'50" east, a distance of 330.61 feet,
thence south 76°51'40" east, a distance of 349.38 feet to a point on the
east line of said northeast quarter of Section 1, thence south 00°01'58"
east, along said east line, a distance of 270.05 feet to the point of
beginning.



      Parcel 2:  beginning at the southwest corner of said northwest
quarter of Section 6, thence north 89°23'55" east (assumed bearings), along
the southerly line thereof, a distance of 175.00 feet, thence north
33°08'42" west, a distance of 320.33 feet to a point on the west line of
said northwest quarter, thence south 00°01'58" east, along said west line, a
distance of 270.05 feet to the point of beginning.



      Parcels 1 and 2 also described as parcels A and C respectively on
the plat of survey recorded September 27, 1996, as instrument no. 6939-96.



      Excepting therefrom the following:  part of the southwest
quarter of Section 6, Township 81 North, Range 7, East of the 5th P.M.,
Clinton County, Iowa, bounded and described as follows, to-wit:  beginning
at a point on the north line of said southwest quarter of Section 6, said
point being north 89°09'51" east, a distance of 343.74 feet from the
northwest corner thereof, thence south 13°20'44" west, a distance of 64.37
feet, thence south 79°58'21" east, a distance of 50.08 feet, thence north
13°20'44" east, a distance of 74.11 feet to the north line of said southwest
quarter of Section 6, thence south 89°09'51" west along said north line, a
distance of 51.57 feet to the point of beginning.



      Reserving unto the grantor and its successors an easement for the
purpose of ingress and egress over, across and through a 22 foot strip of
land lying 11 feet on each side of the following described centerline.
Commencing at the northwest corner of the southwest quarter of said Section
6, thence north 89°09'51" east, along the north line thereof, a distance of
395.31 feet, thence south 13°20'44" west, a distance of 63.11 feet to the
point of beginning of the hereinafter described centerline, thence south
48°18'33" east, a distance of 53.62 feet; thence south 60°49'50" east, a
distance of 135.67 feet, thence south 85°23'58" east, a distance of 54.67
feet, thence north 85°48'03" east, a distance of 57.71 feet, thence south
83°39'18" east, a distance of 27.72 feet, thence south 69°37'20" east, a
distance of 55.24 feet to the northwesterly right-of-way line of Bluff
Boulevard, and the point of termination of said centerline.



      Subject to any and all existing rights-of-way for public
highways, utilities and other easements, covenants, restrictions and
reservations of record.



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Ashford
University Urban Renewal Project Area known as the Ashford University Urban
Renewal Area, by and for the benefit of the state, the city, the county, the
Clinton Community School District and all other taxing districts from and
after the effective date of this section shall be divided as follows:



      (1)   The portion of the taxes which would be produced by the
rate at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing
districts taxing property in the Ashford University Urban Renewal Area upon
the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Ashford
University Urban Renewal Project as shown on the January 1 assessment roll
last equalized prior to the date of the effective date of Ordinance 2308
shall be allocated to and when collected, be paid into the fund for the
respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which
all other property taxes are paid;



      (2)   The portion of the taxes each year, in excess of the
base period taxes, determined as provided in division (B)(1) above, shall be
allocated to and when collected, be paid into a special tax increment fund
hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys
advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise,
including bonds issued under the authority of Iowa Code §§ 403.9 and
403.12, incurred by the city, to finance or refinance in whole or in part the
Ashford University Urban Renewal Project, except that taxes for the payment
of bonds and interest of each taxing district levying taxes on the project
area shall be collected against all taxing property within the project area
without any limitation as hereinafter provided;



      (3)   All taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property
in the Ashford University Urban Renewal Project shall be paid into the funds
of the taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing district in the same
manner as all other property taxes unless or until the total assessed
valuation of the taxable property in the Ashford University Urban Renewal
Project shall exceed the total assessed value of the taxable property in the
Ashford University Urban Renewal Project as shown by the assessment roll
referred to in division (B)(2) above; and



      (4)   At the time as the monies advanced, bonds and interest
thereon and indebtedness of the city referred to in division (B)(2) above
have been paid, all moneys hereinafter received from taxes upon taxable
property in the urban renewal project, known as the Ashford University Urban
Renewal Project, shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(Ord. 2308, passed 11-28-2005)



§ 35.061  CITY HOUSING PARTNERSHIP URBAN RENEWAL AREA.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the City Housing
Partnership Urban Renewal Project Area, the area having been identified in
the urban renewal plan approved by the Council by resolution adopted by
Ordinance 2082. Additional territory now has been added to the City Housing
Partnership Urban Renewal Project Area. Indebtedness has been incurred by the
city, and additional indebtedness is anticipated to be incurred in the
future, to finance urban renewal project activities within the amended City
Housing Partnership Urban Renewal Project Area, and the continuing needs of
redevelopment within the amended City Housing Partnership Urban Renewal
Project Area are such as to require the continued application of the
incremental tax resources of the amended City Housing Partnership Urban
Renewal Project Area.



   (B)   Ordinance 2082 is hereby amended to read as follows:



      (1)   For purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings.



         ORIGINAL PROJECT AREA.  The portion of the city described
in the urban renewal plan for the City Housing Partnership Urban Renewal Area
approved by resolution on February 25, 1997, which original project area
includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally described as
follows:



      Ridgeview Manor:  the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter
and the west half of the northwest quarter of Section 1, Township 81 North
Range 6, East of the 5th P.M., excepting therefrom those portions of said
land platted as Galbraith Acres First, Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth
Additions in the City of Clinton, Iowa. Also, all that part of Outlot D of
said Galbraith Acres First Addition lying northerly from the north line of
Lot One, Block Seven in said Galbraith Acres Second Addition, in the City of
Clinton, Clinton County, Iowa.



         AMENDMENT NO. 1 AREA.  The portion of the city described
in Amendment No. 1 to the Urban Renewal Plan for the City Housing Partnership
Urban Renewal Area approved by Resolution 98-066 on February 10, 1998, which
Amendment No. 1 Area includes the lots and parcels located within the area
legally described as follows:



      Millcreek Highland Subdivision:  part of the east half of the
northwest quarter of Section 11, Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the 5th
P.M., City of Clinton, County of Clinton, State of Iowa, more particularly
described as follows:



      Commencing at the northwest corner of the northwest quarter of
said Section 11; thence north 81°41'31" east on the north line of said
northwest quarter, 1325.44', to the west line of the northeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of said Section 11; thence south 00°02'35" east on said
west line, 993.31 feet to the north line of the south half of the southwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 11
and the point of beginning; thence north 89°46'19" east of the north line of
the south half of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of said Section 11, a distance of 662.44 feet to the east
line of said south half; thence south 00°02'41" east on said west line, 6.89
feet; thence south 89°59'59" east, 2.45 feet to the northwest corner of Mill
Creek Heights Subdivision; thence south 00°01'38" east on the west line of
said Mill Creek Heights Subdivision, 336.95 feet, to the southwest corner of
said Mill Creek Heights Subdivision; thence south 89°53'03" east on the
south line of said Mill Creek Heights Subdivision, 362.00 feet; thence south
00°03'32" west, 321.20 feet, to the south line of the north half of the
northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said
Section 11; thence south 89°59'44" west on said south line, 364.07 feet, to
the west line of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of said Section 11; thence south 00°01'38" east on said
west line, 328.43 feet, to the south line of the northwest quarter of the
southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 11, thence south
89°51'07" west on said south line, 662.10 feet, to the west line of the
northwest quarter of southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said
Section 11, thence north 00°02'15" west on said west line, 662.21 feet, to
the northwest corner of the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of said Section 11, thence north 00°03'59" west on the
west line of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the northwest
quarter of said Section 11, a distance of 331.10 feet, to the point of
beginning, containing 17.817 acres more or less.



      For the purposes of this description, the north line of the
northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 11 is assumed to bear
north 89°46'19" east.



         AMENDMENT NO. 2 AREA.  The portion of the city described
in Amendment No. 2 to the Urban Renewal Plan for the City Housing Partnership
Urban Renewal Area approved by resolution on June 12, 2007, which Amendment
No. 2 Area removes the original project area (Ridgeview) as described above,
and includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally described
as follows:



      Town and Country Manor:  a part of the northwest quarter and a
part of the west one-half of the northeast quarter, all in Section 2,
Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the 5th P.M., within the city of Clinton,
Clinton County, Iowa, more particularly described as:



      Commencing as a point of beginning at the southeast corner of the
said northwest quarter of Section 2; thence south 87°129'07" west, along the
south line of the said northwest quarter of Section 2, a distance of 1987.94
feet to the southwest corner of the east one-half of the west one-half of the
said northwest quarter of Section 2; thence north 02°13'42" west, along the
west line of the said east one-half of the west one-half of the northwest
quarter of Section 2, a distance of 2284.19 feet to the south line of Lot 1
of Country Place First Subdivision in said City of Clinton; thence north
87°25'34" east, along the said south line of Lot 1, a distance of 11.78 feet
to the southeast corner of said Lot 1; thence north 01°54'29" west, along
the east line of said Lot 1, a distance of 424.18 feet to the north line of
the said northwest quarter of Section 2; thence north 87°25'34" east, along
the said north line of the northwest quarter of Section 2, a distance of
1973.37 feet to the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of Section 2;
thence south 02°14'15" east, a distance of 887.81 feet; thence north
87°25'15" east, parallel to and 887.81 feet distant south to the north line
of the northeast quarter of said Section 2, a distance of 1324.69 feet to the
east line of the said west one-half of the northeast quarter of Section 2;
thence south 02°13'38" east, along the said east line of the west one-half
of the northeast quarter of Section 2, a distance of 1823.60 feet to the
southeast corner of the said west one-half of the northeast quarter of
Section 2; thence south 87°27'54" west, along the south line of the said
west one-half of the northeast quarter of Section 2, a distance of 1324.36
feet to the point of beginning.



      Except:  the land owned by Reemark Properties, LLC per warranty
deed at instrument number 1132-06, office of Clinton County Recorder;
described as: commencing at the center of Section 2,



Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the 5th P.M.; thence south 87°45'35" west
a distance of 50.00 feet to the west right-of-way line of North Eighteenth
Street; thence north 02°14'25" west along the west right- of-way line of
North Eighteenth Street a distance of 705.69 feet to the point of beginning;
thence north 02°14'25" west along the right-of-way line a distance of 407.50
feet; thence north 16°36'58" west, 198.19 feet; thence north 48°46'08" west
184.93 feet; thence south 30°09'00" west 311.93 feet; thence south
33°39'12" west, 265.95 feet; thence south 18°50'47" west 335.00'; thence
south 23°10'56" west, 310.42 feet; thence north 82°11'09" east, 183.85
feet; thence south 86°42'36" east, 80.00 feet; thence north 51°06'24" east,
390.00'; thence north 58°49'50" east, 211.06 feet to the point of beginning.



         AMENDED PROJECT AREA.  The portion of the city included
within the original project area and the Amendment No. 1 Area, which amended
project area includes the lots and parcels located within the area legally
described as follows:



      Millcreek Highland Subdivision:  part of the east half of the
northwest quarter of Section 11, Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the 5th
P.M., City of Clinton, County of Clinton, State of Iowa, more particularly
described as follows:



      Commencing at the northwest corner of the northwest quarter of
said Section 11; thence north 81°41'31" east on the north line of said
northwest quarter, 1325.44 feet, to the west line of the northeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of said Section 11; thence south 00°02'35" east on
said west line, 993.31 feet to the north line of the south half of the
southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said
Section 11 and the point of beginning; thence north 89°46'19" east of the
north line of the south half of the southwest quarter of the northeast
quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 11, a distance of 662.44
feet to the east line of said south half; thence south 00°02'41" east on
said west line, 6.89 feet; thence south 89°59'59" east, 2.45 feet to the
northwest corner of Mill Creek Heights Subdivision; thence south
00°01'38"east on the west line of said Mill Creek Heights Subdivision,
336.95 feet, to the southwest corner of said Mill Creek Heights Subdivision;
thence south 89°53'03" east on the south line of said Mill Creek Heights
Subdivision, 362.00 feet; thence south 00°03'32" west, 321.20', to the south
line of the north half of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
the northwest quarter of said Section 11; thence south 89°59'44" west on
said south line, 364.07 feet, to the west line of the northeast quarter of
the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 11; thence
south 00°01'38" east on said west line, 328.43 feet, to the south line of
the northwest quarter of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of
said Section 11, thence south 89°51'07" west on said south line, 662.10
feet, to the west line of the northwest quarter of southeast quarter of the
northwest quarter of said Section 11, thence north 00°02'15" west on said
west line, 662.21 feet, to the northwest corner of the northwest quarter of
the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 11, thence
north 00°03'59" west on the west line of the southwest quarter of the
northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of said Section 11, a distance of
331.10 feet, to the point of beginning, containing 17.817 acres more or less.



      For the purposes of this description, the north line of the
northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 11 is assumed to bear
north 89°46'19" east.



      Town and Country Manor:  a part of the northwest quarter and a
part of the west one-half of the northeast quarter, all in Section 2,
Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the 5th P.M., within the city of Clinton,
Clinton County, Iowa, more particularly described as:



      Commencing as a point of beginning at the southeast corner of the
said northwest quarter of Section 2; thence south 87°29'07" west, along the
south line of the said northwest quarter of Section 2, a distance of 1987.94
feet to the southwest corner of the east one-half of the west one-half of the
said northwest quarter of Section 2; thence north 02°13'42" west, along the
west line of the said east one-half of the west one-half of the northwest
quarter of Section 2, a distance of 2284.19 feet to the south line of Lot 1
of Country Place First Subdivision in said City of Clinton; thence north
87°25'34" east, along the said south line of Lot 1, a distance of 11.78 feet
to the southeast corner of said Lot 1; thence north 01°54'29" west, along
the east line of said Lot 1, a distance of 424.18 feet to the north line of
the said northwest quarter of Section 2; thence north 87°25'34" east, along
the said north line of the northwest quarter of Section 2, a distance of
1973.37 feet to the northeast corner of the said northwest quarter of Section
2; thence south 02°14'15" east, a distance of 887.81 feet; thence north
87°25'15" east, parallel to and 887.81 feet distant south to the north line
of the northeast quarter of said Section 2, a distance of 1324.69 feet to the
east line of the said west one-half of the northeast quarter of Section 2;
thence south 02°13'38" east, along the said east line of the west one-half
of the northeast quarter of Section 2, a distance of 1823.60 feet to the
southeast corner of the said west one-half of the northeast quarter of
Section 2; thence south 87°27'54" west, along the south line of the said
west one-half of the northeast quarter of Section 2, a distance of 1324.36
feet to the point of beginning.



      Except:  the land owned by Reemark Properties, LLC per warranty
deed at instrument number 1132-06, office of Clinton County Recorder;
described as: commencing at the center of Section 2, Township 81 North, Range
6 East of the 5th P.M.; thence south 87°45'35" west a distance of 50.00 feet
to the west right-of-way line of North Eighteenth Street; thence north
02°14'25" west along the west right-of-way line of North Eighteenth Street a
distance of 705.69 feet to the point of beginning; thence north 02°14'25"
west along the right-of-way line a distance of 407.50 feet; thence north
16°36'58" west, 198.19 feet; thence north 48°46'08" west 184.93 feet;
thence south 30°09'00" west 311.93 feet; thence south 33°39'12" west,
265.95 feet; thence south 18°50'47" west 335.00 feet; thence south
23°10'56" west, 310.42 feet; thence north 82°11'09" east, 183.85 feet;
thence south 86°42'36" east, 80.00 feet; thence north 51°06'24" east,
390.00 feet; thence north 58°49'50" east, 211.06 feet to the point of
beginning.



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the amended
project area, legally described in division (A) above, by and for the benefit
of the state, city, county, Clinton Community School District and all other
taxing districts from and after the effective date of this section shall be
divided as follows:



      (1)   As a result of Amendment No. 2, the original project
area has been removed;



      (2)   As to Amendment No. 1 Area, base period taxes shall be
computed in the same manner using the total assessed value shown on the
assessment roll as of January 1, 1997, being the assessment roll applicable
to property in such area as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
effective date of this section;



      (3)   As to Amendment No. 2 Area, base period taxes shall be
computed in the same manner using the total assessed value shown on the
assessment roll as of January 1, 2006, being the assessment roll applicable
to property in the area as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the
effective date of this section;



      (4)   The portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes for the amended project area, determined for each sub-area
thereof as provided in division (B)(3) above, shall be allocated to and when
collected be paid into the special tax increment fund previously established
by the city to pay the principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced
to, or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise,
including bonds issued under authority of Iowa Code § 403.9 or § 403.12,
incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, urban
renewal projects undertaken within the amended project area pursuant to the
urban renewal plan, as amended, except that taxes for the regular and
voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to Iowa Code § 298.2, but only to the extent authorized in Iowa
Code § 403.19(2), and taxes for payment of bonds and interest of each taxing
district shall be collected against all taxable property within the amended
project area without any limitation as hereinabove provided;



      (5)   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the
taxable property in the areas of the amended project area exceeds the total
assessed value of the taxable property in the areas shown by the assessment
rolls referred to in division (B)(3) above, all of the taxes levied and
collected upon the taxable property in the amended project area shall be paid
into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the
taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes; and



      (6)   At the time as the loans, moneys advanced, bonds and
interest thereon and indebtedness of the city referred to in division (B)(4)
above have been paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the amended project area shall be paid into the funds for
the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other
property.



(Ord. 2082, passed 7-28-1998; Ord. 2359, passed 11-27-2007)



§ 35.062  WEST VIEW HEIGHTS URBAN RENEWAL AREA.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the West View Heights
Urban Renewal Area, the area having been identified in the urban renewal plan
approved by the Council by resolution adopted on March 12, 2013. For use in
this section, the following areas are described:



      Part of Southwest Quarter of Section 36, Township 82 North, Range
6 East of the 5th Principal Meridian in the City of Clinton, County of
Clinton, State of Iowa.



      Beginning at the Northeast Corner of West View Heights 1st
Addition; thence, along the north line of said 1st Addition, South 87 degrees
45 minutes 30 seconds West, a distance of 391.04 feet; thence continuing
along said north line for the next two courses, South 65 degrees 41 minutes
31 seconds West, a distance of 419.84 feet; thence, South 87 degrees 45
minutes 30 seconds West, to the east line of Prince of Peace Catholic Parish
1st Addition, a distance of 78.05 feet; thence along said east line, North 01
degrees 56 minutes 24 seconds West, to the Southerly Right of Way line of
Lametta Wynn Drive, a distance of 745.73 feet; thence, along said southerly
line, North 87 degrees 44 minutes 55 seconds East, to the East line of the
Southwest Quarter of Section 36, a distance of 856.82 feet; thence, along
said East line, South 01 degrees 59 minutes 31 East, a distance of 588.14
feet, to the point of beginning, containing 12.556 acres more or less. 



      For the purposes of this description the east line of the
southwest quarter of Section 36 bears South 01 degrees 59 minutes 31 seconds
East.



      The West View Heights Urban Renewal Area also includes the full
right-of-way of all adjacent roads and streets bordering the Area.



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal
Area legally described in the preamble hereof, by and for the benefit of the
State of Iowa, City of Clinton, County of Clinton, State of Iowa, and all
other taxing districts from and after the effective date of this section
shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.



   (C)   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate
at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts
upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Urban
Renewal Area, as shown on the assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar
year preceding the first calendar year in which the city certifies to the
Auditor of Clinton County, Iowa the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness,
or bonds payable from the division of property tax revenue described herein,
shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the
respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which
all other property taxes are paid.



   (D)   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes determined as provided in division (C) shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund of the city hereby
established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced
to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds or obligations issued under the authority of Iowa Code § 403.9 or
403.12, as amended, incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or
in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the Urban Renewal Area
pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan, except that (i) taxes for the regular and
voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to Iowa Code § 298.2 and taxes for the instructional support
program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code § 257.19  (but
in each case only to the extent required under Iowa Code § 403.19(2)); (ii)
taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; (iii)
taxes imposed under Iowa Code § 346.27(22) related to joint county-city
buildings; and (iv) any other exceptions under Iowa Code § 403.19 shall be
collected against all taxable property within the Urban Renewal Area without
any limitation as hereinabove provided.



   (E)   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the Urban Renewal Area exceeds the total assessed value of the
taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area as shown by the assessment roll
referred to in division (C), all of the taxes levied and collected upon the
taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for
the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing districts in
the same manner as all other property taxes.



   (F)   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and
interest thereon of the city, referred to in division (D) have been paid, all
monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the Urban
Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts
in the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(Ord. 2488, passed 3-19-2013)



§ 35.063  LINCOLNWAY INDUSTRIAL RAIL AND AIR PARK URBAN RENEWAL AREA.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the Lincolnway
Industrial Rail and Air Park Urban Renewal Area, the area having been
identified in the urban renewal plan approved by the Council by resolution
adopted on February 11, 2014. For use in this section, the following areas
are described:



      This section includes the Rail.One and NRM Property, which is
legally described as follows:



      Lots 2, 5 and 6 in Lincolnway Park - Part One in the City of
Clinton, Iowa



      Parcel #8811320002, Parcel #8811320005, and Parcel #8811320006



      ("Rail.One and NRM Property")



   (B)   The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal
Area legally described in the preamble hereof (the Rail.One and NRM
Property), by and for the benefit of the State of Iowa, City of Clinton,
County of Clinton, Camanche Community School District, and all other taxing
districts from and after the effective date of this section shall be divided
as hereinafter in this section provided.



   (C)   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate
at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts
upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the Urban
Renewal Area (Rail.One and NRM Property), as shown on the assessment roll as
of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in which
the city certifies to the Auditor of Clinton County, Iowa the amount of
loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds payable from the division of property
tax revenue described herein, shall be allocated to and when collected be
paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the
taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid.



   (D)   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes determined as provided in division (C) shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund of the city hereby
established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced
to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds or obligations issued under the authority of Iowa Code § 403.9 or
403.12, as amended, incurred by the city to finance or refinance, in whole or
in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the entire Urban Renewal
Area pursuant to the Urban Renewal Plan, except that (i) taxes for the
regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school
district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code § 298.2  and taxes for the
instructional support program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa
Code § 257.19  (but in each case only to the extent required under Iowa
Code § 403.19(2)); (ii) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each
taxing district; (iii) taxes imposed under Iowa Code § 346.27(22) related to
joint county-city buildings; and (iv) any other exceptions under Iowa Code §
403.19 shall be collected against all taxable property within the Urban
Renewal Area (Rail.One and NRM Property) without any limitation as
hereinabove provided.



   (E)   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the Urban Renewal Area (Rail.One and NRM Property) exceeds the
total assessed value of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area
(Rail.One and NRM Property) as shown by the assessment roll referred to in
division (C), all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property
in the Urban Renewal Area (Rail.One and NRM Property) shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the taxing
districts in the same manner as all other property taxes.



   (F)   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and
interest thereon of the city referred to in division (D) have been paid, all
monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the Urban
Renewal Area (Rail.One and NRM Property) shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(Ord. 2503, passed 3-11-2014)



§ 35.064  WASHINGTON MIDDLE SCHOOL URBAN RENEWAL AREA.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the Washington Middle
School Urban Renewal Area, the area having been identified in the urban
renewal plan approved by the Council by resolution adopted on October 25,
2016. For use in this section, the following areas are described:



A part of Block 1 and Block 2 in Lambertson's Subdivision and also a part of
Block 3 in Curtis & Leslie's addition, all within the city of Clinton,
Clinton County, Iowa, more particularly described as; beginning at the
northeast corner of Lot 1, in said Block 1, Lambertson's addition, thence
south 00°05'05" west, along the east line of said Block 1, a distance of
160.00 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 24 of said Block 1, Lambertson's
Subdivision; thence north 89°58'35" west, along the north line of said Lot
24 and its westerly extension, a distance of 120.00 feet; thence south
00°01'09" west, a distance of 38.16 feet; thence north 89°45'45" west, a
distance of 251.92 feet; thence south 47°29'38" west, a distance of 64.69
feet; thence south 00°00'14" east, a distance of 129.10 feet to a point 20
feet south of the centerline of vacated 3rd Avenue South; thence north
89°59'14" west, parallel to and 20 feet southerly distant from the said
centerline of vacated 3rd Avenue South, a distance of 302.91 feet to the east
line of South 8th Street; thence north 00°02'50" west, along the said east
line of South 8th Street, a distance of 70.00 feet to the north line of 3rd
Avenue South; thence north 89°52'42" west, along the said north line of 3rd
Avenue South, a distance of 117.56 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 1, of
said Block 3 of Curtis & Leslie's addition; thence north 00°15'01" east,
along the said west line of Lot 1, a distance of 140.00 feet to the northwest
corner of said Lot 1; thence south 89°58'35" east, along the north line of
said Lot 1, a distance of 50.00 feet to the northeast corner of said Lot 1;
thence north 00°02'50" west, a distance of 20.00 feet to the southeast
corner of Lot 14, in said Block 3 of Curtis & Leslie's addition; thence north
89°58'35" west, along the south line of said Lot 14, a distance of 50.00
feet to the southwest corner of said Lot 14; thence north 00°15'01" east,
along the west line of said Lot 14, a distance of 140.00 feet to the
northwest corner of said Lot 14; thence south 89°59'14" east, along the
south line of 2nd Avenue South, a distance of 839.07 feet to the point of
beginning. Subject, however, to an easement to Clinton Community School
district over the southerly 11' of the vacated alley immediately north and
adjacent to Lots 23 and 24 in Block 1 of  Lambertson's Subdivision and any
other easements of record.



   (B)   That the taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban
Renewal Area legally described in the preamble hereof, by and for the benefit
of the State of Iowa, City of Clinton, County of Clinton, Clinton Community
School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective
date of this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.



   (C)   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate
at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts
upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban
renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll being January 1 of the calendar
year preceding the first calendar year in which the municipality certified to
the county auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds
payable from the division of property tax revenue described in this
section,  shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for
the respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into
which all other property taxes are paid.



   (D)   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes determined as provided in division (C) of this section shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund of
the city, hereby established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans,
monies advanced to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or
otherwise, including bonds or obligations issued under the authority of Iowa
Code §§ 403.9 or 403.12, as amended, incurred by the city, to finance or
refinance, in whole or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the
urban renewal area pursuant to the urban renewal plan, except that (i) taxes
for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a
school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code § 298.2 and taxes for the
instructional support program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa
Code § 257.19 (but in each case only to the extent required under Iowa Code
§ 403.19(2)); (ii) taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each
taxing district; (iii) taxes imposed under Iowa Code § 346.27(22) related to
joint county-city buildings; and (iv) any other exceptions under Iowa Code §
403.19 shall be collected against all taxable property within the urban
renewal area without any limitation as hereinabove provided.



   (E)   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the
taxable property in the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll
referred to in division (C) of this section, all of the taxes levied and
collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid
into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the
taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes.



   (F)   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and
interest thereon of the city referred to in division (D) hereof have been
paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in
the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(Ord. 2550, passed 11-22-2016)



§ 35.065  SADDLE RIDGE URBAN RENEWAL AREA.



   (A)   The provisions of this section apply to the Saddle Ridge Urban
Renewal Area, the area having been identified in the urban renewal plan
approved by the Council by resolution adopted on November 8, 2016. For use in
this section, the following areas are described:



Being part of the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 2,
Township 81 North, Range 6 East, of the 5th PM in the City of Clinton,
Clinton County, Iowa more particularly described as follows:



Commencing at the center of Section 2; thence south 86° 49' 41" west, 50.0
feet to the west right of way line of North 18th Street and the point of
beginning; thence south 86° 49' 41" west, 889.03 feet along the south line
of the northwest quarter of Section 2 to the east right of way line of Mill
Creek Parkway; north 12° 53' 15" east, 168.31 feet along the east right of
way of Mill Creek Parkway; thence north 72° 00' 42" east, 392.00 feet;
thence north 52° 51' 52" east, 415.00 feet; thence north 41° 51' 22" east,
148.57 feet to the west right of way of North 18th Street; thence south 02°
14' 25" east, 598.81 feet along the west right of way of North 18th Street to
the point of beginning.  Said parcel contains 6.17 acres and is subject to
easements of record.



Also, the 100 feet in width of right-of-way immediately adjacent to the east
side of the previously described property.



   (B)   That the taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban
Renewal Area legally described in the preamble hereof, by and for the benefit
of the State of Iowa, City of Clinton, County of Clinton, Clinton Community
School District, and all other taxing districts from and after the effective
date of this section shall be divided as hereinafter in this section provided.



   (C)   That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate
at which the tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts
upon the total sum of the assessed value of the taxable property in the urban
renewal area, as shown on the assessment roll on January 1 of the calendar
year preceding the first calendar year in which the municipality certified to
the county auditor the amount of loans, advances, indebtedness, or bonds
payable from the division of property tax revenue described in this section,
shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the
respective taxing district as taxes by or for the taxing district into which
all other property taxes are paid.



   (D)   That portion of the taxes each year in excess of the base
period taxes determined as provided in division (C) shall be allocated to and
when collected be paid into a special tax increment fund of the city, hereby
established, to pay the principal of and interest on loans, monies advanced
to, indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including
bonds or obligations issued under the authority of Iowa Code § 403.9 or
403.12, as amended, incurred by the city, to finance or refinance, in whole
or in part, urban renewal projects undertaken within the urban renewal area
pursuant to the urban renewal plan, except that (i) taxes for the regular and
voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school district imposed
pursuant to Iowa Code § 298.2  and taxes for the instructional support
program of a school district imposed pursuant to Iowa Code § 257.19  (but
in each case only to the extent required under Iowa Code § 403.19(2)); (ii)
taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district; (iii) 
taxes imposed under Iowa Code § 346.27(22) related to joint county-city
buildings; and (iv) any other exceptions under Iowa Code § 403.19 shall be
collected against all taxable property within the urban renewal area without
any limitation as hereinabove provided.



   (E)   Unless or until the total assessed valuation of the taxable
property in the urban renewal area exceeds the total assessed value of the
taxable property in the urban renewal area as shown by the assessment roll
referred to in division (C) of this section, all of the taxes levied and
collected upon the taxable property in the urban renewal area shall be paid
into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for the
taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes.



   (F)   At such time as the loans, advances, indebtedness, bonds and
interest thereon of the city, referred to in division (D) hereof have been
paid, all monies thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in
the urban renewal area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.



(Ord. 2551, passed 11-22-2016)



URBAN REVITALIZATION AREA



§ 35.075  DESIGNATION OF URBAN REVITALIZATION AREAS.



   (A)   Statement of purpose and findings. The City of Clinton's Urban
Revitalization Program ("CURP" or "Program") described in the Amended and
Restated Clinton Urban Revitalization Plan ("Plan"), as amended, allows the
issuance of property tax exemptions for qualified improvements to qualified
real estate within a designated urban revitalization area. The CURP is
designed to stimulate private investment by reducing the tax increase that
would normally result from making improvements to real property. The City
Council finds that the rehabilitation, conservation, re-development, economic
development, or a combination thereof, of the revitalization areas designated
in the Plan, as amended, and this section, is necessary in the interest of
the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and the
areas have heretofore been found to substantially meet the criteria of Iowa
Code § 404.1.



   (B)   Designated urban revitalization areas.



      (1)   The following areas are no longer designated as urban
revitalization areas under Iowa Code Ch. 404:



         (a)   Due the cessation of the Iowa Enterprise Zone
Program, the city removed the following enterprise zones from the CURP in
2016: Lincoln Way Enterprise Zone and Central Clinton Enterprise Zone. As
such, the Lincoln Way Enterprise Zone and the Central Clinton Enterprise Zone
are no longer designated as urban revitalization areas. Two other areas
previously identified as enterprise zones are now designated as
commercial/industrial revitalization areas; those areas include: Lyons
Business and Technology Park Urban Revitalization Area and the Manufacturing
Meadows Urban Revitalization Area.



         (b)   The city previously designated the New Directions
Area as a separate urban revitalization area. However, in 2016 the City
Council determined that the desired level of revitalization had been attained
in that area and therefore the city removed the New Directions Area from the
CURP. As such, the New Directions Area is no longer designated as an urban
revitalization area.



         (c)   With the adoption of Amendment No. 1 to the Plan
in 2018, the City Council determined that the desired level of revitalization
has been attained in two of the commercial/industrial revitalization areas:
the Margaret Place Urban Revitalization Area and the Margaret Place East
Urban Revitalization Area. Therefore, the city removed the Margaret Place
Urban Revitalization Area and the Margaret Place East Urban Revitalization
Area from the CURP, and as such, they are no longer designated as urban
revitalization areas.



      (2)   The following areas are designated as urban
revitalization areas under Iowa Code Ch. 404:



         (a)   City-wide housing revitalization area and housing
redevelopment subarea.



            1.   The city-wide housing revitalization area
includes the entire area within the corporate limits of the City of Clinton.
The legal description for the area within the corporate limits of the City of
Clinton is found in Chapter 35 of the 2005 Code of Ordinances of the City of
Clinton, Iowa. Any land annexed into the city in the future shall
automatically be included in the city-wide housing revitalization area as of
the effective date of the annexation.



            2.   A subarea within the city-wide housing
revitalization area has been identified which contains property that
substantially meets the criteria of Iowa Code § 404.1(2). Specifically, the
city has found this subarea, referred to as the housing redevelopment
subarea, to contain the existence of certain conditions, including a
substantial number of deteriorated or deteriorating structures, faulty lot
layouts, deterioration of site or other improvements, and the existence of
conditions which endanger life or property by fire and other causes; all of
which are among the criteria listed in Iowa Code § 404.1(2) for designating
an area as blighted. Due to the existence of these blighting conditions, the
city has determined that legitimate planning objectives, namely the cessation
of blighting influences, supports making a more robust exemption schedule
available for residential property within this subarea. The housing
redevelopment subarea includes the following properties:



               a.   All of the area contained within the
following boundaries: the point of beginning is the centerline of 7th Avenue
North at the intersection of the centerline of North 3rd Street; thence
following the centerline of 7th Avenue North west to the centerline of North
Bluff Blvd. and following the centerline of Bluff Blvd. to the centerline of
South 14th Street; thence following the centerline of South 14th Street south
to the centerline of Camanche Avenue; thence following the centerline of
Camanche Avenue north to the centerline of South 5th Street at the
intersection with the centerline of 11th Avenue South; thence following the
centerline of 11th Avenue South east to the centerline of South 4th Street;
thence following the centerline of South 4th Street north to the centerline
of 8th Avenue South; thence following the centerline of 8th Avenue South east
to the centerline of South 2nd Street; thence following the centerline of 2nd
Street to the centerline of 6th Avenue North; thence following the centerline
of 6th Avenue North west to the centerline of North 3rd Street; thence
following the  centerline of North 3rd Street north to the point of
beginning; and



               b.   Section 30 Township 82 North Range 7
part of SE 1/4 SE SW commencing on point on the west line of tract owned by
Skyline Center in center of the north/south concrete roadway; thence N
406.48' to NW corner Skyline Center thence E 423.25' to W line North 4th
Street; thence N on W line North 4th Street 879.60' to S line 28th Avenue
North thence W 12.19' on said Avenue; long legal description; and



               c.   All of the area contained within the
following boundaries:  the point of beginning is the centerline of North 3rd
Street at the intersection of the centerline of 25th Avenue North; thence
following the centerline of North 3rd Street north to the centerline of 30th
Avenue North; thence following the centerline of 30th Avenue North east to
the centerline of Garfield Street; thence following the centerline of
Garfield Street south to the centerline of 25th Avenue North; thence
following the centerline of 25th Avenue North west to point of beginning.



               d.   In addition, the following lots are
also included in this blighted subarea:



                  i.   Buell's Addition, Range 3, Block
8, Lots 1 - 16;



                  ii.   Buell's Addition, Range 3; Block
7, Lots 9 - 16;



                  iii.   Buell's Addition, Range 3,
Block 6, Lots 9 - 16;



                  iv.   Buell's Addition, Range 3, Block
5, Lots 9 - 16;



                  v.   Town of Lyons; Range 3; Block 19,
Lots 1 - 12;



                  vi.   Town of Lyons; Range 3, Block
18, Lots 4 - 9;



                  vii.   Town of Lyons, Range 2, Block
8, Lots 1 - 12;



                  viii.   Town of Lyons, Range 4, Block
25, Lots 3 - 10;



                  ix.   Town of Lyons, Range 5, Block
34, Lots 5 - 8;



                  x.   Buell's Second Addition, Range 6,
Block 1, Lots 4 - 12;



                  xi.   Buell's Second Addition, Range
7, Block 1, Lots 5 - 11;



                  xii.   Buell's Second Addition, Range
8, Block 1, Lots 6 - 11;



                  xiii.   Buell's Addition, Range 4,
Block 8, Lots 1 - 16;



                  xiv.   Buell's Addition; Range 4;
Block 7; Lots 1 - 16;



                  xv.   Buell's Addition, Range 5, Block
8; Lots 1 - 16;



                  xvi.   Buell's Addition, Range 5,
Block 7, Lots 1 - 16;



                  xvii.   Buell's Addition, Range 6,
Block 8, Lots 1 - 8;



                  xviii.   Buell's Addition, Range 6,
Block 7, Lots 1 - 8, 15 & 16;



                  xix.   Buell's Addition, Range 7,
Block 7, Lots 1, 2, 15 & 16; and



                  xx.   Buell's Addition, Range 8, Block
7, Lots 1, 2, 15 & 16.



         (b)   Commercial/industrial revitalization areas. The
city has designated multiple areas as commercial/industrial urban
revitalization areas. These areas include the Central Business District, the
Lyons Business District, Liberty Avenue-Block A, Lyons Business and
Technology Park, and Manufacturing Meadows. Legal descriptions for the
commercial/industrial revitalization areas are as follows:




CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT URBAN REVITALIZATION AREA




   Commencing as a point of beginning at the intersection of the center
lines of 14th Avenue North and Pershing Boulevard; thence easterly on the
centerline of 14th Avenue North to the meander of the ordinary high water
line of the Mississippi River on the west bank of Joyce's Slough; thence
northerly along said high water line to the centerline of the Highway 136
bridge over the Mississippi River; then easterly on said centerline to the
east boundary of the City of Clinton, Iowa, being the thread of the main
channel of the Mississippi River; then southerly along said east boundary to
the Chicago and Northwestern Transportation Company (now Union Pacific
Railroad) drawbridge; thence westerly and southwesterly on the northerly
right of way line of the Chicago and Northwestern Transportation Company
railroad (now Union Pacific Railroad) tracks to the centerline of 13th Avenue
South; thence westerly on the centerline of 13th Avenue South to the
centerline of South 5th Street; thence northerly on the centerline of South
5th Street to the centerline of 5th Avenue South; thence easterly on the
centerline of 5th Avenue South to the centerline of South 4th Street; thence
northerly on the centerline of South 4th Street to the centerline of 3rd
Avenue North; thence easterly on the centerline of 3rd Avenue North to the
centerline of North 3rd Street; thence northerly on the centerline of North
3rd Street to the centerline of 8th Avenue North; thence easterly along the
centerline of 8th Avenue North to the centerline of Pershing Boulevard;
thence northerly on the centerline of Pershing Boulevard to the centerline of
14th Avenue North, the point of beginning, all in the City of Clinton,
Clinton County, Iowa.




LYONS BUSINESS DISTRICT URBAN REVITALIZATION AREA




   That portion of the City of Clinton starting at the intersection of
Pershing Boulevard and Fourteenth Avenue North, thence northerly a distance
of 4,350 feet along the centerline of Pershing Boulevard to the intersection
of Pershing Boulevard and Twenty-third Avenue North, thence westerly a
distance of 346 feet along the centerline of Twenty-third Avenue North to the
intersection of Twenty-third Avenue North and Cleveland Street, thence
southerly a distance of 180 feet along the centerline of Cleveland Street to
the intersection of Cleveland Street and Twenty-third Avenue North, thence
westerly for a distance of 230 feet along the centerline of Twenty-third
Avenue North to the intersection of Twenty-third Avenue North and North Third
Street, thence northerly for a distance of 1,200 feet along the centerline of
North Third Street to the intersection of North Third Street and Twenty-fifth
Avenue North, thence easterly for a distance of 1,040 feet along the
centerline of Twenty-fifth Avenue North to the intersection of Twenty-fifth
Avenue North and North Second Street, thence northerly for a distance of
1,420 feet along the centerline of North Second Street to the centerline of
North Second Street and Twenty-eight Avenue North, thence easterly for a
distance of 350 feet along the centerline of Twenty-eight Avenue North to the
intersection of Twenty-eight Avenue North and Roosevelt Street, thence
northerly for a distance of 1,910 feet along the centerline of Roosevelt
Street to the intersection of Roosevelt Street and Thirty-second Avenue
North, thence easterly for a distance of 1,050 feet along the centerline of
Thirty-second Avenue North to the west meander of the ordinary high water
line of the Mississippi River, thence southerly along the west meander of the
ordinary high water line to the centerline of Fourteenth Avenue North, thence
westerly for a distance of 866 feet along the centerline of Fourteenth Avenue
North to the intersection of Pershing Boulevard and Fourteenth Avenue North
and the point of beginning.




LIBERTY AVENUE-BLOCK A URBAN REVITALIZATION AREA




Lots 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19 in Block 20 of East Chancy Park and an
unplatted tract of land at the west end of the southern half of Block 20 of
East Chancy Park and Lots 10, 11, 12 and 13 in Block 20 of Allars Addition.




LYONS BUSINESS AND TECHNOLOGY PARK URBAN REVITALIZATION AREA




NW 1/4 of Section 36, Township 82 North, Range 6, East of the 5th P.M.




MANUFACTURING MEADOWS URBAN REVITALIZATION AREA




NE 1/4 of Section 15, Township 81 North, Range 6, East of the 5th , and the
NW 1/4 of Section 14, Township 81 North, Range 6, East of the 5th P.M. and
the area described as follows: Commencing at the intersection of Highway 30
and Harrison Drive, thence northeasterly on the center line of Harrison Drive
to the center line of 23rd Avenue North, thence west on the said center line
of 23rd avenue North and continuing on the east/west quarter line of Section
14, Township 81 North, Range 6, East of the 5th P.M. to the west line of
Section 14, thence south on the west line of Section 14 to the center line of
Highway 30, thence east on said center line of Highway 30 to the center line
of Harrison Drive, the point of beginning.



   (C)   Duration of designation. The areas designated as urban
revitalization areas under this section shall continue as such until the city
repeals or amends this section. However, if the City Council determines at
any time during the term of the Plan that the desired level of revitalization
has been attained or economic conditions are such that continuation of the
exemptions granted under the Plan would cease to be of benefit to the city
for one or more of the designated revitalization areas, the City Council may
amend or repeal this section pursuant to Iowa Code Ch. 404 so as to amend or
cancel one or more of the designated revitalization areas. In the event this
section or any part thereof is amended or repealed so as to cancel one or
more of the designated revitalization areas, all exemptions previously
granted under the Plan for properties in the cancelled revitalization area(s)
shall continue until their expiration.



(1999 Code, § 10.01)  (Ord. 2297, passed 7-12-2005; Ord. 2316, passed
2-28-2006; Ord. 2345, passed 3-13-2007; Ord. 2423, passed 8-10-2010; Ord.
2449, passed 5-24-2011; Ord. 2534, passed 2-23-2016; Ord. 2596, passed
10-23-2018)



MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT



§ 35.085  SELF-SUPPORTED MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   In accordance with Iowa Code Ch. 386 (herein the “Act”)
and the recitations set out in the preamble to Ordinance 2465, there is
hereby established and created in the city, a self-supported municipal
improvement district as defined in the Act, the name of which shall be the
Downtown Clinton Self-Supported Municipal Improvement District (SSMID II)
(herein the “District”).



   (B)   The District shall include all property within the following
described boundaries, except the proposed District shall be comprised only of
real property within the District which is zoned for commercial or industrial
uses and property within any duly designated historic district, specifically
excluding property assessed as residential property for property tax purposes
unless the residential property is within a duly designated historical
district:



   Commencing at the intersection of the South line of Third Avenue South
with the westerly line of South Fourth Street, in the City of Clinton, Iowa,
which point is the point of beginning; thence easterly along the south line
of Third Avenue South to the intersection of said south line with the west
line of South First Street; thence southerly along the west line of South
First Street and vacated South First Street to the intersection of said west
line with the north line of Eighth Avenue South; thence westerly along said
north line of Eighth Avenue South to the intersection of said north line with
the westerly line of South Fourth Street; thence northerly along said
westerly line of South Fourth Street to the point of beginning; all located
in the City of Clinton, Clinton County, Iowa; and Lots K, L, and M in Block
28, including that portion of the vacated north-south alley in said Block
adjacent thereto; Lots 1, 2, 19, and 20 in Block 29; Lots 1, 2, 19, and 20 in
Block 30; Lots G, H, and I in Block 31; Lots 1, 2, 3, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, and 20 in Block 32; and Lots 1 through 12, all inclusive, in
Block B; all in the Plat known as the “Town of Clinton”, within the City
of Clinton, Clinton County, Iowa.



   (C)   It is hereby found and determined that all of the property
included within the District is similarly related so that the present and
potential use or enjoyment of the property is benefited by the condition,
performance of administration, redevelopment, revitalization and maintenance
of the District, and the owners of property in the District have a present
and potential benefit from the condition, performance of administration,
redevelopment, revitalization and maintenance of the District, all consistent
with the requirements of Iowa Code § 386.3(1)(c).



   (D)   The purposes of the proposed District shall include, but not
be limited to:  undertaking all actions, and constructing all public
improvements or self-liquidating improvements, authorized pursuant to the
Act; the performance, administration and operation of the District; the
growth, redevelopment and revitalization of the District to the full extent
authorized by the Act, including, but not limited to, provision of snow
removal, street and sidewalk clean-up, maintenance and repair of
improvements, city- owned parking, parking enhancements, street lighting
improvements, sidewalk enhancements, and plantings; and attracting new
business and residential development to the District.



   (E)   The District shall be operated by and administered by the
city, as governing body. A Board will be established consisting of ten
members. Upon approval of the District, the city will designate the City
Planner as an adviser and represent the city on the Board as a non-voting
member and an election will be held within the District to elect the
remaining nine members to the Board. The nine elected Board members will be
voting members and consist solely of property owners within the District, or
in the case of corporations, the designated representative of the
corporation. The nine voting members of the Board will elect one of the
voting members to act as chairperson. The City Finance Department will
administer and disburse all funds of the District as directed by the Board.
The new Board will develop a committee structure and bylaws and will update
the membership with public meetings for the entire membership at least
semi-annually. An oversight committee, made up of property owners not
currently serving on the Board, will review the goals, objectives and
accomplishments of the SSMID II Board every two years, and report their
conclusions to the Board and the general membership.



   (F)   Pursuant to the provisions of the Act, there is hereby
established and created for the District a Capital Improvement Fund, an
Operation, Administration and Program Fund and a Maintenance/Repair Fund with
the annual allocation of the District combined tax for each fund described
below, and annually levy tax known as the District combined tax, which tax
shall total, but not exceed, $6 per $1,000 of taxable value of the taxable
property within the District. Commencing with the fiscal year beginning July
1, 2012, the city shall levy and collect such tax and shall continue to so
levy such tax for each succeeding fiscal year until June 30, 2022. In each
year, after first paying or making provision for payment of principal and/or
interest coming due in that year with respect to any debt incurred by the
city on behalf of the District, all remaining tax funds shall be disbursed by
the city, after receiving recommendations of the Board, pursuant to the
District budget, to be used for the payment of part or all of the costs
incurred by the District in operations, improvements, maintenance and
District activities including, but not limited to, those purposes outlined in
divisions (D) and (E) above. The Council shall determine each year what
amount and/or percentage of the tax dollars, remaining after city debt
service related to the District, shall be allocated to the three funds. No
later than January 15, 2012, for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2012, and
no later than January 15 of each succeeding year during the existence of the
District, the Board shall submit its recommended budget to the Council, for
Council approval, and inclusion as part of the budget of the city for the
year in question.



   (G)   The Capital Improvement Fund shall fund all public
improvements and self-liquidating improvements, including debt service
payments on bonds the city issues to acquire such improvements or
self-liquidating improvements, to the full extent authorized pursuant to the
Act. The Capital Improvement Fund may be used by the District, as authorized
by the Act, and as the Council may determine, after Division recommendation.
Initially, any funds allocated to the Capital Improvement Fund shall be used
for purposes of construction of city-owned parking, parking facilities,
and/or parking enhancements, to the extent permitted by the Act, as the
Council may determine appropriate.



   (H)   The Operation, Administration and Program Fund of the District
shall fund all administration, operations and programs of the District, and
may be used by the city to make payments pursuant to division (E) above, and
as the Council may determine after Board recommendations, to the extent
permitted by the Act. Annual budgets must allocate at least 20% of revenues
to this fund.



   (I)   The Maintenance/Repair Fund shall also fund and be used for
snow removal, street and sidewalk cleanup, maintenance and repair expenses of
improvements, maintenance of plantings, and as the Council may determine
after Board recommendations, to the extent permitted by the Act. Any unused
monies in this fund may, at the discretion of the Board, be transferred to
one or both of the other two funds.



   (J)   The taxes described in division (F) above shall be levied for
a period of ten fiscal years, commencing with the fiscal year beginning July
1, 2012. At the end of ten years, the Council, after recommendations of the
Division, shall determine whether or not to continue the existence of the
District.



   (K)   Contracts implementing the purposes, improvements, actions,
activities and operations of the District, outlined in but not limited by
divisions (D), (E), (G), (H) and (I) above, shall be executed by and in the
name of the city, as governing body, subject to such public hearing
requirements and other requirements as may be imposed by law, and after
consideration by the Council of the recommendations of the Board.



(Ord. 2104, passed 11-9-1999; Ord. 2465, passed 9-13-2011)



CHAPTER 36: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES



Section



   36.01   Purpose and overview



   36.02   Risk assessment



   36.03   Identification of red flags



   36.04   Procedure for identifying red flags



   36.05   Responding to red flags



   36.06   Investigation of report by patient of identity theft



   36.07   Administration of the program



   36.08   Annual update of the program



§ 36.01  PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW.



   (A)   (1)   The purpose of this policy/procedure (policy) is to
assure that the city ambulance service (provider) maintains compliance with
the requirements regarding the prevention, detection and mitigation of
identity theft as set forth in the federal regulations known as the “red
flag rules.”



      (2)   IDENTITY THEFT means a fraud committed or attempted
using the identifying information of another person without authority.  This
includes MEDICAL IDENTITY THEFT, i.e., IDENTITY THEFT committed for the
purpose of obtaining medical services, such as the use of another person's
insurance card or number.  Although MEDICAL IDENTITY THEFT may occur without
the knowledge of the individual whose medical identity is stolen, in some
cases the use of an individual's medical identity may occur with the
knowledge and complicity of that individual.



   (B)   This chapter sets forth the steps provider will take in
implementing a program for detecting, preventing and mitigating identity
theft (the program) in connection with covered accounts, as required by the
red flag rules.  COVERED ACCOUNT means:



      (1)   An account that provider offers or maintains, primarily
for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to
permit multiple payments or transactions; and



      (2)   Any other account that provider offers or maintains for
which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to individuals or to the safety
and soundness of provider from identity theft, including financial,
operational, compliance, reputation or litigation risks.



   (C)   (1)   Section 36.02 of this chapter describes the risk
assessment provider shall conduct at the inception of the program and
annually thereafter.  Section 36.03 sets forth the “red flags” (i.e.,
warning signs) that may alert provider personnel to the possible existence of
Identity Theft in the course of provider's day to day operations.  Section
36.04 sets forth the procedures provider will follow in attempting to detect
those red flags.  Section 36.05 sets forth the procedures provider will
follow in responding appropriately to red flags that are detected, in order
to prevent and mitigate identity theft.  Section 36.06 sets forth the
procedures provider will take in responding to a claim by an individual that
he has been a victim of identity theft.  Section 36.07 describes how
provider will administer the program.  Section 36.08 describes the annual
updating of the program.



      (2)   Questions regarding this chapter or the program shall be
directed to the Program Compliance Officer designated pursuant to § 36.08.



(Ord. 2416, passed 7-13-2010)



Editor’s note:



   See 16 C.F.R. § 681.2 as supplemented by the Interagency Guidelines on
Identity Theft Detection, Prevention and Mitigation set forth in Appendix A
of 16 C.F.R. part 681 (Guidelines) and the supplement thereto.



§ 36.02  RISK ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   Upon initial implementation of the program, and annually
thereafter as a part of the annual update described in § 36.08 of this
chapter, provider shall determine whether it maintains covered accounts.  As
part of that determination, provider shall conduct a risk assessment to
determine whether it offers or maintains Covered Accounts that carry a
reasonably foreseeable risk of identity theft, including financial,
operational, compliance, reputation or litigation risks.



   (B)   The risk assessment shall take into consideration:



      (1)   The methods provider provides to open its accounts;



      (2)   The methods it provides to access its accounts; and



      (3)   Its previous experiences with identity theft.



(Ord. 2416, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 36.03  IDENTIFICATION OF RED FLAGS.



   (A)   RED FLAG is a pattern, practice or specific activity that
indicates the possible existence of identity theft.  In other words, a red
flag is a warning sign regarding the possibility of identity theft.   



   (B)   In identifying red flags relevant to its operations, provider
has:



      (1)   Reviewed the examples of red flags found in the red flag
rules (see the supplement to the guidelines), including fraud or active duty
alerts, notice of credit freeze, notice of address discrepancy from a
consumer reporting agency;



      (2)   Considered the factors specified in § 36.02 above; and



      (3)   Incorporated red flags from sources such as changes in
identity theft risks of which provider becomes aware and applicable
regulatory guidance.



   (C)   Based on the process specified in the § 36.03 above, provider
has identified the following situations as red flags that should alert
provider personnel to the possibility of identity theft:



      (1)   A patient submits a driver's license, insurance card or
other identifying information that appears to be altered or forged; 



      (2)   The photograph on a driver's license or other
government-issued photo I.D. submitted by a patient does not resemble the
patient;



      (3)   Information on one form of identification submitted by a
patient is inconsistent with information on another form of identification,
or with information already in provider's records or information obtained
from other sources such as a consumer credit data base;



      (4)   A patient has an insurance member number but no
insurance card;



      (5)   The Social Security Number (SSN) or other identifying
information furnished by a patient is the same as identifying information in
provider's records furnished by another patient;



      (6)   The SSN furnished by a patient has not been issued, is
listed on the Social Security's Administration's death master file, or is
otherwise invalid.  The following numbers are always invalid:



         (a)   The first three digits are in the 800, 900 or 000
range, or in the 700 range above 772, or are 666;



         (b)   The fourth and fifth digits are 00; or



         (c)   The last four digits are 0000;



      (7)   The address given by a patient does not exist or is a
post office box, or is the same address given by an unusually large number of
other patients; 



      (8)   The phone number given by the patient is invalid or is
associated with a pager or an answering service, or is the same telephone
number submitted by an unusually large number of other patients;



      (9)   The patient refuses to provide identifying information
or documents;



      (10)   Personal identifying information given by a patient is
not consistent with personal identifying information in Provider's records,
or with information provided by another source such as an insurance company
or consumer credit database;



      (11)   A patient's signature does not match the signature on
file in Provider's records;



      (12)   A patient contacts provider or provider's billing
service and indicates that he or she has received an invoice, explanation of
benefits or other document reflecting a transport that the patient claims was
never received;



      (13)   Mail correspondence is returned to provider or
provider's billing service despite continued activity associated with that
mailing address;



      (14)   Provider or provider's billing service receives a
warning, alert or notification from a credit reporting agency, law
enforcement or other credible source regarding a patient or a patient's
insurance information;



      (15)   Provider or a service provider has suffered a security
breach, loss of unprotected data or unauthorized access to patient
information;



      (16)   An insurer denies coverage due to a lifetime benefit
limit being reached or due to an excessive volume of services;



      (17)   A discrepancy exists between medical or demographic
information obtained by provider from the patient and the information found
in health facility records;



      (18)   Attempts to access an account by persons who cannot
provide authenticating information.



   (D)   Provider shall update the foregoing list of red flags as part
of its annual update of the program.



   (E)   All provider personnel have an affirmative obligation to be
vigilant for any evidence of a red flag and to notify their immediate
supervisor, or the program compliance officer, to report the red flag.



(Ord. 2416, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 36.04  PROCEDURE FOR IDENTIFYING RED FLAGS.



   Provider personnel will follow the following procedures in order to
detect the red flags indicated above, which indicate the possibility of
identity theft.



   (A)   The process of confirming a patient's identity should never
delay the delivery of urgently or emergently needed medical care.  When a
patient's condition permits collection of demographic information and
documentation, medical transport crews shall request, in addition to an
insurance card, a driver's license or other form of government issued
photographic personal identification.  If the patient lacks such
photographic identification, medical transport personnel shall:



      (1)   Request other form of identification, such as a credit
card; and/or



      (2)   Ask a family member or other person at the scene who
knows the patient to verify the patient's identity. 



   (B)   Billing personnel, in the course of creating and processing
claims, and verifying patient information, shall be alert for the existence
of any of the red flags listed in § 36.03 above.



   (C)   Before providing information regarding an account, or making
any change to an address or other information associated with an account, the
requester shall be required to provide the social security number, full name,
date of birth and address of the patient.  If the requester makes the
request in person, a driver's license or other government issued photographic
identification shall be requested.



   (D)   In the event medical transport personnel or billing personnel
encounter a red flag, the existence of the red flag shall be brought to the
prompt attention of the individual's supervisor or the Program Compliance
Officer so that it can be investigated and addressed, as appropriate, in
accordance with the procedures set forth in § 36.05 below.



(Ord. 2416, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 36.05  RESPONDING TO RED FLAGS.



   (A)   When a red flag is detected, provider personnel shall
investigate the situation, as necessary, to determine whether there is a
material risk that identity theft has occurred or whether there is a benign
explanation for the red flag.  The investigation shall be documented in
accordance with provider's incident reporting policy.  If it appears that
identity theft has not occurred, provider may determine that no further
action is necessary.



   (B)   Provider's response shall be commensurate with the degree of
risk posed by the red flag.  In determining an appropriate response,
provider shall consider aggravating factors that may heighten the risk of
identity theft, such as a data security incident that results in unauthorized
access to a patient's account records, or notice that a patient has provided
information related to a provider account to someone fraudulently claiming to
represent provider or to a fraudulent website.



   (C)   If it appears that identity theft has occurred, the following
steps should be considered and taken, as appropriate:



      (1)   Except in cases where there appears to be obvious
complicity by the individual whose identity was used, promptly notify the
victim of identity theft, by certified mail, using the identity theft patient
notice letter developed by provider.  Notification may also be provided by
telephone, to be followed by a mailed letter;



      (2)   Place an identity theft alert on all patient care
reports (“PCRs”) and financial accounts that may have inaccurate
information as a result of the identity theft;



      (3)   Discontinue billing on the account and/or close the
account;



      (4)   Reopen the account with appropriate modifications,
including a new account number;



      (5)   If a claim has been submitted to an insurance carrier or
government program (payor) in the name of the patient whose identity has been
stolen, notify the payor, withdraw the claim and refund any charges
previously collected from the Payor and/or the patient; 



      (6)   If the account has been referred to collection agencies
or attorneys, instruct the collection agency or attorneys to cease collection
activity;



      (7)   Notify law enforcement and cooperate in any
investigation by law enforcement;



      (8)   Request that law enforcement notify any health facility
to which the patient using the false identity has been transported regarding
the identity theft;



      (9)   If an adverse report has been made to a consumer credit
reporting agency regarding a patient whose identity has been stolen, notify
the agency that the account was not the responsibility of the individual;



      (10)   Correct the medical record of any patient of provider
whose identity was stolen, with the assistance of the patient as needed;



      (11)   If the circumstances indicate that there is no action
that would prevent or mitigate the Identity Theft, no action need be taken.



(Ord. 2416, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 36.06  INVESTIGATION OF REPORT BY PATIENT OF IDENTITY THEFT.



   (A)   If an individual claims to have been a victim of identity
theft (e.g., the individual claims to have received a bill for a transport he
or she did not receive), provider or its billing service shall investigate
the claim.  Authentication of the claim shall require a copy of a police
report and either:



      (1)   The identity theft affidavit developed by the FTC,
including supporting documentation; or



      (2)   An identification theft affidavit recognized under state
law.



   (B)   Provider personnel shall review the foregoing documentation
and any other information provided by the individual and shall make a
determination as to whether the report of identity theft is credible. 



   (C)   The individual who filed the report shall be informed in
writing of provider's conclusion as to whether provider finds the report
credible.



   (D)   If, following investigation, it appears that the individual
has been a victim of identity theft, provider will take the appropriate
actions as indicated in § 36.05 of this chapter.



   (E)   If, following investigation, it appears the report of identity
theft was not credible, the individual shall be notified and provider may
continue billing on the account, upon approval of the Program Compliance
Officer.  The account shall not be billed without such approval.



(Ord. 2416, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 36.07  ADMINISTRATION OF THE PROGRAM.



   (A)   The program, and all material changes thereto, shall be
approved by the City Administrator.



   (B)   A designated employee at the level of senior management shall
be designated by the City Administrator as the Program Compliance Officer and
shall be responsible for the oversight, development and implementation of the
program.



   (C)   Provider shall train staff, as needed, to effectively
implement the program.  The following categories of personnel shall be
trained in the implementation of the program:



      (1)   All medical transport personnel;



      (2)   All billing office personnel;



      (3)   All management personnel. 



   (D)   Initial training shall occur no later than December 1, 2010
for all current personnel.  Newly hired personnel shall be trained in the
implementation of the Program as part of their standard compliance and HIPAA
training.  Refresher training shall be included in the annual compliance and
HIPAA training given to provider personnel, and may be given to specific
employees from time to time on an “as needed” basis.



   (E)   Provider shall exercise appropriate and effective oversight of
all arrangements involving a service provider whose duties include opening,
monitoring or processing patient accounts, or performing other activities
which place them in a position to prevent, detect or mitigate identity theft
(service providers).  Each service provider shall be required to execute an
amendment or addendum to its service agreement or business associate
agreement which requires it to:



      (1)   Implement a written identity theft program that meets
the requirements of the red flags rule;



      (2)   Provide a copy of such program to provider no later than
December 1,  2010;



      (3)   Provide copies of all material changes to such program
on an annual basis; and



      (4)   Either report all red flags which it encounters to
provider, or take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft
itself.



   (F)   The Program Compliance Officer shall report to the City
Administrator, on an annual basis, on compliance with the program.  The
report shall address material matters related to the program and evaluate
issues such as:



      (1)   The effectiveness of the program in addressing the risk
of identity theft;



      (2)   Service provider arrangements;



      (3)   Significant incidents involving identity theft and
provider's response;



      (4)   Recommendations for material changes to the program.



(Ord. 2416, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 36.08  ANNUAL UPDATE OF THE PROGRAM.



   The program will be reviewed, revised and updated on an annual basis. 
In performing such update, provider shall consider:



   (A)   Provider's experiences with identity theft over the period
since the last revision of the program;



   (B)   Changes in methods of identity theft, or in methods to detect,
prevent and mitigate identity theft;



   (C)   Changes in provider's technology and operations, including any
new electronic health record or financial software programs implemented by
provider; and



   (D)   Changes in business arrangements of provider, including but
not limited to in its relationships with service providers.



(Ord. 2416, passed 7-13-2010)



CHAPTER 37:  IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM



Section



   37.01   Purpose and overview



   37.02   Identification of red flags



   37.03   Detection of red flags



   37.04   Preventing and mitigating identity theft



   37.05   Further prevention



   37.06   Updating the programming and the red flags



   37.07   Program administration



§ 37.01  PURPOSE AND OVERVIEW.



   (A)   The City of Clinton  (the "provider") developed this Identity
Theft Prevention Program ("program") pursuant to the Federal Trade
Commission's ("FTC") Red Flag Rule, which implements Section 114 of the Fair
and Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003.  16 C. F. R. § 681.2.  This
program is designed to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft in
connection with the opening and maintenance of certain accounts for services
provided by the city.  For purposes of this program, IDENTITY THEFT is
considered to be "fraud committed using the identifying information of
another person."  The ACCOUNTS addressed by the program, (the "accounts"),
are defined as:



      (1)   An account the city offers or maintains primarily for
personal, family, household purposes, operational, financial, compliance,
general services provided, municipal infractions, and sewer billing that
involve multiple payments or transactions; and



      (2)   Any other account the city offers or maintains for which
there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and
soundness of the utility from identity theft.



   (B)   This program was developed with oversight and approval of the
Program Administrator (defined below).  After consideration of the size and
complexity of the city's operations and account systems, and the nature and
scope of the city's use of information, the City Council determined that this
program was appropriate for the City of Clinton, and therefore approved this
program on September 11, 2012.



(Ord. 2480, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 37.02  IDENTIFICATION OF RED FLAGS.



   A RED FLAG is a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates
the possible existence of identity theft.  In order to identify relevant red
flags, the city considered the types of accounts that it offers and
maintains, the methods it provides to open its accounts, the methods it
provides to access its accounts, and its previous experiences with identity
theft.  The city identifies the following red flags, in each of the listed
categories:



   (A)   Notifications and warnings from consumer reporting agencies. 
Possible red flags for this category include:



      (1)   Receiving a report or notice from a consumer reporting
agency of a credit freeze;



      (2)   Receiving a report of fraud with a consumer report; and



      (3)   Receiving indication from a consumer report of activity
that is inconsistent with a customer's usual pattern or activity.



   (B)   Suspicious documents.  Possible red flags for this category
include:



      (1)   Receiving documents that are provided for identification
that appear to be forged or altered;



      (2)   Receiving documentation on which a person's photograph
or physical description is not consistent with the person presenting the
documentation;



      (3)   Receiving other documentation with information that is
not consistent with existing customer information (such as if a person's
signature on a check appears forged); and



      (4)   Receiving an application for service that appears to
have been altered or forged.



   (C)   Suspicious personal identifying information.  Possible red
flags for this category include:



      (1)   A person's identifying information is inconsistent with
other sources of information (such as an address not matching an address on a
consumer report or a SSN that was never issued);



      (2)   A person's identifying information is inconsistent with
other information the customer provides (such as inconsistent SSNs or birth
dates);



      (3)   A person's identifying information is the same as shown
on other applications found to be fraudulent;



      (4)   A person's identifying information is consistent with
fraudulent activity (such as an invalid phone number or fictitious billing
address);



      (5)    A person's SSN is the same as another customer's SSN;



      (6)   A person's address or phone number is the same as that
of another person;



      (7)   A person fails to provide complete personal identifying
information on an application when reminded to do so; and



      (8)   A person's identifying information is not consistent
with the information that is on file for the customer.



   (D)   Unusual use of or suspicious activity related to an account. 
Possible red flags for the category include:



      (1)   A change of address for an account followed by a request
to change the account holder's name;



      (2)   An account being used in a way that is not consistent
with prior use (such as late or no payments when the account has been timely
in the past);



      (3)   Mail sent to the account holder is repeatedly returned
as undeliverable;



      (4)   The utility receives notice that a customer is not
receiving his paper statements;



      (5)   The utility receives notice that an account has
unauthorized activity;



      (6)   Breaches in a city computer system; and



      (7)   Unauthorized access to or use of customer account
information.



   (E)   Notice regarding possible identity theft. Red flags for this
category include:



      (1)   The utility receives notice from a customer, an identity
theft victim, law enforcement or any other person that it has opened or is
maintaining a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft.



(Ord. 2480, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 37.03  DETECTION OF RED FLAGS.



   (A)   In order to detect any of the red flags identified above with
the opening of a new account, city personnel will take the following steps to
obtain and verify the identity of the person opening the account.  Steps can
include:



      (1)   Requiring certain identifying information such as name,
date of birth, residential or business address, principal place of business
for an entity, SSN, driver's license or other identification;



      (2)   Verifying the customer's identity, such as by copying
and reviewing a driver's license or other identification card;



      (3)   Reviewing documentation showing the existence of a
business entity; and



      (4)   Independently contacting the customer.



   (B)   In order to detect any of the red flags identified above for
an existing account, city personnel will take the following steps to monitor
transactions with an account.  Steps can include:



      (1)   Verifying the identification of customers if they
request information (in person, via telephone, via facsimile, via email);



      (2)   Verifying the validity of requests to change billing
addresses; and



      (3)   Verifying changes in banking information given for
billing and payment purposes.



(Ord. 2480, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 37.04  PREVENTING AND MITIGATING IDENTITY THEFT.



   In the event city personnel detect any identified red flags they shall
investigate the situation, as necessary, to determine whether there is a
material risk that identity theft has occurred or whether there is a benign
explanation for the red flag.  The investigation shall be documented in
accordance with the city's incident reporting policy.  If it appears that
identity theft has not occurred, the city may determine that not further
action is necessary.  If it appears that identity theft has occurred, such
personnel shall take one or more of the following steps, depending on the
degree of risk posed by the red flag.  Steps can include:



   (A)   Continuing to monitor an account for evidence of identity
theft;



   (B)   Contacting the customer in writing;



   (C)   Changing any passwords or other security devices that permit
access to accounts;



   (D)   Reopening an account with a new number;



   (E)   Not opening a new account;



   (F)   Closing an existing account;



   (G)   Notifying law enforcement;



   (H)   Notify the Program Administrator (as defined below) for
determination of the appropriate step(s) to take. 



(Ord. 2480, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 37.05  FURTHER PREVENTION.



   In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring
with respect to city accounts, the city will take the following steps with
respect to its internal operating procedures.  Possible steps may include:



   (A)   Providing a secure website or clear notice that a website is
not secure;



   (B)   Ensuring complete and secure destruction of paper documents
and computer files containing customer information;



   (C)   Ensuring that office computers are password protected and that
computer screens lock after a set period of time; and



   (D)   Requiring only the last 4 digits of SSNs on customer
applications.



(Ord. 2480, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 37.06  UPDATING THE PROGRAMMING AND THE RED FLAGS.



   This program will be periodically reviewed and updated to reflect
changes in risks to customers and the soundness of the city from identity
theft.  At least once per year the Program Administrator will determine
whether it maintains covered accounts that carry a reasonably foreseeable
risk of identity theft, the city's experiences with identity theft situation,
changes in identity theft methods, changes in identity theft detection and
prevention methods, changes in the city's technology and operations including
any new financial software programs implemented by the city, changes in types
of accounts the city maintains and changes in the city's business
arrangements with other entities.  After considering these factors, the
Program Administrator will determine whether changes to the program,
including the listing of red flags, are warranted.  If warranted, the
Program Administrator will present the City Council with his or her
recommended changes and the City Council will make a determination of whether
to accept, modify or reject those changes to the program.



(Ord. 2480, passed 9-11-2012)



§ 37.07  PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Oversight.  The city's program will be overseen by a Program
Administrator.  The Program Administrator shall be the Finance Director. 
The Program Administrator will be responsible for the program's
administration, for ensuring appropriate training of city staff on the
program, for reviewing any staff reports regarding the detection of red flags
and the steps for preventing and mitigating identity theft, determining which
steps of prevention and mitigation should be taken in particular
circumstances, reviewing and, if necessary, approving changes to the
program. 



   (B)   Staff training and reports.  City staff responsible for
implementing the program shall be trained either by or under the direction of
the Program Administrator in the detection of red flags, and the responsive
steps to be taken when a red flag is detected. 



   (C)   Service provider arrangements.  In the event the city engages
a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more
accounts, the city will take the following steps to ensure the service
provider performs its activity in accordance with reasonable policies and
procedures designed to detect, prevent, and mitigate the risk of identity
theft.  These steps may include:



      (1)   Requiring, by contract, that service providers have such
policies and procedures in place;



      (2)   Requiring, by contract, that service providers review
the utility's program and report any red flags to the Program Administrator.



(Ord. 2480, passed 9-11-2012)



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



   Chapter



      50.   SOLID WASTE



      51.   WATER SERVICE SYSTEM



      52.   SEWERS



      53.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 50:  SOLID WASTE



Section




Solid Waste Control




   50.01   Purpose



   50.02   Definitions



   50.03   Sanitary disposal required



   50.04   Health and fire hazard



   50.05   Reserved



   50.06   Separation of yard waste required



   50.07   Littering prohibited



   50.08   Open dumping prohibited



   50.09   Toxic and hazardous waste



   50.10   Waste storage containers



   50.11   Prohibited practices



   50.12   Sanitary disposal project designated



Collection of Solid Waste



   50.25   Collection service



   50.26   Collection vehicles



   50.27   Loading



   50.28   Frequency of collection



   50.29   Right of entry



   50.30   Collector’s license



   50.31   Collection fees



   50.32   Lien for nonpayment



SOLID WASTE CONTROL



§ 50.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the chapter in this code of ordinances pertaining to
solid waste control is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection and
disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the city
from hazards to their health, safety and welfare as may result from the
uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.



(1999 Code, § 105.01)



§ 50.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY OWNED SOLID WASTE CONTAINER.  Those solid waste containers which
the city purchases and provides to the owners or occupants of residential
premises for the placement of solid waste for collection by the city.



   CITY OWNED YARD WASTE CONTAINER.  Those yard waste containers which
the city purchases and provides to the owners or occupants of residential
premises for the placement of yard waste for collection by the city.



   COLLECTOR.  Any person authorized to gather solid waste from public
and private places.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the State Department of Natural Resources
or any designee.



(Iowa Code § 455B.101(2)) 



   DISCARD.  To place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit or drop.



(Iowa Code § 455B.361(2))



   DWELLING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms located within a structure
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are
intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



   GARBAGE.  All solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable
waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving and
consuming of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal,
excluding useful industrial by-products, and includes all substances from all
public and private establishments and from all residences.



(I.A.C. 567-100.2)



   LANDSCAPE WASTE.  Any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The
term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves,
grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings.



(I.A.C. 567-20.2(455B))



   LITTER.  Any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials or
debris.



(Iowa Code § 455B.361(1))



   MOBILE HOME.  A transportable structure which exceeds eight feet in
width or 32 feet in length, built on a chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation. A MOBILE HOME is considered
a residential dwelling unit if it is permanently connected to the required
utilities.



   OWNER.  In addition to the record titleholder, any person residing in,
renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in any
premises, and as between the parties the duties, responsibilities,
liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and several.



   REFUSE.  Putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings,
market and industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry or
semisolid form.



(I.A.C. 567-100.2)



   RESIDENTIAL PREMISES.  A single-family dwelling and any
multiple-family dwelling up to and including four separate dwelling units.



   RESIDENTIAL WASTE.  Any refuse generated on the premises as a result
of residential activities. The term includes landscape waste grown on the
premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires
and trade waste.



(I.A.C. 567-20.2(455B))



   RUBBISH.  Non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and
non-combustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind.



(I.A.C. 567-100.2)



   SANITARY DISPOSAL. A method of treating solid waste so that it does not
produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.



(I.A.C. 567-100.2)



   SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT.  All facilities and appurtenances including
all real and personal property connected with the facilities, which are
acquired, purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved,
extended, maintained or operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid
waste without creating a significant hazard to the public health or safety,
and which are approved by the Director.



(Iowa Code § 455B.301) 



   SOLID WASTE.  Garbage, refuse, rubbish and other similar discarded
solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to the materials
resulting from industrial, commercial, agricultural and domestic activities.
SOLID WASTE may include vehicles, as defined by Iowa Code § 321.1(1).



(Iowa Code § 455B.301)



   YARD WASTE.  Leaves and lawn clippings and tree and shrubbery branches
of less than six inches in diameter and 48 inches in length, excluding tree
limbs and yard wastes created by commercial tree service operations.



(1999 Code, § 105.02)   (Ord. 2456, passed 8-9-2011)



§ 50.03  SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED.



   It is the duty of each owner to provide for the sanitary disposal of
all refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a
nuisance. Any accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more
than 30 days shall be deemed a nuisance and the city may proceed to abate the
nuisances in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 90 of this code or by
initiating proper action in District Court.



(Iowa Code Chapter 657)  (1999 Code, § 105.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.04  HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD.



   It is unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises,
improved or vacant, or on any public place, the quantities of solid waste
that constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.



(1999 Code, § 105.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.05  RESERVED.



§ 50.06  SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED.



    All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or occupant from all
other solid waste accumulated on the premises and shall only be placed for
collection in the city provided yard waste container. Yard waste container
containing material other than yard waste will not be collected by the city.
However, tree and shrubbery branches of a diameter of more than one inch and
less than six inches shall not be placed in the yard waste container but
shall be tied in bundles not to exceed 18 inches in diameter and 48 inches in
length.



(1999 Code, § 105.06)  (Ord. 2456, passed 8-9-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.07  LITTERING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall discard any litter onto or in any water or land, except
that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized
collection and discarding of litter in or on areas or receptacles provided
for that purpose. When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver
of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for the act in any case where doubt
exists as to which occupant of the motor vehicle actually discarded the
litter.



(Iowa Code § 455B.363)  (1999 Code, § 105.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.08  OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall dump or deposit or permit the dumping or depositing of
any solid waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or stream of
water at any place other than a sanitary disposal project approved by the
Director, unless a special permit to dump or deposit solid waste on land
owned or leased by the person has been obtained from the Director. However,
this section does not prohibit the use of dirt, stone, brick or similar
inorganic material for fill, landscaping, excavation or grading at places
other than a sanitary disposal project.



(I.A.C. 567-100.2, Iowa Code § 455B.307)  (1999 Code, § 105.08)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 50.09  TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   No person shall deposit in a solid waste container or otherwise offer
for collection any toxic or hazardous waste. The materials shall be
transported and disposed of as prescribed by the Director. As used in this
section, TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE means waste materials, including but not
limited to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological
waste, flammable or explosive materials and similar harmful waste which
requires special handling and which must be disposed of in a manner as to
conserve the environment and protect the public health and safety.



(I.A.C. 567-100.2, 567-102.14(2), 400-27.14(2))  (1999 Code, § 105.09) 
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.10  WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS.



   Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or renting any
premises, dwelling unit or any place where refuse accumulates shall provide
and at all times maintain in good order and repair suitable containers for
refuse in accordance with the following.



   (A)   Container specifications.  Waste storage containers shall
comply with the following specifications.



      (1)   Solid waste and yard waste containers.



         (a)   Only city-owned containers provided by the city
shall be used for the placement of solid waste and yard waste for collection
by the city.  Only those city owned containers shall be assigned to a
particular residential premises and shall remain at that residential premises
in the event the owner or occupant moves.



         (b)   Collection shall not be made on any solid waste or
yard waste that is not placed within the container.  Solid waste or yard
waste containers that are so filled that the hinged lid can not be fully
closed will not be collected.



         (c)   If a resident wishes to have an overfilled solid
waste container emptied, he or she may purchase a special collection bag at
City Hall for the price of $5.  The special collection bag shall be visibly
placed on the contents of the overfilled container on their normal day of
collection. The purchase of the special collection bag does not cover bags
that are not placed in or on the solid waste container and no bags shall be
collected that are placed on the ground.



         (d)   If a city owned container is lost or stolen from a
residential premises, the owner or occupant of the residential premises shall
report such event to the Public Works Department within 24 hours of the
loss.  In the event of loss or theft, a replacement city owned container
shall be provided to the owner or occupant.



      (2)   [Reserved]



      (3)   Putrescible solid waste.  All putrescible solid waste
shall be drained of all excess liquid, wrapped in paper or in disposal
containers and placed or stored until collected in covered suitable
containers. Ashes should be placed in separate sturdy containers before being
deposited for collection.



      (4)   Residential dumpsters.  No residential solid waste from
a single-family or two-family residence shall be placed out for collection in
containers that are larger than 100 gallons. Where residential solid waste is
placed out for collection from residential units of more than a one-family or
two-family residence in containers that are larger than 100 gallons, the
containers must be visually screened from abutting properties and the public
streets. Where a single-family or two-family residence has an approved home
occupation pursuant to the city’s zoning regulations, a solid waste
container may exceed 100 gallons provided the container is visually screened
from abutting properties and the public streets. Home occupations allowed
this exception are day care facilities, barber and beauty shops, carpentry
shops, cabinet making, upholstering, furniture repair, refinishing or similar
occupations.



      (5)   Commercial.  Every person owning, managing, operating,
leasing or renting any commercial premises where an excessive amount of
refuse accumulates and where its storage in portable containers as required
above is impractical, shall maintain metal bulk storage containers approved
by the city.



   (B)   Storage of containers.  Residential solid waste containers
shall be stored upon the residential premises. Commercial solid waste
containers shall be stored upon private property, unless the owner has been
granted written permission from the city to use public property for those
purposes. The storage site shall be well drained; fully accessible to
collection equipment, public health personnel and fire inspection personnel.
All owners of residential and commercial premises shall be responsible for
proper storage of all garbage and yard waste to prevent materials from being
blown or scattered around neighboring yards and streets.



   (C)   Solid waste dumpsters on streets.  The placement of solid
waste dumpsters of any size on the streets and the placement of dumpsters of
20 cubic yard capacity or more on the alleys of the city is prohibited,
unless a permit for the purpose is obtained by the owner of the dumpster in
accordance with this division. Solid waste dumpsters will be permitted on
paved streets or alleys only if the dumpster cannot be located off of the
paved portion of the street or alley. The location of the dumpster must be
approved by the Public Works Department. The placement of the dumpster must
not create a traffic hazard. Reflectors or reflectorized tape shall be placed
on the corners of the dumpsters. A flashing light or lights may be required
by the Public Works Department, if deemed necessary. The dumpster shall have
a cover if any of the contents can be windblown. Disposal of garbage in
on-street dumpsters is prohibited.



      (1)   Permit application.  The application for a permit to
place a solid waste dumpster on the streets and a solid waste dumpster of 20
cubic yards’ capacity or more on the alleys of the city shall be made by
the owner of the dumpster or the owner’s designee to the Public Works
Department on a form provided by the Department. The application should state
the name, address and telephone number of the owner, the proposed location of
the dumpster, the length of time the dumpster will be located on the street,
the size of the dumpster, a statement that the dumpster cannot be located off
of the paved portion of the street or alley and a statement that the owner of
the dumpster will be responsible for any damage to public property and the
owner will reimburse the city for any damages. Accompanying the application
must be a current certificate of liability insurance in an amount of at least
$1,000,000 covering the owner and owner’s business. The application must be
signed by the owner or the owner’s designee.



      (2)   Fee.  The fee for the permit shall be as established by
resolution of the Council.



      (3)   Issuance of permit.  If all of the requirements of the
permit application and regulations are met, the permit shall be issued. The
permit shall be for a period of seven calendar days, when the dumpster should
be removed. A second permit may be issued for the same dumpster for the same
location upon payment of another permit fee. A third permit for the same
dumpster for the same location shall not be issued. A self-adhesive sign with
the expiration date of the permit on it will be issued with the permit. The
permit holder shall affix the sign to the top corner of the end of the
dumpster nearest the center of the street. The permit, once issued can be
revoked by the Public Works Department if there is noncompliance with any of
the requirements.



      (4)   Location of containers for collection.  Containers for
the storage of solid waste awaiting collection shall be placed outdoors at
some easily accessible place by the owner or occupant of the premises served.
Each container set out for collection must have a landfill bag tag attached
firmly and visibly thereto.



      (5)   Nonconforming containers.  Solid waste placed in
containers not meeting city specifications or in other unacceptable
containers will not be collected.



(1999 Code, § 105.10)  (Ord. 2223, passed 8-22-2000; Ord. 2456, passed
8-9-2011; Ord. 2471, passed 4-24-2012; Ord. 2474, passed 6-12-2012)  
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.11  PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



   It is unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Unlawful use of containers.  Deposit refuse in any solid
waste containers not owned by the person without the written consent of the
owner of the containers;



   (B)   Interfere with collectors.  Interfere in any manner with
solid waste collection equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful
performance of their duties as such, whether the equipment or collectors be
those of the city, or those of any other authorized waste collection service;



   (C)   Incinerators.  The residential use of an incinerator to burn
refuse, rubbish, garbage, residential waste or landscape waste; and



   (D)   Scavenging.  Take or collect any solid waste which has been
placed out for collection on any premises, unless the person is an authorized
solid waste collector.



(1999 Code, § 105.11)  (Ord. 2456, passed 8-9-2011)   Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.12  SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED.



   The sanitary landfill facilities operated by the County Area Solid
Waste Agency are hereby designated as the official public sanitary disposal
project for the disposal of solid waste produced or originating within the
city.



(1999 Code, § 105.12)



COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE



§ 50.25  COLLECTION SERVICE.



   (A)   General provisions.  The city shall provide for the
collection of solid waste from residential premises only in a manner as
established by resolution of the Council. The city shall not provide for the
collection of hazardous materials or any solid waste not prepared for
disposal in accordance with this solid waste chapter. Bulky rubbish will be
collected by special procedures as established by resolution of the Council.
A copy of any and all procedures established by the Council shall be filed in
the office of the Clerk and shall be available for public inspection during
normal business hours. The owners or operators of commercial, industrial or
institutional premises shall provide for the collection of solid waste
produced upon the premises.



   (B)   Collection and placement.  Collection of solid waste and yard
waste shall be made from streets unless specifically approved by the Public
Works Director for alley or alternate collection pursuant to the following:



      (1)   Whenever solid waste is collected from the street or
alley, residents desiring to have solid waste collected by the city shall
cause it to be deposited upon the parking or terrace adjacent to the roadway
in front of the premises, or in the alley as prescribed by the collection
point notification from the container vendor.



      (2)   No solid waste, solid waste container or yard waste
container shall be deposited by any person upon any sidewalk, crosswalk or
roadway, or upon any alley right of way, so as to obstruct or block
pedestrian movement or vehicular traffic.



      (3)   No person shall deposit a solid waste or yard waste
container upon the parking, terrace or alley more than 12 hours before the
date designated for solid waste or yard waste collection. No person shall
allow solid waste or yard waste containers to remain on the parking, terrace
or alley for more than 12 hours after the date designated for solid waste
collections.



      (4)   All solid waste and yard waste containers shall be
stored behind the front yard building setback, except when placed on the
parking, terrace or alley on the designated date of collection.



(1999 Code, § 106.01)  (Ord. 2456, passed 8-9-2011)   Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.26  COLLECTION VEHICLES.



   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of
garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing the materials
shall be leakproof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall
be cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding and shall be
maintained in good repair.



(I.A.C. 567-104.9(455B))  (1999 Code, § 106.02)



§ 50.27  LOADING.



   Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of
any solid waste shall be loaded and moved in a manner that the contents will
not fall, leak or spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or
loss of material. Where spillage does occur, the material shall be picked up
immediately by the collector or transporter and returned to the vehicle or
container and the area properly cleaned.



(1999 Code, § 106.03) (Iowa Code §§ 321.460 and 805.8A(13)(c))



§ 50.28  FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION.



   Solid waste shall be collected from residential premises at a frequency
as determined by resolution of the Council, but not less than once each week,
and from commercial, industrial and institutional premises as frequently as
may be necessary.



(1999 Code, § 106.04)



§ 50.29  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon private
property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by
this chapter; however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units
or other residential buildings.



(1999 Code, § 106.05)



§ 50.30  COLLECTOR’S LICENSE.



   No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting,
processing or disposing of solid waste other than waste produced by that
person within the city without first obtaining from the city an annual
license in accordance with the following.



   (A)   Application.  Application for a solid waste collector’s
license shall be made to the Clerk and provide the following:



      (1)   Name and address.  The full name and address of the
applicant, and if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers
thereof;



      (2)   Equipment.  A complete and accurate listing of the
number and type of collection and transportation equipment to be used;



      (3)   Collection program.  A complete description of the
frequency, routes and method of collection and transportation to be used; and



      (4)   Disposal.  A statement as to the precise location and
method of disposal or processing facilities to be used.



   (B)   Insurance requirements.  Each applicant for a license to haul
solid waste shall submit with the application a certificate of insurance
naming the city as an additional insured, with minimum coverage in the
following amounts:



 

General liability
 
$1,000,000 combined single limit


 
$1,000,000 each occurrence


 
$2,000,000 aggregate


Automobile liability
 
$1,000,000 combined single limit


 
$1,000,000 each occurrence


Worker’s compensation
 
Iowa statutory limits



 



   (C)   License fee.  The annual license fee shall be established by
City Council resolution. Failure of the licensee to make a payment within 15
days of the beginning of each year shall result in the revocation of the
license to haul solid waste. New applicants will have their license fee
prorated on a monthly basis. Licensees terminating their service will not
receive a refund for the balance of the quarter in which they terminate their
service.



   (D)   License issued.  If the Council upon investigation finds the
application to be in order and determines that the applicant will collect,
transport, process or dispose of solid waste without hazard to the public
health or damage to the environment and in conformity with law and ordinance,
the requested license shall be issued. Each license shall be for a term of
one year from January 1 to December 31.



   (E)   License renewal.  An annual license may be renewed simply
upon payment of the required fee, provided the applicant agrees to continue
to operate in substantially the same manner as provided in the original
application and provided the applicant furnishes the Clerk with a current
listing of vehicles, equipment and facilities in use.



   (F)   License not transferable.  No license authorized by this
subchapter may be transferred to another person.



   (G)   Owner may transport.  Nothing herein is to be construed so as
to prevent the owner from transporting solid waste accumulating upon premises
owned, occupied or used by the owner, provided the refuse is disposed of
properly in an approved sanitary disposal project.



   (H)   Grading or excavation excepted.  No license or permit is
required for the removal, hauling or disposal of earth and rock material from
grading or excavation activities; however, all materials shall be conveyed in
tight vehicles, trucks or receptacles so constructed and maintained that none
of the material being transported spills upon any public right-of-way.



   (I)   Right of appeal.  In the event a licensee has a license
revoked or an applicant has a license application denied, the
licensee/applicant shall have the right to appeal the revocation/denial to
the Council by delivering a written notice of appeal to the City Clerk within
seven days of the revocation/denial. The appeal shall be scheduled for
hearing before the Council at a Committee of the Whole meeting within 30 days
of receipt of the appeal notice with a decision on the appeal to be
considered at the next Council meeting.



(1999 Code, § 106.06)  (Ord. 2271, passed 11-11-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 50.31  COLLECTION FEES.



   The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by this chapter
are declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served
and there shall be levied and collected fees therefor in accordance with the
following.



   (A)   Fees for collection.  The fees for solid waste collection and
disposal service, used or available, and for the solid waste removal flat fee
are as established by resolution of the Council.



   (B)   Payment of bills.  All fees are due and payable under the
same terms and conditions provided for payment of sewer service as contained
in § 52.091 of this code of ordinances. The provisions contained in §
52.093 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.



   (C)   Nonresident owners.  A nonresident owner of each lot or
parcel of real estate with a building located thereon and which is subject to
the solid waste collection charge shall notify the City Clerk of his or her
present address. Failure of any person to receive bills for the charges shall
not be considered an excuse for nonpayment, nor shall the failure result in
an extension of the period of time during which the net bill should have been
paid.



(1999 Code, § 106.07)  (Ord. 2456, passed 8-9-2011; Ord. 2471, passed
4-24-2012)   Penalty, see § 10.99



Editor’s note:



   For further information regarding collection fees, see Goreham vs. Des
Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449



§ 50.32  LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.



   The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof are
jointly and severally liable for fees for solid waste collection and
disposal. Fees remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon
the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County
Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes.



(Iowa Code § 384.84)  (1999 Code, § 106.08)



CHAPTER 51:  WATER SERVICE SYSTEM



Section



   51.01   Clinton Waterworks Company



§ 51.01  CLINTON WATERWORKS COMPANY.



   The city’s waterworks utility is operated by the Clinton Waterworks
Company pursuant to a franchise granted to the company in 1976.



(1999 Code, § 90.01)



Cross-reference:



   Franchises, see Table of Special Ordinances, Table I



CHAPTER 52:  SEWERS



Section



Sanitary Sewer System



   52.001   Purpose



   52.002   Definitions



   52.003   Superintendent



   52.004   Prohibited acts



   52.005   Sewer connection required



   52.006   Service outside the city



   52.007   Right of entry



   52.008   Owner’s liability limited



   52.009   Use of easements



   52.010   City construction or approval



Building Sewers and Connections



   52.025   Permit



   52.026   Connection charge



   52.027   Interceptor sewer



   52.028   Conformance to codes



   52.029   Connection requirements



   52.030   Reserved



   52.031   Sewer tap



   52.032   Inspection required



   52.033   Property owner’s responsibility



   52.034   Abatement of violations



Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG)



   52.035   Fats, oils and grease interceptors; purpose and policy



   52.036   Applicability and prohibitions



   52.037   Definitions



   52.038   Installation and maintenance requirements



   52.039   Annual inspection



   52.040   Schedule of penalties



   52.041   Judicial enforcement and remedies



Use of Public Sewers



   52.045   Reserved



   52.046   Reserved



   52.047   Prohibited discharges



   52.048   Restricted discharges



   52.049   Restricted discharges; powers



   52.050   Special facilities



   52.051   Control structures



   52.052   Testing of wastes



   52.053   Right of entry



   52.054   Report of accidental discharge of prohibited waste



On-Site Wastewater Systems



   52.065   When prohibited



   52.066   When required



   52.067   Compliance with regulations



   52.068   Permit required



   52.069   Discharge restrictions



   52.070   Maintenance of system



   52.071   Systems abandoned



   52.072   Disposal of septage



   52.073   Minimum lot area



Sewer Use Charge



   52.085   Purpose



   52.086   Application



   52.087   Definitions



   52.088   Unit cost procedure



   52.089   Unit cost determination



   52.090   Sewer use charge



   52.091   Billing for sewer service



   52.092   Lien for nonpayment



   52.092A   Disconnection of water service for nonpayment



   52.093   Lien notice



   52.093A   Suspension of Certificate of Occupancy



   52.093B   Penalty for violation of Summer Watering Program



   52.094   Sewer Revenue Fund



   52.095   Investment of funds



   52.096   Sewage monitoring devices



   52.097   Special requirement for significant industrial users



Industrial Cost Recovery



   52.110   Definitions



   52.111   Unit charges



   52.112   Levy of charges



   52.113   Payment of charges



   52.114   Industrial cost recovery unit costs



   52.115   Accounts established



   52.116   Use of Industrial Cost Recovery Account 80



   52.117   Use of Special Projects Account 20



   52.118   Measurement of strength and volume



   52.119   Significant industrial users



Sewage Pretreatment Program



   52.130   Purpose and policy



   52.131   Definitions



   52.132   General discharge prohibitions



   52.133   National categorical pretreatment standards



   52.134   Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards



   52.135   State requirements



   52.136   City’s right of revision



   52.137   Excessive discharge



   52.138   Accidental discharges



   52.139   Fees



   52.140   Wastewater discharge permits



   52.141   Reporting requirements for permittee



   52.142   Monitoring facilities



   52.143   Inspection and sampling



   52.144   Pretreatment



   52.145   Confidential information



   52.146   Residuals generated



   52.147   Wastewater discharge permit appeals



   52.148   Permit suspension



   52.149   Revocation of permit



   52.150   Procedure for revocation or other action



   52.151   Records retention



   52.152   Publication of users in significant noncompliance



 



   52.999   Penalty



SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM



§ 52.001  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the subchapter of this code of ordinances pertaining to
sanitary sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment
and disposal of sanitary sewage within the city in order to protect the
public health, safety and welfare.



(1999 Code, § 95.01)



§ 52.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BNS DIRECTOR. The Director of the Building and Neighborhood Services
Department of the city or any authorized deputy, agent, or representative.



   BOD or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.  The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a concentration
(e.g., mg/l).



   BUILDING DRAIN.  The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
building drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.



   BUILDING SEWER.  The part of the horizontal piping from the building
wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment portion
of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the drainage
of one building site.



   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the city or any authorized deputy,
agent or representative.



   COD or CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND.  The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
chemical oxidation of organic matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, as
determined in accordance with standard laboratory procedure as set out in the
latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.



   COMBINED SEWER.  A sewer originally designed and currently designated
to receive both surface water run-off and sewage.



   CUSTOMER.  Any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged
into the city’s sewer system.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage or sale of
produce, meat, fish, fowl and condemned food.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES.  The solid, liquid or gaseous wastes resulting from
any industrial or manufacturing processes, trade or business, or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, including cooling
water and the discharge from sewage pretreatment facilities.



   NATURAL OUTLET.  Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or groundwater.



   LEACHATE.  Free liquid that derives from the decomposition of wastes
or water that has come in contact with refuse from landfills.



   ON-SITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM.  All equipment and
devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment and
disposal of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other facilities
serving the equivalent of 15 persons (1,500 gpd) or less.



   OTHER WASTES.  Other substances except sewage and industrial wastes.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, municipal corporation, governmental unit or group.



   pH.  A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution expressed in
standard units.



   PROCESS WATER.  Any water used in the manufacturing, preparation or
production of goods, materials or food.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and is controlled by public authority.



   SANITARY SEWAGE.  Sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings,
factories or institutions, and free from storm, surface water and industrial
waste.



   SANITARY SEWER.  A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.



   SEWAGE.  A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with
the ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT.  Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.



   SEWAGE WORKS or SEWAGE SYSTEM.  All facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.



   SEWER.  A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.



   SEWER SERVICE CHARGES.  Any and all charges, rates or fees levied
against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of the
customers by the sewer system.



   SLUG.  Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.



   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER.  A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Water Quality Superintendent of the city or any
authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS.  The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER.  Clean water uncontaminated by industrial wastes,
other wastes or any substances which render water unclean or noxious or
impure, so as to be actually or potentially harmful or detrimental or
injurious to public health, safety or welfare, to domestic, commercial,
industrial or recreational use or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or
other aquatic life.



   WATERCOURSE.  A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.



(1999 Code, § 95.02)  (Ord. 2289, passed 4-12-2005; Ord. 2542, passed
9-27-2016)



§ 52.003  SUPERINTENDENT.



   The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and duties:



   (A)   Operation and maintenance.  Operate and maintain the city
sewage system;



   (B)   Inspection and tests.  Conduct necessary inspections and
tests to assure compliance with the provisions of this sewer chapter; and



   (C)   Records.  Maintain a complete and accurate record of all
sewers, sewage connections and manholes constructed showing the location and
grades thereof.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))  (1999 Code, § 95.03)



§ 52.004  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:



   (A)   Damage sewer system.  Maliciously, willfully or negligently
break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewer system;



(Iowa Code § 716.1)



   (B)   Downspouts.  Connect a roof downspout, exterior foundation
drain, areaway drain or other source of surface run-off or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer;



   (C)   Manholes.  Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system,
except by authority of the Superintendent;



   (D)   Objectionable wastes.  Place or deposit in any unsanitary
manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under
the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste;



   (E)   Septic tanks.  Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage except as provided in these chapters; and



(Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(f))



   (F)   Untreated discharge.  Discharge to any natural outlet within
the city, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(f))



(1999 Code, § 95.04)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.005  SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED.



   The owner of any building or property which is located within the city,
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city and from which sewage is
discharged is required to connect to a public sewer at the owner’s expense
within 90 days after service of official notice to do so, provided that the
public sewer is reasonably available for connection. A property shall be
considered reasonably available for connection if the building sewer
discharge is within 200 feet of connection to the city sanitary sewer system
by private gravity sewer, or within 200 feet of connection to the city
sanitary sewer system by private pressurized sewer. Additionally, if the
building or property is used for human occupancy, employment or recreation,
the owner is required to install at the same time toilet facilities in
accordance with the State Building Code and other ordinances of the city. The
official notice shall be given by the Council or its designated agent and
shall be served upon the owner personally or by certified mail. In the event
a building or property owner fails to connect to a public sewer in compliance
with a notice given under this section, the city may undertake to have the
connection made and shall assess the cost thereof to the property owner. The
assessment shall be collected with and in the same manner as general property
taxes. This section shall not apply to pre-existing septic systems unless
application is made for a permit for repair or replacement of said system.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(f))  (1999 Code, § 95.05)  (Ord. 2542, passed
9-27-2016)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.006  SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY.



   The owners of property outside the corporate limits of the city so
situated that it may be served by the city sewer system may apply to the
Council for permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and
conditions stipulated by resolution of the Council.



(Iowa Code §§ 364.4(2), 364.4(3))  (1999 Code, § 95.06)



§ 52.007  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this sewer chapter. The
Superintendent or representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or
other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.



(1999 Code, § 95.07)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.008  OWNER’S LIABILITY LIMITED.



   While performing the necessary work on private property, the
Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the owner or occupant
and the owner or occupant shall be held harmless for injury or death to city
employees and the city shall indemnify the owner or occupant against loss or
damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the owner or
occupant and growing out of any gauging and sampling operation, except as
such may be caused by negligence or failure of the owner or occupant to
maintain safe conditions.



(1999 Code, § 95.08)



§ 52.009  USE OF EASEMENTS.



   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.



(1999 Code, § 95.09)



§ 52.010  CITY CONSTRUCTION OR APPROVAL.



   No sanitary or storm sewers shall be constructed in the city (except
house or building service sewers) except by the city or by others in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city and subject to
inspection during construction by engineers and employees of the city. No
sewers shall be considered to be a part of the public sewer system unless
accepted by resolution of the Council. The size, slope, alignment, material
of construction, methods to be used in excavation, placing of pipe, jointing,
testing, backfilling and other work connected with the construction of sewers
shall conform to the requirements of the city.



(1999 Code, § 95.10)  Penalty, see § 52.999



BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS



§ 52.025  PERMIT.



   Before any person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof a
written permit must be obtained from the city. The application for the permit
shall set forth the location and description of the property to be connected
with the sewer system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent. The permit shall require that construction and
connection of the building sewer to the public sewer be completed within 60
days after the issuance of the permit, except that when a property owner
makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the owner’s control
or peculiar hardship, the time period is inequitable or unfair, an extension
of time within which to comply with the provisions herein may be granted. Any
sewer connection permit may be revoked at any time for a violation of these
chapters. A connection permit shall not be issued to any person except a
licensed sewer and drain layer.



(1999 Code, § 96.01)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.026  CONNECTION CHARGE.



   If the property described in the permit application has not been
previously assessed for the cost of construction of the sewer to which
connection is made, a connection charge may be collected before the permit is
issued. The connection charge shall be as determined by the Council, taking
into consideration the cost of the sewer line providing service, the benefits
to the user and any special circumstances existing which reasonably affect
the determination of an equitable charge to the user.



(1999 Code, § 96.02)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.027  INTERCEPTOR SEWER.



   (A)   An interceptor sewer is designated to be established in the
following location:



      Commencing at the location of the city disposal plant located in
the northwest quarter of Section 23, Township 81 North, Range 6 East of the
5th P.M., thence a 36-inch sewer in a northwesterly and northerly direction
to the intersection of Harrison Drive and South Twenty-First Street; thence a
30-inch sewer in South Twenty-First Street to Manufacturing Drive; thence a
27-inch sewer in Manufacturing Drive to Thirteenth Avenue South to South
Fourteenth Street; thence a 24-inch sewer in Thirteenth Avenue South to South
Twelfth Street; thence a 24-inch sewer in South Twelfth Street to Lincoln
Boulevard; thence a 24-inch sewer in Lincoln Boulevard to Eighth Avenue South.



   (B)   No permit shall be issued for the connection with the
interceptor sewer until a fee in the amount of $200 is first paid to the
city. No connection shall be made with the interceptor sewer by any person
except a qualified, registered and licensed sewer and drain layer.



(1999 Code, § 96.03)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.028  CONFORMANCE TO CODES.



   The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the method to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the
requirements of Division 4, Plumbing Rules and Regulations, of the State
Building Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the
absence of Code provisions, or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of Water Pollution Control
Federation (W.P.C.F.) Manual of Practice No. 9 and applicable American
Society for Testing and Materials (A.S.T.M.) standards shall apply.



(1999 Code, § 96.04)  (Ord. 2542, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.029  CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The installation of the building sewer and connection to the
public sewer shall be made by a sewer and drain layer licensed by the city.



   (B)   The connection shall be made under the direct supervision of
the City Engineer and in accordance with the following.



      (1)   Old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and
test conducted by the owner and observed by the City Engineer, to meet all
requirements of this subchapter.



      (2)   Separate building sewers. A separate and independent
building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an
adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. In those cases the building sewer
from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer, provided that the city shall require a
written agreement between the property owners as to the share of the costs of
construction and maintenance which each shall contribute.



      (3)   Connection. The connection of the building sewer into
the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of Division 4, Plumbing
Rules and Regulations, of the State Building Code, applicable rules and
regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in W.P.C.F. Manual of
Practice No. 9 and the A.S.T.M. standards. All connections shall be made
gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the City Engineer or a representative of the
City Engineer before installation.



      (4)   Depth. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth
of cover above the sewer shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost.



      (5)   Sewage lifts. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by the drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and
discharged to the building sewer.



(1999 Code, § 96.05)  (Ord. 2542, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.030  RESERVED.



§ 52.031  SEWER TAP.



   Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at
the “Y” branch, if the branch is available at a suitable location. If no
properly located “Y” branch is available, a “Y” saddle shall be
installed at the location specified by the City Engineer. The public sewer
shall be tapped with a tapping machine and a saddle appropriate to the type
of public sewer shall be glued and attached with stainless steel clamps to
the sewer. At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a
manhole unless special written permission is received from the City Engineer
and in accordance with the City Engineer’s direction if the connection is
approved.



(1999 Code, § 96.07)  (Ord. 2542, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.032  INSPECTION REQUIRED.



   All connections with the sanitary sewer system before being covered
shall be inspected and approved, in writing, by the City Engineer. As soon as
all pipe work from the public sewer to inside the building has been
completed, and before any backfilling is done, the City Engineer shall be
notified and the City Engineer shall inspect and test the work as to
workmanship and material; no sewer pipe laid underground shall be covered or
trenches filled until after the sewer has been so inspected and approved. If
the City Engineer refuses to approve the work, the plumber or owner must
proceed immediately to correct the work.



(1999 Code, § 96.08)  (Ord. 2542, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.033  PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.



   All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



(1999 Code, § 96.09)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.034  ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS.



   Construction or maintenance of building sewer lines whether located
upon the private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which
construction or maintenance is in violation of any of the requirements of
this subchapter, shall be corrected, at the owner’s expense, within 30 days
after date of official notice from the City Engineer of the violation. If not
made within the time the City Engineer shall, in addition to the other
penalties herein provided, have the right to finish and correct the work and
assess the cost thereof to the property owner. The assessment shall be
collected with and in the same manner as general property taxes.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(3))  (1999 Code, § 96.10)  (Ord. 2542, passed
9-27-2016)  Penalty, see § 52.999



FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG)



§ 52.035  FATS, OILS AND GREASE INTERCEPTORS; PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   This sets forth uniform requirements for users of the City of Clinton
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) to capture and dispose of fats, oils
and grease (FOG) and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws, including the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C., §§ 1251 et seq.;
and the General Pretreatment Regulations, Title 40 C.F.R. Part 403. The
objectives of this subchapter are:



   (A)   To prevent the introduction of FOG into the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works that will interfere with its operation;



   (B)   To prevent the introduction of FOG into the Publicly Owned
Treatment Works that could pass through the Publicly Owned Treatment Works,
inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible
with the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;



   (C)   To prevent sanitary sewer overflow (SSO), where sewer water
flows out of a manhole cover and along the ground. These overflows can then
contaminate the ground, local water bodies and any property that the sewerage
comes into contact with.



   (D)   To promote the reuse and recycling of waste grease (FOG) from
the Publicly Owned Treatment Works;



   (E)   To enable the city to comply with federal, state and local
pollutant discharge limits.



(Ord. 2473, passed 6-12-2012)



§ 52.036  APPLICABILITY AND PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   This subchapter shall apply to all non-domestic users of the
Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW), as defined in § 52.037.



   (B)   Grease interceptors shall not be required for residential
users.



   (C)   The subchapter shall apply to both new and existing facilities
generating fats, oils, or greases as a result of food manufacturing,
processing, preparation, or food service.  The facilities shall install,
use, and maintain appropriate grease interceptors as required in § 52.038.
These facilities include but are not limited to restaurants, food
manufacturers, food processors, commercial kitchens, hospitals, schools,
hotels and motels, prisons, nursing homes, care facilities, and any other
facility preparing, serving, or otherwise making any foodstuff available for
consumption.



   (D)   No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct
or indirect discharge of any fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable
origin into the POTW system in such amounts as to cause interference with the
collection and treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass through
the treatment works into the environment.



(Ord. 2473, passed 6-12-2012)



§ 52.037  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



   BOD.  The value of the five-day test for Biochemical Oxygen Demand, as
described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water & Wastewater."



   COD.  The value of the test for Chemical Oxygen Demand, as described
in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water &
Wastewater."



   EPA.  The United States Environmental Protection Agency.



   FATS, OILS, AND GREASES (FOG).  Organic polar compounds derived from
animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride
molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical
test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to
time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases."  A wide
range of food preparation activities including, but not limited to the
following, can generate fats, oils and grease:  cooking by frying, baking,
grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling, boiling, blanching,
roasting, toasting, poaching, infrared heating, searing, barbequing or other
food preparation activity that produces a food product in or on receptacles
that require washing and/or cleaning.



   FOG DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A grease interceptor that reduces non-petroleum
fats, oils, and grease (FOG) in effluent by separation, and mass and volume
reduction.



   GENERATOR.  Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/grease
interceptor, or whose act or process produces a grease trap waste.



   GREASE INTERCEPTOR.  An appurtenance or appliance that is installed in
a sanitary drainage system to intercept non-petroleum fats, oils and grease
(FOG) from a wastewater. There are two types of grease interceptors: gravity
grease interceptors and hydromechanical grease interceptors.



   GREASE INTERCEPTOR, GRAVITY.



      GRAVITY GREASE INTERCEPTOR.  A plumbing appurtenance or
appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept
non-petroleum fats, oils, and greases (FOG) from a wastewater discharge and
is identified by volume, 30-minute retention time,  baffle(s), a minimum of
two compartments, a minimum total volume of 300 gallons, and gravity
separation. These interceptors are designed by a registered professional
engineer. Gravity grease interceptors are generally installed outside.



   GREASE INTERCEPTOR, HYDROMECHANICAL. 



      HYDROMECHANICAL GREASE INTERCEPTOR.  A plumbing appurtenance or
appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept
non-petroleum fats, oils, and grease (FOG) from a wastewater discharge and is
identified by flow rate, and separation and retention efficiency. The design
incorporates air entrainment, hydro mechanical separation, interior baffling,
and/or barriers in combination or separately, and an external flow control,
with air intake (vent).



   GREASE REMOVAL DEVICE (GRD). Any hydromechanical grease interceptor
that automatically, mechanically removes non-petroleum fats, oils and grease
(FOG) from the interceptor, the control of which are either automatic or
manually initiated.



   GREASE WASTE.  Material collected in and from a grease interceptor in
the sanitary sewer service line of a commercial, institutional, or industrial
food service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting from
de-watering processes.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE.  The introduction of pollutants into
a POTW from any non-domestic source.



   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal,
or is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit.



   pH.  The measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water and is
defined as the negative logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration.



   POTW or PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS.  A treatment works which is
owned by a state or municipality as defined by section 502(4) of the Clean
Water Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the
storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and
other conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW Treatment Plant. The term
also means the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which
has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such
a treatment works. For purposes of this subchapter, the terms "sanitary sewer
system" and "POTW" may be used interchangeably.



   TRANSPORTER.  A person who is registered with and authorized by the
TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic septage,
chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance
with current regulations.



   TSS. The value of the test for Total Suspended Solids, as described in
the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water &
Wastewater."



   USER.  Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional
limits of the city, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or
discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute such
wastewater from mobile sources.



(Ord. 2473, passed 6-12-2012)



§ 52.038  INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Installations.



      (1)   All establishments subject to this chapter shall have a
grease interceptor installed and in fully operational condition no later than
June 30, 2020. Any establishment that demonstrates timely compliance with
this section shall be entitled to a one-time rebate of 50% of the total cost
of installation of the grease interceptor, with the maximum rebate payment
not to exceed $1,500. This rebate would only be available to businesses that
have installed a compliant grease interceptor between July 1, 2018 and June
30, 2019.  No rebates issued pursuant to this section shall be approved or
issued for grease interceptors installed after June 30, 2019. However, if an
establishment begins installation of a compliant interceptor before June 30,
2019, a rebate shall be approved if the installation of such interceptor is
completed within 30 days of commencement of installation, even if such
installation is not complete until after June 30, 2019.



      (2)   New facilities. Food processing or food service
facilities which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities
which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility, where
such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design, install,
operate and maintain a grease interceptor in accordance with locally adopted
plumbing codes or other applicable ordinances. Grease interceptors shall be
installed and inspected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



      (3)   Existing facilities. Existing grease interceptors must
be operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations and in accordance with these Model Standards, unless
specified in writing and approved by the POTW.



      (4)   All grease interceptor waste shall be properly disposed
of at a facility in accordance with federal, state, or local regulation.



   (B)   Cleaning and maintenance.



      (1)   Grease interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient
operating condition at all times.



      (2)   Each grease interceptor when cleaned shall be fully
evacuated.



   (C)   Self-cleaning; hydro-mechanical grease interceptors only.



      (1)   Grease interceptor self-cleaning operators must receive
approval from the POTW to remove grease from their own grease
hydro-mechanical grease interceptors. The following conditions shall apply:



         (a)   The grease interceptor is no more than 100 GPM
size;



         (b)   Proper on-site material disposal methods are
implemented (e.g. absorb liquid into solid form and dispose into trash);



         (c)   The local solid waste authority allows such
practices;



         (d)   Grease waste is placed in a leak proof, sealable
container(s) located on the premises and in an area for the transporter to
pump-out; and



         (e)   Detailed records on these activities are
maintained.



      (2)   Grease interceptor self-cleaning operators must submit a
completed self-cleaning request to the POTW for approval. The written request
shall include the following information:



         (a)   Business name and street address;



         (b)   Grease interceptor operator name, title, and phone
number;



         (c)   Description of maintenance frequency, method of
disposal, method of cleaning and size (in gallons) of the grease interceptor;
and



         (d)   Signed statement that the operator will maintain
records of waste disposal and produce them for compliance inspections.



      (3)   Self-cleaners must adhere to all the requirements;
procedures and detailed record keeping outlined in their approved
application, to ensure compliance with this subchapter. A maintenance log
shall be kept by self-cleaning operators that indicates, at a minimum, the
following information:



         (a)    Date the grease trap/interceptor was serviced;



         (b)   Name of the person or company servicing the grease
trap/interceptor;



         (c)   Waste disposal method used;



         (d)   Gallons of grease removed and disposed of;



         (e)   Waste oil added to grease interceptor waste; and



         (f)   Signature of the operator after each cleaning that
certifies that all grease was removed, disposed of properly, grease
trap/interceptor was thoroughly cleaned, and that all parts were replaced and
in operable condition.



      (4)   Violations incurred by grease interceptors self-cleaners
will be subject to enforcement action including fines and/or removal from the
self-cleaner program.



   (D)   Cleaning schedules.



      (1)   Grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as
necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to
impair the efficiency of the grease interceptor; to ensure the discharge is
in compliance with local discharge limits; and to ensure no visible grease is
observed in discharge.



      (2)   Grease interceptors shall be completely evacuated a
minimum of every 30 days, or more frequently when:



         (a)   Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height
of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the
device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials,
sediment, oils or greases; or



         (b)   If there is a history of non-compliance.



      (3)   Any person who owns or operates a grease interceptor may
submit to the POTW a request in writing for an exception to the 30 day
cleaning frequency of their grease interceptor. The POTW may grant an
extension for required cleaning frequency and establish a specific cleaning
schedule on a case-by-case basis when less than 25% of the wetted height of
the grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the
invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or
greases.



   (E)   Manifest requirements.



      (1)   Each pump-out of a grease interceptor must be
accompanied by a manifest to be used for record keeping purposes.



      (2)   Persons who generate, collect and transport grease waste
shall maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such
records shall be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall include:



         (a)   Name, address, telephone, and registration number
of transporter;



         (b)   Name, signature, address, and phone number of the
person who generated the waste and the date collected;



         (c)   Type and amount(s) of waste collected or
transported;



         (d)   Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s)
collecting, transporting, and depositing the waste;



         (e)   Date and place where the waste was deposited;



         (f)   Identification (permit or site registration
number, location, and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited;



         (g)   Name and signature of facility on-site
representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste
received;



         (h)   The volume of the grease waste received; and



         (i)   A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist
transporters, waste generators, and regulating authorities in tracking the
volume of grease transported.



      (3)   Manifests shall be divided into five parts and records
shall be maintained as follows.



         (a)   One part of the manifest shall have the generator
and transporter information completed and be given to the generator at the
time of waste pickup.



         (b)   The remaining four parts of the manifest shall
have all required information completely filled out and signed by the
appropriate party before distribution of the manifest.



         (c)   One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving
facility.



         (d)   One part shall go to the transporter, who shall
retain a copy of all manifests showing the collection and disposition of
waste.



         (e)   One copy of the manifest shall be returned by the
transporter to the person who generated the wastes within 15 days after the
waste is received at the disposal or processing facility.



         (f)   One part of the manifest shall go to the local
authority.



         (g)   Copies of manifests returned to the waste
generator shall be retained for five years and be readily available for
review by the POTW.



   (F)   Bioremediation.  Bioremediation media shall only be used with
approved FOG Disposal Systems. The generator must submit a request to utilize
bioremediation media and receive written permission from the POTW before
implementation of bioremediation media. The request must demonstrate that the
generator has an appropriate FOG system in place.



   (G)   Prohibited practices.  No person shall introduce, or cause,
permit, or suffer the introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier
into a grease interceptor. Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are
materials which allow the grease to pass from the grease interceptor into the
collection system, and include but are not limited to enzymes, soap, diesel,
kerosene, and other solvents.



   (H)   Compliance monitoring.



      (1)   Right of entry. The POTW shall have the right to enter
the premises of any user or potential user to determine whether the user is
complying with all requirements of this chapter and any wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the POTW ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.



         (a)   Where a user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the POTW will be permitted to
enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.



         (b)   The POTW shall have the right to set up on the
user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.



         (c)   The POTW may require the user to install
monitoring equipment as necessary such as FOG sensing and alarm devices. The
facility's monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense.



         (d)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and
easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the POTW and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.



         (e)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the POTW access to
the user's premises shall be a violation of this subchapter.



      (2)   Search warrants. If the POTW has been refused access to
a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, then the POTW may seek issuance of a search warrant.



(Ord. 2473, passed 6-12-2012; Ord. 2587, passed 7-24-2018)



§ 52.039  ANNUAL INSPECTION.



   All establishments subject to the provisions of this chapter shall
permit the POTW to conduct an inspection of its grease interceptor a minimum
of once every 12 months. The cost of this annual inspection is $40 and is
payable by the owner of the food service establishment. In the event the POTW
determines that the interceptor is in violation of this chapter, the food
service establishment and/or its owner shall be subject to more frequent
inspections until such time as the violations noted at the time of initial
inspection are remedied in full. Inspections under such circumstances shall
not occur more than once every four weeks. The cost of each and every
re-inspection is $40 and is payable by the owner of the food service
establishment.



(Ord. 2587, passed 7-24-2018)



§ 52.040  SCHEDULE OF PENALTIES.



   (A)   If the POTW determines that a generator is responsible for a
blockage of a collection system line, the generator shall owe a civil penalty
of $500 for the first violation, $750 for a second violation, and $1,000 for
the third violation within a two-year period. Continuous violations may
result in termination of services.



   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this subchapter
shall be subject to a written warning for the first violation, a $500 civil
penalty for the second violation, a $750 civil penalty for the third
violation, and a $1,000 civil penalty for the fourth violation within a
two-year period. Consistent violations may result in termination of service
as per § 52.041.



   (C)   Any person or entity who fails to comply with § 52.038(A)(1)
by June 30, 2020 shall be subject to a penalty of $50 for each day of
non-compliance. After July 31, 2020, daily fines assessed under this division
shall cease and any person or entity not in compliance with § 52.038(A)(1)
shall be subject to termination of service pursuant to § 52.041, in addition
to any other penalties provided for in this chapter, the Iowa Code, or any
applicable federal laws or regulations.



(Ord. 2473, passed 6-12-2012; Ord. 2587, passed 7-24-2018)



§ 52.041  JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.



   Injunctive relief. When the POTW finds that a user has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the POTW may petition the District Court for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The POTW may
also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable
relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental
remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against a user.



(Ord. 2473, passed 6-12-2012; Ord. 2587, passed 7-24-2018)



USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS



§ 52.045  RESERVED.



§ 52.046  RESERVED.



§ 52.047  PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.



   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or
indirectly, any of the following described substances to any public sewers:



   (A)   Flammable or explosive material.  Any gasoline, benzene,
naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;



   (B)   Solid or viscous substances.  Solid or viscous substances,
either whole or ground, in quantities or of the size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
disposable diapers, glass grinding or polishing wastes, stone cutting or
polishing wastes, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, sanitary napkins, paper dishes, cups, milk containers,
other paper products, beer or distillery slops, residues, chemical or point
residues, cannery wastes and bulk solids;



   (C)   Excessive BOD, solids or flow.



      (1)   Any waters or wastes having:



         (a)   A five day biochemical oxygen demand greater than
300 parts per million by weight;



         (b)   Containing more than 350 parts per million by
weight of suspended solids; or



         (c)   Having an average daily flow greater than 2% of
the average sewage flow of the city, shall be subject to the review of the
Superintendent.



      (2)   Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent,
the owner shall provide, at the owner’s expense, the preliminary treatment
as may be necessary to:



         (a)   Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts
per million by weight;



         (b)   Reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per
million by weight; or



         (c)   Control the quantities and rates of discharge of
waters or wastes.



      (3)   Plans, specifications and any other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be
submitted for the approval of the Superintendent and no construction of the
facilities shall be commenced until the approvals are obtained in writing;



   (D)   Noxious or malodorous gases.  Any noxious or malodorous
liquid, gas or other substance which either singly or by interaction with
other wastes is sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or
is sufficient to prevent entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair;
and



   (E)   Excessive ammonia.  Any waters or wastes having an ammonia
concentration of greater than 50 mg/l shall be subject to the review of the
Superintendent. Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the
owner shall provide, at the owner’s expense, the preliminary treatment as
may be necessary to reduce the ammonia concentrations to no greater than 25
mg/l. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval
of the Superintendent and no construction of the facilities shall be
commenced until the approvals are obtained in writing.



(1999 Code, § 97.03)  (Ord. 2289, passed 4-12-2005)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.048  RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the
following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears
likely in the opinion of the Superintendent that the wastes can harm either
the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or
constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to factors such as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the
sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent
factors.



   (B)   The substances restricted are:



      (1)   High temperature.  Any liquid or vapor having a
temperature higher than 65°C (150°F);



      (2)   Fat, oil, grease.  Any water or waste containing fats,
wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 150 mg/l;



      (3)   Viscous substances.  Water or wastes containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F
and 150°F (0° to 65°C);



      (4)   Acids.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid
iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or
not;



      (5)   Toxic or objectionable wastes. Any waters or wastes
containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to deteriorate
any public sewer, injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create
any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including,
but not limited to, the following list in average or maximum concentrations
established by categorical pretreatment standards, or an industrial waste
discharge permit: arsenic, cadmium, chromium, copper, cyanide, lead, mercury,
molybdenum, nickel, selenium, silver, zinc.



      (6)   Odor or taste.  Any waters or wastes containing phenols
or other taste-producing or odor-producing substances which constitute a
nuisance or hazard to the structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage
works, or which prevent sewage treatment which meets the requirements of the
state and federal government and any other public agency with proper
authority to regulate the discharge from the sewage treatment plant;



      (7)   Unusual wastes.  Materials which exert or cause:



         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids
(such as, but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues)
or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate);



         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited
to dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions);



         (c)   Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works; and



         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes
constituting “slugs” as defined herein.



      (8)   Damaging substances.  Any waters, wastes, materials or
substances which react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release
noxious gases, develop color of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids
in objectionable concentration or create any other condition deleterious to
structures and treatment processes.



      (9)   Maximum allowable industrial loading (MAIL) limits. The
maximum allowable industrial loading (MAIL) limits for the following
discharges shall be:



 


Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)                             
                                                   
             





Monthly average
 
18,600 lbs/day


Daily maximum
 
33,100 lbs/day



Total Suspended Solids



Monthly average
 
19,930 lbs/day


Daily maximum
 
77,000 lbs/day



Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen



Monthly average
 
2,700 lbs/day


Daily maximum
 
3,900 lbs/day




 



      (10)   pH of discharge. Any water or wastes having a pH lower
than 5.0 or greater than 10 having any other corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to the public sewer or structures, equipment, and
personnel of the water pollution control facilities, or operation thereof.



   (C)   All discharges shall be in compliance with prohibited
discharge and waste limitation requirements of the NPDES permit and any other
prohibitions or limitations mandated by state or federal regulations.



(1999 Code, § 97.04)  (Ord. 2396, passed 12-18-2008; Ord. 2443, passed
4-26-2011; Ord. 2542, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.049  RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; POWERS.



   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged directly or indirectly to the public sewers, which waters contain
the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 52.048 and
which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Superintendent may:



   (A)   Rejection.  Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from
the public sewage system;



   (B)   Pretreatment.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable
condition for discharge to the public sewers;



   (C)   Controls imposed.  Require control over the quantities and
rates of discharge; and/or



   (D)   Special charges.  Require payment to cover the added cost of
handling and treating the wastes.



(1999 Code, § 97.05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.050  SPECIAL FACILITIES.



   If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. Where preliminary
treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.



(1999 Code, § 97.06)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.051  CONTROL STRUCTURES.



   When required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
structure, together with the necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. The structure and equipment, when required, shall be constructed at
the owner’s expense in accordance with plans approved by the city and shall
be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.



(1999 Code, § 97.07)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.052  TESTING OF WASTES.



   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this sewer chapter shall be
determined in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136, Guidelines Establishing
Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants, and shall be determined at the
control structure provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control
structure. In the event that no special structure has been required, the
control structure shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in
the public sewer from the point at which the building sewer is connected.
Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the
effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence
of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally,
but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour
composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab
samples).



(1999 Code, § 97.08)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.053  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The city may conduct tests as are necessary to enforce this sewer
chapter and employees of the city may enter upon any property for the purpose
of taking samples, obtaining information or conducting surveys or
investigations relating to enforcement. Entry shall be made during operating
hours unless circumstances require otherwise. In all cases where tests are
conducted by the city for the purpose of checking to determine if a
previously found violation of these chapters has been corrected, the cost of
the tests shall be charged to the customer and added to the customer’s
sewer charge. In those cases where the city determines that the nature or
volume of a particular customer’s sewage requires more frequent than normal
testing, the city may charge the customer for the tests, after giving the
customer ten days’ written notice of its intention to do so, and the cost
thereof shall be added to the customer’s sewer charge. In any case where
industrial wastes are discharged to a public sewer, the city may require the
customer, at the customer’s own expense, to test discharges on a regular
basis and to report the test results to the Council within a reasonable time.
All tests shall be as ordered by the city and shall be conducted by qualified
personnel and in accordance with the standards set out in this subchapter.
The city shall also be reimbursed for all inspections made, all testing costs
and readings required by city personnel. All meters used by an industry to
determine discharge volume and content shall be certified annually by an
independent authority with the Superintendent to be notified thereof. Each
industrial customer shall further notify the Superintendent of its sampling
schedule and obtain the Superintendent’s approval thereto.



(1999 Code, § 97.09)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.054  REPORT OF ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE OF PROHIBITED WASTE.



   Accidental discharges of prohibited waste into the sewage works,
directly or through another disposal system, or to any place from which the
waste may enter the sewage works, shall be reported to the Superintendent by
the persons responsible for the discharge, or by the owner or occupant of the
premises where the discharge occurred, immediately upon obtaining knowledge
of the fact of the discharge.



(1999 Code, § 97.10)  Penalty, see § 52.999



ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS



§ 52.065  WHEN PROHIBITED.



   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, it is unlawful to
construct or maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(f))  (1999 Code, § 98.01)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.066  WHEN REQUIRED.



   When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§ 52.005, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are employed
shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system complying with the provisions of this subchapter.



(I.A.C. 567-69.1(3))  (1999 Code, § 98.02)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.067  COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.



   The type, capacity, location and layout of a private on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system shall comply with the specifications and
requirements set forth by the I.A.C. 567, Chapter 69, and with additional
requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the County Board of
Health.



(I.A.C. 567-69.1(3), 567-69.1(4))  (1999 Code, § 98.03)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.068  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of
Health.



(1999 Code, § 98.04)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.069  DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS.



   It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any ditch,
stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the
surface of the ground.



(I.A.C. 567-69.1(3))  (1999 Code, § 98.05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.070  MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.



   The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall
operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at no
expense to the city.



(1999 Code, § 98.06)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.071  SYSTEMS ABANDONED.



   At the time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by
an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in §
52.005, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this sewer chapter and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(f))  (1999 Code, § 98.07)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.072  DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE.



   No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site treatment system at
any location except an approved disposal site.



(1999 Code, § 98.08)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.073  MINIMUM LOT AREA.



   No on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system employing
sub-surface soil absorption facilities shall be constructed where the area of
the lot is less than two acres per dwelling unit, unless the owner presents
evidence to the Council demonstrating that special conditions exist and which
assures the system will meet the minimum standards of the state. This
restriction shall only apply to lots or parcels created after the effective
date of this subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 98.09)  (Ord. 2116, passed 5-23-2000)  Penalty, see § 52.999



SEWER USE CHARGE



§ 52.085  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to recover from users of the
sewage works and facilities, on an equitable basis, the share of the sewage
works and facilities’ costs attributable to the users, and to provide funds
for the operation and maintenance, debt service, replacement and improvements
of the sewage works and facilities.



(1999 Code, § 99.01)



§ 52.086  APPLICATION.



   The fees, rates and charges for using the city sewage works and
facilities shall be upon the conditions and in the amounts set forth in this
subchapter, except where this subchapter is declared inapplicable for a
particular user by a written contract providing for alternative charges
between the user and the city.



(1999 Code, § 99.02)



§ 52.087  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BILLABLE FLOW.  The total number of gallons utilized to determine the
unit cost for billing for sewage works and facilities services.



   CAPITAL COSTS.  All reasonable and necessary costs and expenses
incurred by the city in planning, designing, financing and constructing the
sewage works and facilities, including but not limited to costs and expenses
for obtaining necessary permits, licenses, approval and grants for design and
construction, fees for legal and consulting services and acquisition.



   COMMERCIAL USER.  All users of the system classified as industrial
users in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987, U.S. Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under Divisions C, F, G,
H and K and under Divisions A, B, D, E and I, but who are excluded from the
definition for the purposes of this subchapter because they discharge
primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences,
except that the classification does not include exempted users who are
otherwise classified in this subchapter as domestic users, governmental users
or institutional users.



   CONTRACT USER.  Any user who has a written contract with the city to
use the sewage works and facilities.



   DEBT SERVICE.  The principal and interest necessary to pay bonded
indebtedness.



   DOMESTIC USER.  Those establishments of which its related occupations,
if any, are usually considered as domestic service and whose discharge
consists solely of sanitary wastes.



   FLOW.  The quantity of billable flow expressed in gallons or cubic
feet per 24 hours.



   GENERAL MUNICIPAL FLOW.  The total sewage flow discharged to the
sewage works and facilities, minus the flows from industrial users, other
municipalities and contract users. GENERAL MUNICIPAL FLOW includes flow from
domestic users, commercial users, institutional users and governmental users.
GENERAL MUNICIPAL FLOW, based on the design of the sewage treatment
facilities, is further defined as flows containing five-day BOD
concentrations no greater than 212 mg/l and suspended solids and
concentrations no greater that 210 mg/l.



   GENERAL MUNICIPAL USER.



      (1)     Any user discharging sewage to the general municipal
flow other than industrial users, municipalities and other contract users.
This category of user includes as subcategories:



         (a)   Domestic users; and



         (b)   Commercial users (with representative users, but
not limited to):



            1.   Class 1.  Domestic strength taverns and
private clubs without kitchens;



            2.   Class 2.  Bakeries, taverns and private
clubs with kitchens, Laundromats, car washes;



            3.   Class 3.  Any establishment that otherwise
qualifies as a Class 4 but which establishment has as “Grease Interceptor
Installed” pursuant to §§ 52.035 through 52.041 (Fats, Oils and Grease
(FOG));



            4.   Class 4.  Restaurants, butcher shops,
grocery or convenience stores with pizza preparation or delicatessens,
veterinary clinics and animal kennels, dry cleaners, industrial and
commercial laundries.



         (c)   The billing factor times the Class 1 rate for each
commercial customer class shall be:



            Class 1      1.0



            Class 2      1.3



            Class 3      1.557



            Class 4      1.7



      (2)   A commercial user may receive separate billing for
domestic classified use from within their commercial establishment. Said
separation shall be accomplished by the installation of a second water meter
downstream of the primary meter which shall record only that water usage
which may be classified as domestic use. The installation shall be inspected
by the Public Works Director, or designee, for compliance and certification
before use. DOMESTIC USE shall mean use from restroom facilities, ice makers,
soft drink dispensers, water station or other similar areas approved by the
Public Works Director, or designee, and shall not include any usage from any
food prep, kitchen or dishwashing area or station that would add food
particles, food disposal and waste, or FOG (fats, oils and grease) to the
waste stream.



   GOVERNMENTAL USER.  Includes those establishments whose function is
the administration and/or execution of governmental programs as well as the
office of executives, legislative bodies and agencies which provide general
support services for government.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   Any nongovernmental user of the sewage works and
facilities identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987,
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the
following divisions:



         (a)   Agriculture, forestry and fishing (Div. A);



         (b)   Mining (Div. B);



         (c)   Manufacturing (Div. D);



         (d)   Transportation, communication, electric, gas and
sanitary services (Div. E); and



         (e)   Services (Div. I).



      (2)   A user in the divisions listed may be excluded and
treated as a commercial user if the Council determines it will primarily
introduce domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. For
industrial users with sewage containing BOD and suspended solids
concentrations less than the concentrations as defined for general municipal
flow, charges shall be based on concentrations as defined for general
municipal flow.



   INSTITUTIONAL USER.  Those establishments engaged in activities of a
noneconomic nature, frequently being the performance of services for the
general public (health, educational, social), and not classified as a
governmental or commercial user in this subchapter.



   LOAD.  Quantities of sewage characteristics such as BOD, SS or other
constituents as expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) or pounds per 24
hours.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any industrial user who discharges
sewage which constitutes greater than 10% of the design flow or design
pollutant loading of the sewage treatment plant.



   USER.  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity, whether
municipal or otherwise, discharging sewage into the sewage works and
facilities.



(1999 Code, § 99.03)  (Ord. 2289, passed 4-12-2005; Ord. 2440, passed
2-22-2011; Ord. 2476, passed 6-26-2012; Ord. 2602, passed 2-12-2019)



§ 52.088  UNIT COST PROCEDURE.



   The Council shall annually determine and fix the unit costs for use of
the sewage works and facilities on the basis of flow and determine surcharge
unit costs for BOD, SS and any other pollutant, taking into consideration the
cost of treatment of sewage, and may increase or decrease the unit cost as
often and in amounts as may reasonably be required to accomplish the purposes
of this subchapter. The cost to be fixed by the Council shall be determined
and allocated in each of the following categories:



   (A)   Category A.  Includes debt service for bond issues for
existing and proposed sewage works and facilities and any desired or required
coverage for debt service; and



   (B)   Category B.  Includes operation and maintenance of existing
and proposed sewage works and facilities.



(1999 Code, § 99.04)



§ 52.089  UNIT COST DETERMINATION.



   (A)   (1)   The unit cost for users of the sewage works and
facilities shall be determined by adding the total annual cost of Categories
A and B and dividing by billable flow to determine a unit charge per 1,000
gallons of billable flow.



      (2)   Billable flow will be determined annually by the sum of
the following:



         (a)   Measured industrial flow discharged to the sewer
system;



         (b)   Flow discharged to sewer system as determined by
metered water, minus metered water to measured industries;



         (c)   Flow discharged to sewer system as determined by
meters or estimates of well water supplies, minus well water from measured
industries.



      (3)   The formula for this calculation of unit cost is as
follows:



 


Sum of cost in § 52.088 ÷ estimated billable flow in 1,000 gallons =
dollars per 1,000 gallons




 



   (B)   The charges to users of the sewage works and facilities shall
be the product of the unit cost determined in accordance with division (A)
above and that portion of the billable flow attributed to each domestic,
commercial, institutional, governmental and industrial user. The formula for
this calculation is as follows:



 


Unit cost per 1,000 gallons x users billable flow in gallons = user charge




 



   (C)   (1)   The users surcharges for BOD and SS loading
discharged to the sewage works and facilities in excess of those
concentrations defined in § 52.087 shall be determined as follows:  unit
costs for BOD and SS shall be calculated by apportioning the total Category A
and B cost associated with that year, 30% to BOD and 20% to SS and then
dividing each cost so apportioned by the total estimated BOD and SS to be
received at the sewage treatment plant in that year.



 

BOD:  Category A and B cost x .30 ÷ estimated annual BOD in 100 lbs.



 

SS:  Category A and B cost x .20 ÷ estimated annual SS in 100 lbs.



 



      (2)   The BOD and SS loads in excess of the allowable
concentrations shall be utilized to determine the surcharge. The excess BOD
and SS load shall be calculated by subtracting the allowable BOD and SS
concentrations from the actual concentration discharged and then determining
the excess pounds of BOD and SS. The formula for this calculation is as
follows:



 

Excess BOD:  (Actual mg/l - 212 mg/l BOD) x (users billable flow in mg) x
8.34 lbs. BOD



 

Excess SS:  (Actual mg/l - 210 mg/l SS) x (users billable flow in mg) x 8.34
lbs. SS



 



      (3)   The surcharge shall be calculated by multiplying the
excess pounds of BOD and SS by the appropriate unit cost. The formula for
this calculation is as follows:



 

BOD:  ($ per 100 lbs. BOD) x (excess BOD per billing period in 100 lbs.) = $$



 

SS:  ($ per 100 lbs. SS) x (excess SS per billing period in 100 lbs.) = $$



 



(1999 Code, § 99.05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.090  SEWER USE CHARGE.



   The sewer use charge is as follows:



   (A)   Effective July 1, 2010.



      (1)   The unit costs for users of the sewage works and
facilities is $6.17 per 100 cubic feet or $8.26 per 1,000 gallons, based on
metered water usage.



      (2)   User surcharges are $65.27 per 100 pounds of five-day
BOD in excess of the BOD load that would result from a concentration of 212
mg/l in the user’s wastewater; and $71.24 per 100 pounds of suspended
solids in excess of the suspended solids load that would result from a
concentration of 210 mg/l in user’s wastewater.



      (3)   User surcharges are $209.75 per 100 pounds of NH3 in
excess of the NH3 load that would result from a concentration of 25 mg/l in
user’s wastewater.



      (4)   The minimum volume to be billed for each user shall be
500 cubic feet per quarter.



      (5)   The City Council may, by resolution, grant an exemption
from the payment of sewer use charges for those owners who have the sanitary
sewer available but are not connected thereto, provided good reason exists
for the failure to connect.



      (6)   In addition, for users in the commercial customer
classification, in lieu of the BOD surcharge and SS surcharge, there is a
surcharge for higher strength wastewater discharged by those customers in
that classification. The commercial classification surcharge is the factor
times Class 1 rate based on the following table. The BOD and SS
concentrations are listed for typical commercial customers. If an individual
customer feels the strength of their discharge is different from the typical
for that category, the appropriate class can be determined by testing
representative samples of wastewater from the user. The city will coordinate
the sampling for a given period at a charge to the customer.



   (B)    Effective at the start of the first full billing cycle after
July 1, 2011.



      (1)   The unit costs for users of the sewage works and
facilities is $6.79 per 100 cubic feet or $9.09 per 1,000 gallons, based on
metered water usage.



      (2)   User surcharges are $71.80 per 100 pounds of five-day
BOD in excess of the BOD load that would result from a concentration of 212
mg/l in the user’s wastewater; and $78.36 per 100 pounds of suspended
solids in excess of the suspended solids load that would result from a
concentration of 210 mg/l in user’s wastewater.



      (3)   User surcharges are $230.73 per 100 pounds of NH3 in
excess of the NH3 load that would result from a concentration of 25 mg/l in
user’s wastewater.



      (4)    The minimum volume to be billed for each user shall be
100 cubic feet per month (300 cubic feet per quarter). Said minimum volume
change shall be effective at the start of the first full billing cycle after
the date of July 1, 2011.



      (5)   The City Council may, by resolution, grant an exemption
from the payment of sewer use charges for those owners who have the sanitary
sewer available but are not connected thereto, provided good reason exists
for the failure to connect.



      (6)   In addition, for users in the commercial customer
classification, in lieu of the BOD surcharge and SS surcharge, there is a
surcharge for higher strength wastewater discharged by those customers in
that classification. The commercial classification surcharge is the factor
times Class 1 rate based on the following table. The BOD and SS
concentrations are listed for typical commercial customers. If an individual
customer feels the strength of their discharge is different from the typical
for that category, the appropriate class can be determined by testing
representative samples of wastewater from the user. The city will coordinate
the sampling for a given period at a charge to the customer.



   (C)   Effective on the first full billing cycle after the date of
July 1, 2013.



      (1)   The unit costs for domestic users of the sewage works
and facilities shall be $8.96 per 100 cubic feet, based on metered water
usage.



      (2)   In addition, for users in the commercial customer
classification, in lieu of the BOD surcharge and SS surcharge, there is a
surcharge for higher strength wastewater discharged by those customers in
that classification. The commercial classification surcharge is the factor
times Class 1 rate with the new rate set forth in the following table.  If
an individual customer feels the strength of their discharge is different
from the typical for that category, the appropriate class can be determined
by testing representative samples of wastewater from the user. The city will
coordinate the sampling for a given period at a charge to the customer.



         (a)   The unit costs for the commercial classes as
defined in § 52.087, General Municipal User, shall be as follows:



            Class 1      $8.96 per 100 cubic feet



            Class 2      $11.648 per 100 cubic feet



            Class 3      $15.232 per 100 cubic feet



      (3)   User surcharges are $86.66 per 100 pounds of five-day
BOD in excess of the BOD load that would result from a concentration of 212
mg/l in the user's wastewater.



      (4)   User surcharges are $94.58 per 100 pounds of suspended
solids in excess of the suspended solids load that would result from a
concentration of 210 mg/l in user's wastewater.



      (5)   User surcharges are $278.49 per 100 pounds of NH3 in
excess of the NH3 load that would result from a concentration of 25 mg/l in
user's wastewater.



      (6)   The minimum volume to be billed for each user shall be
100 cubic feet per month.



      (7)   The City Council may, by resolution, grant an exemption
from the payment of sewer use charges for those owners who have the sanitary
sewer available but are not connected thereto, provided good reason exists
for the failure to connect.



   (D)   Effective for billing dates after July 1, 2018.



      (1)   The unit costs for domestic users of the sewage works
and facilities shall be $9.63 per 100 cubic feet, based on metered water
usage.



      (2)   In addition, for users in the commercial customer
classification, in lieu of the BOD surcharge and SS surcharge, there is a
surcharge for higher strength wastewater discharged by those customers in
that classification. The commercial classification surcharge is the factor
times Class 1 rate with the new rate set forth in the following table.  If
an individual customer feels the strength of their discharge is different
from the typical for that category, the appropriate class can be determined
by testing representative samples of wastewater from the user. The city will
coordinate the sampling for a given period at a charge to the customer.



         (a)   The unit costs for the commercial classes as
defined in § 52.087, General Municipal User shall be as follows:



            Class 1   $9.63 per 100 cubic feet



            Class 2   $12.522 per 100 cubic feet



            Class 3   $16.374 per 100 cubic feet



      (3)   User surcharges are $93.16 per 100 pounds of five-day
BOD in excess of the BOD load that would result from a concentration of 212
mg/l in the user’s wastewater.



      (4)   User surcharges are $101.67 per 100 pounds of suspended
solids in excess of the suspended solids load that would result from a
concentration of 210 mg/l in user’s wastewater.



      (5)   User surcharges are $299.389 per 100 pounds of NH3 in
excess of the NH3 load that would result from a concentration of 25 mg/l in
user’s wastewater.



      (6)   The minimum volume to be billed for each user shall be
100 cubic feet per month.



      (7)   The City Council may, by resolution, grant an exemption
from the payment of sewer use charges for those owners who have the sanitary
sewer available but are not connected thereto, provided good reason exists
for the failure to connect.



   (E)   Effective for billing dates after July 1, 2019.



      (1)   The unit costs for domestic users of the sewage works
and facilities shall be $9.63 per 100 cubic feet, based on metered water
usage.



      (2)   In addition, for users in the commercial customer
classification, in lieu of the BOD surcharge and SS surcharge, there is a
surcharge for higher strength wastewater discharged by those customers in
that classification. The commercial classification surcharge is the factor
times Class 1 rate with the new rate set forth in the following table.  If
an individual customer feels the strength of their discharge is different
from the typical for that category, the appropriate class can be determined
by testing representative samples of wastewater from the user. The city will
coordinate the sampling for a given period at a charge to the customer.



         (a)   The unit costs for the commercial classes as
defined in § 52.087, General Municipal User shall be as follows:



            Class 1   $9.63 per 100 cubic feet



            Class 2   $12.522 per 100 cubic feet



            Class 3   $15.00 per 100 cubic feet



            Class 4   $16.374 per 100 cubic feet



      (3)   User surcharges are $93.16 per 100 pounds of five-day
BOD in excess of the BOD load that would result from a concentration of 212
mg/l in the user's wastewater.



      (4)   User surcharges are $101.67 per 100 pounds of suspended
solids in excess of the suspended solids load that would result from a
concentration of 210 mg/l in user's wastewater.



      (5)   User surcharges are $299.389 per 100 pounds of NH3 in
excess of the NH3 load that would result from a concentration of 25 mg/l in
user's wastewater.



      (6)   The minimum volume to be billed for each user shall be
100 cubic feet per month.



      (7)   The City Council may, by resolution, grant an exemption
from the payment of sewer use charges for those owners who have the sanitary
sewer available but are not connected thereto, provided good reason exists
for the failure to connect.



(1999 Code, § 99.06)  (Ord. 2289, passed 4-12-2005; Ord. 2298, passed
8-23-2005; Ord. 2365, passed 4-8-2008; Ord. 2395, passed 12-9-2008; Ord.
2457, passed 8-9-2011; Ord. 2466, passed 10-11-2011; Ord. 2472, passed
6-12-2012; Ord. 2486, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2493, passed 5-28-2013; Ord.
2567, passed 3-27-2018; Ord. 2602, passed 2-12-2018)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.091  BILLING FOR SEWER SERVICE.



   Billing and payment for sewer service shall be in accordance with the
following.



   (A)   Bills issued.  The Clerk shall prepare, date and issue bills
for sewer service. Bills shall be deemed issued as of the date indicated on
the bills.



   (B)   Bills payable.  Bills for sewer service are due and payable
at the office of the Clerk within 20 days of the date of issue.



   (C)   Late payment penalty.  Bills not paid when due shall be
considered delinquent. A late payment penalty of 1.5% compounded monthly
shall be added to the delinquent bill.



   (D)   Payment plans authorized.  The Finance Director is hereby
authorized to establish payment plans for customers who qualify under
guidelines established by the Finance Director.



(1999 Code, § 99.07)  (Ord. 2298, passed 8-23-2005; Ord. 2397, passed
12-18-2008)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.092  LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.



   The owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall
be jointly and severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises.
Sewer service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien
upon the premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County
Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property taxes. A lien filing
fee of $5 shall be added to each utility charge certified to the County
Treasurer.



(Iowa Code § 384.84)  (1999 Code, § 99.08)  (Ord. 2298, passed
8-23-2005)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.092A    DISCONNECTION OF WATER SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT.



   (A)   Notice. The Finance Department shall notify each delinquent
customer that service will be discontinued if payment of the sewer account,
including late payment charges, is not received by the date specified in the
notice of delinquency. Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the
customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform
the customer of the nature of the delinquency and afford the customer 14
days’ notice to request a hearing prior to the discontinuance. Failure of a
customer to request a hearing within the allotted time shall constitute a
forfeiture of the right to a hearing.



   (B)   Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the
owner or landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for
notice, the notice of delinquency shall also be given to the owner or
landlord.



   (C)   Hearing.  If a hearing is requested within the 14 day
timeframe referenced in division (A), the Finance Director shall schedule,
within five calendar days after the request, or as soon thereafter as
practicable, an informal hearing at which the customer may submit relevant
evidence concerning the amounts owed.  Testimony and documentation submitted
by the customer may be limited to evidence concerning any alleged errors in
the amount owed and the identity of the person owing the billed amounts. 
All hearings will be audio recorded.  If the Finance Director finds that
disconnection is supported by the evidence, then such disconnection shall be
made, unless payment has been received.



   (D)   Fees. Fees for disconnection of water service and reconnection
of said service shall be established through a resolution of the City Council
in accordance with an agreement with Iowa American Water for the
discontinuation of water services for a delinquent account.



(Ord. 2522, passed 8-25-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law, see Iowa Code §§ 384.84 and 476.20



§ 52.093  LIEN NOTICE.



   A lien for delinquent sewer service charges shall not be certified to
the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien
is given to the customer. If the customer is a tenant and if the owner or
landlord of the property has made a written request for notice, the notice
shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the
appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than ten days prior to
certification of the lien to the County Treasurer.



(Iowa Code § 384.84)  (1999 Code, § 99.09)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.093A  SUSPENSION OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   In addition to any other recourse as may be utilized by the
city for the collection of delinquent sewer service charges the city may
suspend the property owner’s or business owner’s Certificate of Occupancy
upon certification of the City Administrator to the following:



      (1)   A delinquent sewer service charge which is 120 days past
due, and/or



      (2)   A delinquent sewer service charge in excess of $2,500.



   (B)   Notice shall be sent by certified letter, service of process
complete upon mailing, to the delinquent property owner or account holder
stating that if the delinquency is not cured and brought current within 14
days that any Certificate of Occupancy for the premises shall be revoked and
withdrawn.  If after 14 days the account is not cured and brought current
the building shall be placarded by the Building and Neighborhood Services
Department declaring the Certificate of Occupancy is revoked and withdrawn
and that the building shall not be occupied for any purpose.



   (C)   The Certificate of Occupancy may only be re-issued after
payment of any outstanding sums owed for sewer service and only after passing
a re-inspection by the Building and Neighborhood Services Department.



   (D)   This section shall not apply to single family owner occupied
residential dwellings.



(Ord. 2495, passed 6-11-2013)



§ 52.093B  PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF SUMMER WATERING PROGRAM.



   In addition to any other recourse as may be utilized by the city,
either by seeking alternate relief through the courts or for the collection
of delinquent sewer service charges the city may issue a civil citation to
any person or entity who violates the terms and qualifications for use of a
the Summer Watering Program as established by council resolution and if found
guilty shall be subject to a fine in the amount of $500 and revocation of
their Summer Watering Application.



(Ord. 2496, passed - -2013)



§ 52.094  SEWER REVENUE FUND.



   All revenue of the system from every source shall be designated and
accounted for as a separate accounting fund known as the Sewer Revenue Fund
of the city. Money in this revenue fund is required to be set aside each
month into each of the accounts or funds created in this subchapter. These
accounts together with the monthly amounts to be credited thereto are
respectively set out hereinafter in the order in which the credits are to be
made. All credits shall be as of the last business day of each month and
shall include all receipts to the end of the immediately preceding month.



   (A)   Operating, maintenance and billing account.  This account
shall be credited with all revenues received from the operation of the sewer
system. Expenses for operations, maintenance and billing shall be paid from
this account.



   (B)   Sewer Construction Fund.  A Sewer Construction Fund is hereby
established. A deposit shall be made to this fund from the Sewer Revenue Fund
each month. The amount of the deposit may be raised by resolution of the
Council. Money in this fund shall first be used to provide an adequate
allowance for depreciation, the amount thereof to be determined from time to
time by the Council, then for extraordinary repairs or replacements or for
improvements and extensions to the system. At any time the balance of the
Sewer Construction Fund may be transferred to other city accounts and used
for any lawful city purpose by resolution of the Council.



(1999 Code, § 99.10)



§ 52.095  INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.



   Any money in the above listed account or funds may be invested in
interest-bearing demand or time deposits (including certificates of deposit)
in amounts that are fully insured by the FDIC or the FSLIC (or successor
corporations) or in direct or fully guaranteed obligations of the United
States maturing not later than the earliest date on which the moneys in the
respective accounts are estimated to be needed, but in no event later than
five years from the date of any investment. The securities shall be sold
whenever funds are needed. Earnings of any funds invested shall be credited
in the account for which the investment was made. Uninvested money on hand
shall at all times be deposited in banks selected by the city. Money in the
Sewer Revenue Fund and the Sewer Construction Fund must be maintained in
separate accounting records.



(1999 Code, § 99.11)



§ 52.096  SEWAGE MONITORING DEVICES.



   When required by the city, each user shall install a suitable
measuring, sampling and analyzing device. The city may not require
installation of the devices where the city determines that the industrial
user has concentrations of BOD and suspended solids no greater than the
concentration of the constituents in the general municipal flow and a
satisfactory method and access exist for sampling and determining the total
daily sewage flow. In these cases, the charges to those industrial users
shall be based on the flow rate as determined and on BOD and SS loads equal
to the average load of the general municipal flow. Each industrial user
required by the city to install and maintain sewage monitoring facilities
shall submit to the city a monthly report of daily flow, BOD and SS on a form
approved by the city. This report shall be used for billing purposes and
shall be submitted prior to the fifteenth day of the subsequent month. The
city has the right, periodically or continuously, to inspect the monitoring
facilities, to measure, sample and analyze the user’s flow and to analyze
the samples obtained by the industrial user. In the event of any discrepancy
between the flows or loads determined by the city and the industrial user,
the values determined by the city shall be used for billing purposes.



(1999 Code, § 99.12)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.097  SPECIAL REQUIREMENT FOR SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.



   A significant industrial user must comply with all provisions of this
subchapter applicable to industrial users and, in addition, as a condition
precedent to using or continuing to use the sewage works and facilities, must
sign a letter of intent with the city to pay that portion of the grant amount
allocable to the treatment of its wastes. Each letter shall also include a
statement of the intended period of use of the treatment works.



(1999 Code, § 99.13)  Penalty, see § 52.999



INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY



§ 52.110  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BILLABLE FLOW.  The total number of gallons utilized to determine the
unit cost for billing for sewage works and facilities.



   CAPITAL COSTS.  All reasonable and necessary costs and expenses
incurred by the city in planning, designing, financing and constructing the
sewage works and facilities, including but not limited to costs and expenses
for obtaining necessary permits, licenses, approvals and grants for design
and construction, fees for legal and consulting services and acquisition.



   COMMERCIAL USER.  All users of the system classified in the Standard
Industrial Classification Manual, 1987, U.S. Office of Management and Budget,
as amended and supplemented, under Division C, F, G, H and K. For the
purposes of this subchapter, users under Divisions A, B, D, E and I shall be
included in this definition if they discharge primarily segregated domestic
wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. This classification shall not
include users who are otherwise classified in this subchapter as domestic
users, governmental users and institutional users.



   CONTRACT USER.  Any user who has a written contract with the city to
use the sewage works and facilities.



   DOMESTIC USER.  Those establishments of which its related occupations,
if any, are usually considered as domestic service and whose discharge
consists solely of sanitary wastes.



   FLOW.  The quantity of “billable flow” expressed in gallons or
cubic feet per 24 hours.



   GENERAL MUNICIPAL FLOW.  The total sewage flow discharged to the
sewage works and facilities, minus the flows from industrial users, other
municipalities and contract users. GENERAL MUNICIPAL FLOW includes flow from
domestic users, commercial users, institutional users and governmental users.
GENERAL MUNICIPAL FLOW, based on the design of the sewage treatment
facilities, is further defined as flows containing five-day BOD
concentrations no greater than 212 mg/l and suspended solids concentrations
no greater than 210 mg/l.



   GENERAL MUNICIPAL USER.  Any user discharging sewage to the general
municipal flow other than industrial users, municipalities and other contract
users. This category of user includes as subcategories:



      (1)   Domestic users;



      (2)   Commercial users;



      (3)   Institutional users; and



      (4)   Governmental users which are not contract users.



   GOVERNMENTAL USER.  Includes those establishments whose function is
the administration and/or execution of legislative bodies and agencies which
provide general support services for government.



   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY.  The portion of the cost of the sewage works
and facilities attributable to industrial users which was defrayed by federal
grant and which must be recovered pursuant to § 204(b) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1284, in accordance with the United
States Environmental Protection Agency Industrial Cost Recovery Regulations
as published in the February 11, 1974, Federal Register (40 C.F.R. Part 35)
as amended and supplemented.



   INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   Any nongovernmental user of the sewage works and
facilities identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987,
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the
following divisions:



         (a)   Agriculture, forestry and fishing (Div. A);



         (b)   Mining (Div. B);



         (c)   Manufacturing (Div. D);



         (d)   Transportation, communication, electric, gas and
sanitary services (Div. E); and



         (e)   Services (Div. I).



      (2)   A user in the divisions listed may be excluded and
treated as a commercial user if the Council determines it will primarily
introduce domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. For
industrial users with sewage containing BOD and suspended solids
concentrations less than the concentrations as defined for general municipal
flow, charges shall be based on concentrations as defined for general
municipal flow.



   INSTITUTIONAL USER.  Those establishments engaged in activities of a
noneconomic nature, frequently being the performance of services for the
general public (health, educational, social), and not classified as a
governmental or commercial user in this subchapter.



   LOAD.  Quantities of sewage characteristics such as BOD, SS or other
constituents as expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) or pounds per 24
hours.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.  Any industrial user who discharges
sewage which constitutes greater than 10% of the design flow or design
pollutant loading of the sewage treatment plant.



   USER.  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity, whether
municipal or otherwise, discharging sewage into the sewage works and
facilities.



(1999 Code, § 100.01)



§ 52.111  UNIT CHARGES.



   The unit charges for establishing the industrial cost recovery of the
federal grant to be collected by the city from the industrial users of the
city sewage works and facilities shall be upon the conditions and in the
amounts set forth in the subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 100.02)



§ 52.112  LEVY OF CHARGES.



   It is the purpose of this subchapter to recover from industrial users
of the sewage works and facilities the share of the sewage works and
facilities’ costs attributable to the industrial users. The industrial cost
recovery charges provided for in this subchapter are levied against all
industrial users of the sewage works and facilities. The Council shall
annually determine and fix the unit costs for recovery of that portion of the
federal grant attributable to industry on the basis of flow, BOD and SS.



(1999 Code, § 100.03)



§ 52.113  PAYMENT OF CHARGES.



   The city shall compute the amount due for industrial cost recovery and
issue bills therefor at periodic intervals. All industrial cost recovery
charges are due and payable under the same terms and conditions provided for
payment of sewer service as contained in § 52.091 of this code of ordinances
and the provisions contained in §§ 52.092 and 52.093 relating to liens
shall also apply in the event of a delinquent account.



(1999 Code, § 100.04)



§ 52.114  INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY UNIT COSTS.



   The portion of the federal grant amount (75% of the eligible capital
cost) shall be recovered from industrial users of the sewage works and
facilities.



   (A)   The total actual daily flow, BOD and SS from all industries
for the billing period shall be summated and divided by the design flow, BOD
and SS respectively to calculate the percent of plant utilized by industry.



   (B)   The federal grant amount for flow, BOD and SS shall be
calculated by apportioning the federal grant 32% to flow, 48% to BOD and 20%
to SS and dividing each by a 20-year recovery period.



   (C)   To calculate industrial unit cost recovery charges, divide the
recoverable amounts determined above by the total annual industrial flow, BOD
and SS.



   (D)   The cost recovery charges to the individual industries shall
be calculated by multiplying the unit cost as determined above by the
industrial user’s actual flow, BOD and SS for the billing period.



   (E)   In addition to the charges provided for herein, the city may
impose a surcharge on any industrial user based on some other pollutant
loading factor which requires special treatment at the sewage works.



(1999 Code, § 100.05)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.115  ACCOUNTS ESTABLISHED.



   The industrial cost recovery amounts received by the city shall be
deposited initially into a special account which will be called the Clinton
Industrial Cost Recovery Account 100.  The city shall retain 50% of the
amounts recovered from industrial users. Eighty percent of these amounts
retained by the city will be deposited annually into a special city account
which will be called the Clinton Industrial Cost Recovery Account 80.  The
remaining 20% of the funds will be deposited annually into another special
city account which will be called the Clinton Special Projects Account 20. 
The remaining 50% of the amounts recovered from industrial users, together
with any interest earned thereon, shall be returned to the U.S. Treasury,
through the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, on an annual basis.



(1999 Code, § 100.06)



§ 52.116  USE OF INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY ACCOUNT 80.



   The amounts deposited in the Industrial Cost Recovery Account 80,
together with interest earned thereon, shall be used solely for the eligible
costs of the expansion or reconstruction of treatment works associated with
the project and necessary to meet the requirements of the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency. The city shall obtain the written approval of the Regional
Administrator of the U.S. EPA prior to commitment of these retained amounts
for any expansion or reconstruction. Pending use, the amounts deposited into
the Industrial Cost Recovery Account 80 will be invested by the city in a
local financial institution whose deposits are insured by the FDIC.



(1999 Code, § 100.07)



§ 52.117  USE OF SPECIAL PROJECTS ACCOUNT 20.



   The amounts deposited into the Special Projects Account 20 shall be
used as the city desires. However, these funds cannot be used to reduce the
sewer use charge to any person or firm.



(1999 Code, § 100.08)



§ 52.118  MEASUREMENT OF STRENGTH AND VOLUME.



   When required by the city, each industrial user shall install suitable
measuring, sampling and analyzing devices. The city may not require
installation of the devices where the city determines that the industrial
user has concentrations of BOD, suspended solids and NH3 no greater than the
concentration of the constituents in the general municipal flow and a
satisfactory method of access exists for sampling and determining the total
daily sewage flow. In these cases, the charges to those industrial users
shall be based on the flow rate as determined and on BOD, SS loads and NH3
equal to the average load of the general municipal flow. Each industrial user
required by the city to install and maintain sewage monitoring facilities
shall submit to the city a monthly report of daily flow, BOD, SS and NH3 on a
form approved by the city. This report shall be used for billing purposes and
shall be submitted prior to the fifteenth day of the subsequent month. There
shall be a minimum fee of $100 a month for all significant industrial users
as defined under the city’s pretreatment program. The city has the right,
periodically or continuously, to inspect the monitoring facilities, to
measure, sample and analyze the user’s flow and to analyze the samples
obtained by the industrial user. In the event of any discrepancy between the
flows or loads determined by the city and the industrial user, the values
determined by the city shall be used for billing purposes.



(1999 Code, § 100.09)  (Ord. 2289, passed 4-12-2005)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.119  SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.



   A significant industrial user must comply with all provisions of this
subchapter applicable to industrial users and, in addition, as a condition
precedent to using or continuing to use the sewage works and facilities, must
sign a letter of intent with the city to pay that portion of the grant amount
allocable to the treatment of its wastes. Each letter shall also include a
statement of the intended period of use of the treatment works.



(1999 Code, § 100.10)



SEWAGE PRETREATMENT PROGRAM



§ 52.130  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   (A)   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect dischargers into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal
laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment
Regulations (40 C.F.R. Part 403). The objectives of this subchapter are to:



      (1)   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the
system or contaminate the resulting sludge;



      (2)   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately
treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible
with the system;



      (3)   Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim
wastewater and sludges from the system;



      (4)   Provide for equitable distribution of the operation and
maintenance cost of the city’s implementation of the industrial
pretreatment program; and



      (5)   Protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel
who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public.



   (B)   This subchapter provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect dischargers to the city’s wastewater system through the issuance
of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customer’s
capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the
equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein. This subchapter applies to the city and to persons outside the city
who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city POTW.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent of the city’s POTW
shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 101.01)



§ 52.131  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT or THE ACT.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



   APPROVAL AUTHORITY.  The Director of the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources.



   AUTHORIZED or DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.



      (1)   If the user is a corporation:



         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision- making functions
for the corporation; or



         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility
including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital
investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive
measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or
actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual
wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where authority to sign
documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with
corporate procedures.



      (2)   If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a
general partner or proprietor, respectively.



      (3)   If the user is a federal, state, or local government
facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee
the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility,
or their designee.



      (4)   The individuals described in divisions (1) through (3)
above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is
in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
POTW.



   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS.  National categorical pretreatment standards.



   COOLING WATER.  The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added
is heat.



   DIRECT DISCHARGE.  The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the state.



   DISCHARGE.  The releasing, spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying or dumping of a pollutant into the waters of the state or
onto the land or into wells from which the pollutant might flow or drain into
the waters, and includes the release of any pollutant into a POTW.



   DOMESTIC WASTEWATER.  The liquid waste or liquid borne waste resulting
from the noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling of food and/or
consisting of human excrement and similar wastes from sanitary facilities.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA.  The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of the
agency.



   GRAB SAMPLE.  A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.



   HOLDING TANK WASTE.  Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump tank trucks.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE.  The discharge or the introduction of pollutants
from any source regulated under § 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. §
1317) into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the system).



   INDUSTRIAL USER.  A person who discharges, causes or permits the
discharge of pollutants from nondomestic sources into the POTW and is a
source of indirect discharge.



   INTERFERENCE.  The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement
of the city’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation). The term includes prevention of wastewater sludge
use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of the SWDA)
applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.



   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD.  Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with §
307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to a specific
category of industrial users.



   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES PERMIT.  A
permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).



   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD.  Any regulation developed under the authority of § 307(b) of the
Act and 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.



   NEW SOURCE.



      (1)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of
which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under § 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to the source if the
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



         (a)   The building, structure, facility or installation
is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



         (b)   The building, structure, facility or installation
totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes
of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether
these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the
new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which
the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source, should be considered.



      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is
located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of divisions (1)(b) and (c) above but
otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined in this division
has commenced if the owner or operator has begun or caused to begin, as part
of a continuous on-site construction program:



         (a)   Any placement, assembly or installation of
facilities or equipment;



         (b)   Significant site preparation work including
clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of
new source facilities or equipment; or



         (c)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for
the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which
can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for
feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual
obligation under this division.



   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER.  Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product or finished product.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, association, society or group or any other legal entity or any legal
representatives, agents or assigns of the same.



   POLLUTANT.  Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
domestic wastewater, garbage, wastewater sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and commercial, industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water.



   POLLUTION.  The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.



   PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT.  The reduction of the amount of pollutants,
the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing the pollutants into a POTW. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(d).



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS.  Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard imposed on an
industrial user.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW.  A treatment works as defined
by § 212 of the Act, being 33. U.S.C. § 1292, including any devices and
systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of
municipal sewage and industrial waste. The systems include sewers, pipes and
equipment used to convey wastewater to the treatment facility. The terms also
includes the municipality as defined in § 502(4) of the Act which has
jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a
treatment works.



   POTW TREATMENT PLANT.  The portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment of wastewater.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (2) below of this
division:



         (a)   All industrial users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Chapter I,
Subchapter N; and



         (b)   Any other industrial user that: discharges an
average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW
(excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater) or
contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of the average
dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or



         (c)   Is designated as such by the POTW on the basis
that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement (in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6)).



      (2)   Upon a finding than an industrial user meeting the
criteria in division (1) above of this definition has no reasonable potential
for adversely affecting the POTW’S operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirement, the POTW may at any time, on its own
initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or
POTW, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6), determine that the
industrial user is not a significant industrial user.



   SLUG DISCHARGE.  Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch
discharge.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC).  A classification pursuant
to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive
Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.



   SUPERINTENDENT.  The Superintendent of the POTW treatment plant of the
city or a duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT.  Any pollutant or combination of pollutants
identified as toxic pursuant to § 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), or other federal statutes or in
regulations promulgated by the state under state law.



   USER.  Any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the city’s POTW.



   WATERS OF THE STATE.  All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water,
surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are
contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion
thereof.



(1999 Code, § 101.02) (Ord. 2558, passed 11-28-2017)



§ 52.132  GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly
or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the
operation or performance of the city’s POTW. These general prohibitions
apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to national
categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the
substances listed in § 52.047 of this code of ordinances or the following
substances to the city’s POTW:



      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other
way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. Pollutants which create a
fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including but not limited to waste
streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140ºF (60ºC) using the
test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21. At no time shall two
successive readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge
into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than 5% nor any
single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter;



      (2)   Any wastewater containing any pollutants in sufficient
quantity or released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to
injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of
the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment
standard. A pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant
identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a);



      (3)   Any wastewater which imparts colors that cannot be
removed by the treatment process;



      (4)   Any wastewater containing radioactive wastes or isotopes;



      (5)   Detergents, surface-active agents or substances which
may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;



      (6)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or
any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW
to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or
regulations developed under § 405 of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345, any
criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6941
et seq., the Clean Air Act, being 42 U.S.C. 7401 et seq., the Toxic
Substances Control Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., or state criteria
applicable to the sludge management method being used.



      (7)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its
NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality
standards;



      (8)   Any solid or viscous substances which may cause
obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation
of the waste treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease,
garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, or any
material which can be disposed of as trash. No garbage grinder equipped with
a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be installed in any
building which is connected directly or indirectly to a public sewer, without
prior approval of the Council. The Council shall not approve any garbage
grinder which does not grind garbage to a degree so that no particle is
greater than one-half inch in any dimension and shall be empowered to order
that any garbage grinder, regardless of its size or when it was installed,
which does not grind garbage to a degree so as to make it acceptable under
this subchapter, not be used to grind garbage which is thereafter directly or
indirectly discharged into a public sewer;



      (9)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than
10.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the POTW;



      (10)   Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity
in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in quantities that
the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 40ºC (104ºF);



      (11)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products
of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or passthrough;



      (12)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems; and



      (13)   No trucked or hauled pollutants will be accepted.



   (B)   When the Superintendent determines that a user is contributing
to the POTW any of the above enumerated substances or substances listed in §
52.047 in amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the
Superintendent may:



      (1)   Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the
POTW; and



      (2)   Develop effluent limitations for the user to correct the
interference with the POTW.



   (C)   A discharge violation by a user will subject the user to some
type of enforcement action, regardless of whether or not the city advises the
user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW or develops appropriate
effluent limits.



(1999 Code, § 101.03)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.133  NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards located in 40 C.F.R.
Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, are hereby incorporated into
this subchapter by reference. Upon the promulgation of new categorical
pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the new
categorical pretreatment standards, if more stringent than limitations
imposed under this code of ordinances for sources in that subcategory shall
immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this code of ordinances.
The Superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable
reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12.



(1999 Code, § 101.04)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.134  MODIFICATION OF NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.



   Where the city’s wastewater treatment system achieves consistent
removal of pollutants limited by categorical pretreatment standards, the city
may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in
the categorical pretreatment standards. CONSISTENT REMOVAL means reduction in
the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant in the
influent to the POTW to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which
is achieved by the POTW in samples taken when measured according to the
procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7(d)(2) promulgated pursuant to the
Act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the categorical
pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7
are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained.



(1999 Code, § 101.05)



§ 52.135  STATE REQUIREMENTS.



   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any
case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations
or those in this code of ordinances.



(1999 Code, § 101.06)



§ 52.136  CITY’S RIGHT OF REVISION.



   The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to
comply with the objectives presented in § 52.130 of this subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 101.07)



§ 52.137  EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE.



   (A)   No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process
water or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other
pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state.



   (B)   Blending may be an acceptable means of complying with some of
the prohibitions set forth herein, e.g., the pH prohibition.



(1999 Code, § 101.08)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.138  ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated in this
sanitary sewer chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of
prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or
user’s expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures
to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and
shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. No user
who discharges  to the POTW shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into
the POTW until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the
city. Review and approval of the plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user’s
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this subchapter. In the
case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to
immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification
shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume.
Furthermore, the industrial user shall take immediate action to contain and
minimize the accidental discharge to the POTW so as to prevent interference
with and/or damage to the POTW and notify the POTW of the corrective actions.
Industrial users that store hazardous substances shall not contribute to the
POTW unless a spill prevention plan has been approved by the POTW. Approval
of the plans shall not relieve the industrial user from complying with all
other laws and regulations governing the use, storage and transportation of
hazardous substances. The POTW shall evaluate each significant industrial
user at least once every two years and other industrial users as necessary to
determine whether the user needs a plan to control slug discharges.



   (B)   If the POTW decides that a slug control plan is needed, the
plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug
discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under §
52.132, with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days;
and



      (4)   If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from
accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control
of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including
solvents) and/or measures and equipment for emergency response.



      (5)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the
Superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a slug discharge.



   (C)   Within five days following an accidental discharge, the
industrial user shall submit to the Superintendent a detailed written report
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. The notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage
to persons or property, nor shall the notification relieve the user of any
fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this
subchapter or other applicable laws or ordinances. A notice shall be
permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge.
Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause a dangerous discharge
to occur or who may suffer from a discharge are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.



(1999 Code, § 101.09)  (Ord. 2558, passed 11-28-2017)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.139  FEES.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of
costs for the implementation of the program established herein. The
applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the city’s schedule of
charges and fees, to be prepared from time to time by the Superintendent and
approved by the Council. The city may adopt charges and fees which may
include the permit fee, sampling charge and laboratory analysis charge. These
charges shall be assessed to the industrial users through the Superintendent
and be collected by the Clerk.



      (1)   Permit fee.  The city will charge the industries that
are required to obtain a permit per § 52.140 a fee which is established by a
resolution of the City Council.



      (2)   Sampling charge.  The city will assess the industries a
sampling charge for sampling their wastewater with city equipment and
manpower. The sampling charge is estimated to be $150 per site per sampling
day for 24-hour composite samples and $30 per grab sample.



      (3)   Laboratory analysis charge.  The city will assess the
industries a laboratory analysis charge to recover the city’s expenses for
analyzing the industrial wastewater samples for specific pollutants. The
charges for toxic organic pollutants and toxic inorganic pollutants will be
determined by the POTW laboratory or commercial laboratory retained by the
city to perform the analyses.



   (B)   Additional costs as established by the city will be charged to
industrial users on a case by case basis for fees for filing appeals, fees
for consistent removal (by the city) of pollutants otherwise subject to
categorical pretreatment standards and other fees as the city may deem
necessary to carry out the requirements of this subchapter. These fees relate
solely to the matters covered by this subchapter and are separate from all
other fees chargeable by the city.



(1999 Code, § 101.10)  (Ord. 2542, passed 9-27-2016; Ord. 2558, passed
11-28-2017)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.140  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.



   All significant industrial users shall obtain a wastewater discharge
permit.



   (A)   Application.



      (1)   Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the
form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a permit fee as specified in
§ 52.139(A) of this subchapter at least 90 days prior to connecting to or
contributing to the POTW.



      (2)   In support of the application, the industrial user shall
submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:



         (a)   Name, address and location (if different from
address);



         (b)   SIC number according to the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1987, as amended;



         (c)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics
including but not limited to those mentioned in this subchapter as determined
by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed
in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to § 304(h) of
the Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, as amended;



         (d)   Time and duration of wastewater contribution;



         (e)   Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow
rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;



         (f)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by
size, location and elevation and current water use schematic;



         (g)   General description of activities, facilities and
plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could
be discharged;



         (h)   The nature and concentration of any pollutants in
the discharge which are limited by any city, state or national categorical
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
categorical pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if
not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable categorical
pretreatment standards, the statement must be reviewed by an authorized
representative of the user and certified to by a qualified professional;



         (i)   If additional pretreatment and/or operation and
maintenance will be required to meet the categorical pretreatment standards
or pretreatment requirements, the industrial user shall submit the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide additional pretreatment. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard:



            1.   The schedule shall contain increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the industrial user to meet the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements (e.g., hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
contract for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction and the like). No increment shall exceed nine months.



            2.   No later than 14 days following each date in
the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall
submit a progress report to the Superintendent including, as a minimum,
whether or not the industrial user complied with the increment of progress to
be met on the date and, if not, the date on which the industrial user expects
to comply, the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the
industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no
event shall more than nine months elapse between the progress reports to the
Superintendent.



         (j)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate or production;



         (k)   Type and amount of raw materials processed
(average and maximum per day);



         (l)   Number of employees and hours of operation of
plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;



         (m)   Copy of any environmental control permits held by
or for the facility; and



         (n)   Any other information as may be deemed by the city
to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.



      (3)   All wastewater discharge permit applications and user
reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and
contain the following certification statement: 



         I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance
with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.



      (4)   The city will evaluate the data furnished by the
industrial user and may require additional information. After evaluation and
acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater discharge
permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.



   (B)   Modifications.  As soon as possible, and no longer than 90
days subsequent to a change of national categorical pretreatment standards or
pretreatment requirements, the wastewater discharge permit of industrial
users subject to the standards or requirements shall be revised to require
compliance with the standards within the time frame prescribed by the
standards. Where an industrial user subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial
user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the
promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards or
pretreatment requirements. In addition, the industrial user with an existing
wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the Superintendent within 180
days after the promulgation of applicable national categorical pretreatment
standards or pretreatment requirements the information required by divisions
(A)(1)(h) and (i) above.



   (C)   Permit conditions.  Wastewater discharge permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions of this subchapter and all other
applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city.
Permits may contain the following:



      (1)   The schedule of charges and fees as listed in § 52.139
for the wastewater to be discharged to the POTW;



      (2)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater
constituents and characteristics;



      (3)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge
or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;



      (4)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities;



      (5)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
pretreatment facilities;



      (6)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule. All sampling and analysis must be
conducted in accordance with the procedures specified in 40 C.F.R. Part 136.
Pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(g), if sampling indicates a violation, the
user must notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user must also resample and submit results of this resampling to the city
within 30 days. Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the city
performs sampling at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if the
city performs sampling at the user’s facility between the time when the
initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the city
receives the results of this sampling, or if the city has performed the
sampling and analysis in lieu of the industrial user;



      (7)   Compliance schedules; all industries shall develop
compliance schedules when required;



      (8)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or
discharge reports;



      (9)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city and affording city
access thereto;



      (10)   Requirements for prior notification to the city of any
new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the
volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
POTW;



      (11)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per
§ 52.147;



      (12)   Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined
by the Superintendent to be necessary;



      (13)   A statement of duration;



      (14)   A statement of nontransferability;



      (15)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties;



      (16)   Baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports
and periodic compliance reports from categorical industrial users must be
signed by an appropriate official of the user and contain the certification
statement from 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(2)(ii) which attests to the integrity of
the analytical data submitted; and



      (17)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to
ensure compliance with this subchapter.



   (D)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a period of up to
three years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days
prior to the expiration of the industrial user’s existing permit. The terms
and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city
during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in
this subchapter are modified or as other just causes exist. The industrial
user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his or her permit at least
30 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new
conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.



   (E)   Permit transfer.  Wastewater discharge permits are issued to
a specific industrial user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge
permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new
user, different premises or a new or changed operation without the approval
of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms
and conditions of the existing permit.



(1999 Code, § 101.11)  (Ord. 2542, passed 9-27-2016; Ord. 2558, passed
11-28-2017)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.141  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE.



   (A)   Compliance date report.  Within 90 days following the date
for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or
pretreatment requirements or, in the case of a new source, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to categorical pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements
shall submit to the Superintendent a report indicating the nature and
concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process
which are limited by categorical pretreatment standards and pretreatment
requirements and the average and maximum daily flows for these process units
in the user’s facility which are limited by the categorical pretreatment
standards and pretreatment requirements. The report shall state whether the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards and pretreatment requirements
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation
and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the industrial user
into compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standards and
pretreatment requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the industrial user and certified to by a registered
professional qualified to certify the report.



   (B)   Periodic compliance reports.  Periodic compliance reports
shall be made as follows.



      (1)   Any significant industrial user, whether subject to
categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements or not, after
the compliance date of the categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment
requirements, or, in the case of a new source after commencement of the
discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the Superintendent during the months
of June and December, unless required more frequently in the categorical
pretreatment standards or by the Superintendent, a report indicating the
nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by
the categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements. In
addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which, during
the reporting period, exceeded the average daily flow. At the discretion of
the Superintendent and in consideration of such factors as local high or low
flow rates, holidays, budget cycles and the like, the Superintendent may
agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.



      (2)   (a)   The Superintendent may impose mass limitations
on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable categorical
pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements, or in other cases where
the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. In these cases, the report
required by division (B)(1) above of this division shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment
requirements in the effluent of the industrial user. These reports shall
contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the
flow and the nature and concentration or production and mass where requested
by the Superintendent, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by
the applicable categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment
requirements. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the
wastewater discharge permit. All analyses shall be performed in accordance
with procedures pursuant to § 304(h) of the Act, being 33 U.S.C. §
1314(h),  and contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and amendments thereto.
Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the
Superintendent.



         (b)   Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include a
sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in
the EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of
Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April, 1977, and amendments
thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the
Administrator.



      (3)   If a user subject to the reporting requirements in this
section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location
more frequently than required by the Superintendent, using the procedures
prescribed in division (B)(2) above, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report.



   (C)   Upset reports.  For the purposes of this section, UPSET 
means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors
beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operation error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance or careless or improper operation.



      (1)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
the requirements of division (C)(2) below are met.



      (2)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs or other relevant evidence that:



         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;



         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a
prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and



         (c)   The user has submitted the following information
to the Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days):



            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and
cause of noncompliance;



            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact
dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance
is expected to continue; and



            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



      (3)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



      (4)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.



      (5)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the
facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.



   (D)   Sample collection. Samples collected to satisfy reporting
requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and
analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data
that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.



      (1)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide,
total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained
using grab collection techniques.



      (2)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring
and 90-day compliance reports required per 40 C.F.R. 403.12(b) and (d), a
minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil
and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which
historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical
sampling data are available, the Superintendent may authorize a lower
minimum. For periodic compliance reports and reports for industrial users not
subject to categorical pretreatment standards required per 40 C.F.R.
403.12(e) and 403.12(h), the Superintendent shall require the number of grab
samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by the applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements.



(1999 Code, § 101.12)  (Ord. 2558, passed 11-28-2017)  Penalty, see §
52.999



§ 52.142  MONITORING FACILITIES.



   The city may require to be provided and operated, at the industrial
user’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and
flow measurement of the user’s wastewater. The monitoring facility should
normally be situated on the industrial user’s premises, but the city may,
when a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the
industrial user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or
sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or
parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near the sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
industrial user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
city’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. When required, construction shall be completed within 90 days
following written notification by the city.



(1999 Code, § 101.13)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.143  INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.



   The city shall inspect the facilities of any industrial user to
ascertain whether the purpose of this subchapter is being met and all
requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants on premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or its
representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination/copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The city
shall have the right to set up on the user’s property the devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or
metering operations. Where an industrial user has security measures in force
which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security
personnel so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel
from the city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.



(1999 Code, § 101.14)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.144  PRETREATMENT.



   (A)   Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment
as required to comply with this subchapter and shall achieve compliance with
all national categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment requirements,
within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment
regulations or pretreatment requirements. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and
maintained at the industrial user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the
city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of
the facility. The review of the plans and operating procedures will in no way
relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions
of this subchapter. Any changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the
industrial user’s initiation of the changes. All records relating to
compliance with categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment
requirements shall be made available to officials of the EPA and the state or
approval authority upon request.



   (B)   All new wastewater sources, including but not limited to
domestic, commercial and industrial users, in the Western Industrial Corridor
and other surrounding areas discharging wastewater to the sewershed upstream
of the sewage pump station at the northwest corner of East 21st Street/44th
Avenue South and 49th Avenue/54th Street, shall also be required to (a)
install, operate, and maintain a mechanical grinder(s) for all domestic
wastewater and/or a mechanically cleaned car screen(s) for all other sources
of wastewater prior to discharge to the city’s sanitary sewer collection
system, or (b) make other provisions with the city to ensure that a
mechanical grinder(s) and/or a mechanically cleaned bar screen(s) is provided
for such discharges upstream of the aforementioned sewage pump station.
Mechanical grinder(s) shall comply with § 52.132(A)(8) of this Code of
Ordinances and mechanically cleaned screens shall comply with § 52.132(A)(8)
of this Code of Ordinances and Iowa Wastewater Facilities Design Standards
Chapter 13 Wastewater Pumping Stations and Force Mains.



(1999 Code, § 101.15)  (Ord. 2436, passed 12-14-2010; Ord. 2558, passed
11-28-2017)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.145  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections
shall be available to the public and governmental agencies without
restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the city that the release of the information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the person
furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the
public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental
agencies for uses related to this subchapter, the national pollutant
discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit
and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, the portions of a report
shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial
review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information. Information accepted by the city as confidential
shall not be transmitted to the general public by the city. All information
submitted, whether confidential or not, will be available to the EPA and the
state.



(1999 Code, § 101.16)



§ 52.146  RESIDUALS GENERATED.



   Sludges, floats, skimmings and the like generated by an industrial user
or a commercial pretreatment system shall not be placed into the city’s
POTW. The residuals shall be contained, transported and disposed of by
haulers in accordance with federal, state and local regulations.



(1999 Code, § 101.17)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.147  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS.



   The Superintendent shall provide public notice of the issuance of a
wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the
Superintendent to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit
within seven days of notice of its issuance.



   (A)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed
to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.



   (B)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this
objection and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the
wastewater discharge permit.



   (C)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not
be stayed pending the appeal.



   (D)   If the Superintendent fails to act within seven days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered
final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.



   (E)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final
administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a
complaint with the Iowa District Court for the county within 30 days after
final administrative action.



(1999 Code, § 101.18)



§ 52.148  PERMIT SUSPENSION.



   The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater discharge permit when the suspension is necessary, in the opinion
of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health
or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference with the
operations of the POTW or causes or threatens to cause the city to violate
any condition of its NPDES permit. Prior to the suspension, the city will
verbally notify an authorized representative of the industrial user of the
action. Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent
or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The
city shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater
treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying
discharge. Users shall notify the city immediately upon having a slug or
accidental discharge of substances or wastewater in violation of this
subchapter in order to enable countermeasures to be taken by the city to
minimize damage to the POTW and the receiving waters. The notification shall
include the location of the discharge, date and time of the discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken by the
industry following the discharge. Within five days of the date of occurrence,
the user shall submit to the city a detailed written statement describing the
cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences.



(1999 Code, § 101.19)



§ 52.149  REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   Any user who violates any of the following conditions of this
subchapter or applicable state or federal regulations is subject to having
the wastewater discharge permit revoked in accordance with the procedures set
out in § 52.150:



   (A)   Failure of a user to report factually the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of the user’s discharge;



   (B)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



   (C)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



   (D)   Violation of conditions of the permit.



(1999 Code, § 101.20)



§ 52.150  PROCEDURE FOR REVOCATION OR OTHER ACTION.



   (A)   Notification of violation. Whenever the city finds that any
user has violated or is violating this subchapter, wastewater discharge
permit or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained herein, the
city may serve upon the user a written notice stating the nature of the
violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the
satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user.



   (B)   Notice of hearing. The city may order any user who causes or
allows conduct prohibited by division (A) above to show cause before the
Water Quality Superintendent why enforcement action should not be taken
against the user. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time
and place of a hearing to be held by the Water Quality Superintendent
regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the
proposed enforcement action and directing the user to show cause before the
Water Quality Superintendent why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days
before the hearing. The notice of hearing may be served on any agent or
officer of a corporation.



   (C)   Hearing officials. The Water Quality Superintendent may
himself or herself conduct the hearing and take the evidence or may designate
an employee of the city to conduct the hearing.



      (1)   Issue in the name of the Water Quality Superintendent
notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and
the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearings;



      (2)   Take the evidence; and



      (3)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Council
for action thereon.



   (D)   Transcripts. At any hearing held pursuant to this subchapter,
testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The
transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public
or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.



   (E)   Issuance of orders. After the Water Quality Superintendent has
reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the
prohibited conduct. The order may direct that, following a specified time
period, sewer service be discontinued unless the problem is corrected and
additional measures are taken to prevent future problems. Further orders and
directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. The orders may
also revoke the user’s wastewater discharge permit. If the user feels that
the orders and directives are not justified, they may make an appeal to the
City Council.



   (F)   Legal action. If any user discharges domestic wastewater,
industrial wastes or other wastes into the city’s POTW contrary to the
provisions of this subchapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements or
any order of the city, the City Attorney may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the District Court.



(1999 Code, § 101.21)  (Ord. 2542, passed 9-27-2016; Ord. 2558, passed
11-28-2017)



§ 52.151  RECORDS RETENTION.



   All dischargers subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for
no less than three years any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring,
sampling and chemical analyses made by or in behalf of a user in connection
with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are subject to
any enforcement or litigation activities brought by the city pursuant hereto
shall be retained and preserved by the user until all enforcement activities
have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all
appeals have expired. The records retention period may be extended by the
city, the state or EPA.



(1999 Code, § 101.22)  Penalty, see § 52.999



§ 52.152  PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   The Superintendent shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction
served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time during the
previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance
shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other
industrial user that violates divisions (C), (D) or (H) below) and shall mean:



   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter taken during a six month period exceed (by any magnitude)
a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous
limits as defined by 40 C.F.R. 403.3(1);



   (B)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six month period equals or exceeds the product
of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous
limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable
criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);



   (C)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
as defined by 40 C.F.R. 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Superintendent
determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;



   (D)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
Superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such
a discharge;



   (E)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or a general permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;



   (F)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any
required reports, reports on compliance deadlines, periodic self monitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;



   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



   (H)   Any other violation(s), which the Superintendent determines
will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.



(Ord. 2558, passed 11-28-2017)



§ 52.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Sanitary sewer system.  The following penalty provisions
shall apply to violations of §§ 52.001 through 52.010, 52.025 through
52.034, 52.045 through 52.054, 52.065 through 52.073, 52.085 through 52.097,
52.110 through 52.119 and 52.130 through 52.151.



      (1)   Notice of violation.  Any person found to be violating
any provision of §§ 52.001 through 52.010, 52.025 through 52.034, 52.045
through 52.054, 52.065 through 52.073, 52.085 through 52.097 and 52.110
through 52.119, except § 52.004(A), (C) and (D), shall be served by the city
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period  of time stated in the notice, permanently cease
all violations.



      (2)   Continuing violations.  Any person who shall continue
any violation beyond the time limit provided for in division (A)(1) above,
commits a municipal infraction, and on conviction thereof shall be fined an
amount not exceeding $100 for each violation. Each day in which any violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.



      (3)   Liability imposed.  Any person violating any of the
provisions of these chapters shall become liable to the city for any expense,
loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of the violation.



(1999 Code, § 95.11)



   (C)   Sewage pretreatment program.



      (1)   Civil penalties.  Any user who is found to have
violated an order of the Council or who has failed to comply with any
provision of §§ 52.130 through 52.151 and orders, rules and regulations and
permits issued hereunder shall be fined not more than $1,000 for each
offense. Each day on which a violation occurs or continues is deemed a
separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein,
the city may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, court
reporters’ fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law
against the person found to have violated §§ 52.130 through 52.151 or the
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.



      (2)   Recovery of costs for damage.  Any user violating any
of the provisions of §§ 52.130 through 52.151 or who has a discharge which
causes a deposit, obstruction, damage or other impairment to the city’s
POTW shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by
the violation or discharge. The city may add to the user’s charges and fees
the costs assessed or incurred for any cleaning, repair or replacement work
caused by the violation or discharge, or may bill the user directly. Refusal
to pay the assessed or incurred costs shall constitute a violation of §§
52.130 through 52.151.



      (3)   Falsifying information.  Any person who knowingly makes
any false statements, representations or certifications in any application,
record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained
pursuant to §§ 52.130 through 52.151, or wastewater discharge permit, or
who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under §§ 52.130 through 52.151 shall upon
conviction be punished by a fine of not more than $100.



(1999 Code, § 101.23)  (Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)



CHAPTER 53:  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT



Section



   53.01   Purpose



   53.02   Definitions



   53.03   Natural drainage systems



   53.04   Proper drainage



   53.05   Stormwater management



   53.06   Stormwater discharge



   53.07   Illegally discharged stormwater



   53.08   Sedimentation and erosion control



   53.09   Stormwater management plan



   53.10   Stormwater detention regulations



   53.11   Illicit discharges prohibited



   53.12   Illicit connections prohibited



   53.13   Industrial discharges



   53.14   Illicit discharge detection and reporting; cost recovery



   53.15   Suspension of access to the city’s storm sewer system



   53.16   Watercourse protection



   53.17   Enforcement



   53.18   Appeal



 



   53.99   Penalty



§ 53.01  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to eliminate threats to public
health, safety and welfare caused by runoff or excessive stormwater and to
protect property owners from excessive drainage from neighboring properties.



(Ord. 2390, passed 10-28-2008)



§ 53.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the city or any authorized deputy,
agent or representative.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any manmade change to real estate.



   EROSION.  The wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the
movement of wind, water and ice.



   EXCESSIVE STORMWATER RUNOFF.  The volume and rate of flow of
stormwater discharge from an urbanized drainage area which is or will be in
excess of that volume and rate which existed prior to the development.



   FIFTY-YEAR STORM.  Six and three-tenths inches of rain falling in a
24-hour period.



   FIVE-YEAR STORM.  Three and nine-tenths inches of rain falling in a
24-hour period.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or groundwater.



   ONE HUNDRED-YEAR STORM.  Seven and three-tenths inches of rain falling
in a 24-hour period.



   ONE-YEAR STORM. Two and six-tenths inches of rain falling in a 24-hour
period.



   SEDIMENTATION.  The process that deposits soils, debris and other
material either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water of storm
drainage systems.



   SITE.  Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof
under the same ownership.



   STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface
waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.



   STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  All means, natural or manmade, used for
conducting stormwater to, through or from a drainage area to the point of
final outlet from a property.



   STORMWATER RUNOFF.  The waters derived from melting snow or rain
falling within a tributary drainage basin, which flow over the surface of the
ground or are collected in channels or conduits.



   TEN-YEAR STORM.  Four and five-tenths inches of rain falling in a
24-hour period.



   TWENTY-FIVE-YEAR STORM.  Five and five-tenths inches of rain falling
in a 24-hour period.



   TWO-YEAR STORM.  Three and one-tenth inches of rain falling in a
24-hour period.



(Ord. 2390, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016)



§ 53.03  NATURAL DRAINAGE SYSTEMS.



   To the extent practical, all developments shall conform to the contours
of the land and natural and preexisting manmade drainage ways shall remain
undisturbed. Also, to the extent practical, all lot boundaries shall be made
to coincide with natural and preexisting manmade drainage ways within new
subdivisions to avoid the creation of lots that can be built only by altering
the drainage ways.



(Ord. 2390, passed 10-28-2008)



§ 53.04  PROPER DRAINAGE.



   (A)   All developments shall be provided with a drainage system that
is adequate to prevent the undue retention of surface water on the
development site. Surface water shall not be regarded as unduly retained if:



      (1)   The retention results from a technique, practice or
device deliberately installed as part of an approved stormwater runoff
control plan; or



      (2)   The retention is not substantially different in location
or degree than that experienced by the development site in its predevelopment
stage unless the retention presents a danger to health or safety.



   (B)   Whenever practical, the drainage system of a development shall
coordinate with and connect to the drainage system or drainage ways on
surrounding properties or street. No surface water may be channeled or
directed into a sanitary sewer unless approved by the Public Works Director.



(Ord. 2390, passed 10-28-2008)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.05  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.



   All developments shall be constructed and maintained so that adjacent
properties are not unreasonably burdened with surface waters as a result of
the development. More specifically:



   (A)   No development may be constructed or maintained so that the
development unreasonably impedes the natural flow of water from higher
adjacent properties across the development thereby unreasonably causing
substantial damage to the higher adjacent properties; and



   (B)   No development may be constructed or maintained so that
surface waters from the development are unreasonably collected and channeled
onto lower adjacent properties at the location or the volumes as to cause
substantial damage to lower adjacent properties.



(Ord. 2390, passed 10-28-2008)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.06  STORMWATER DISCHARGE.



   Stormwater conducted from roofs or other impervious areas shall be
dispersed entirely upon the grounds of the owner of the contributing property
or it shall be drained or conducted into ditches, storm drains or gutters
where available on public property or easements legally useable for that
purpose, or into public streams. No stormwater shall be purposely directed
onto a neighboring property.



   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any
stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage,
including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer or
combined sewer.



   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted water shall be discharged
to a storm sewer, except that unpolluted cooling or process water shall only
be so discharged upon approval by the Council. The Council may also approve
discharge of unpolluted water into a natural outlet or a combined sewer,
provided the discharge complies with applicable state and federal regulations.



   (C)   The Superintendent is authorized to grant an exemption from
the provisions of this section to permit the connection of downspouts into a
combined sewer or to permit any water to be discharged into a combined sewer
after written application is made for an exemption. A written permit shall be
issued granting the exemption if, in the opinion of the Superintendent:



      (1)   A reasonably available absorption area is not present
for the water;



      (2)   Allowing the downspout to discharge onto the ground,
sidewalk, street or alley will create a hazardous or unsatisfactory condition
or the failure to permit the discharge of water as applied for would create a
hazardous or unsatisfactory condition; or



      (3)   Disconnection from the sewer would require major
structural alteration.



(1999 Code, § 97.01)  (Ord. 2390, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2543, passed
9-27-2016)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.07  ILLEGALLY DISCHARGED STORMWATER.



   (A)   In the event it is determined that stormwater, surface water,
water from downspouts or any water is illegally discharged into any sanitary
sewer or combined sewer in violation of § 53.06, the city shall serve a
written notice upon the owner and/or tenant, ordering the removal of the
illegal connection or discharge. The notice shall be signed by the City
Engineer or an authorized representative and shall allow 15 days for the
removal of the illegal connection or discharge. The notice shall provide for
a right to a hearing before the Council on the order to remove, providing the
party requesting the hearing submits a written request for it to the City
Engineer within 15 days after receipt of the order to remove. The removal of
the illegal connection or discharge requires the disconnection of any pipe
carrying the prohibited discharge to the sewer system either at ground level
or underground and the capping or blocking of the remaining pipe so as to
prevent any water from entering the sewer system. The Superintendent has the
right to inspect and approve any removal.



   (B)   (1)   In the event the owner does not remove the illegal
connection or discharge and does not receive an exemption, the owner shall be
charged a surcharge based on roof area as set forth in the following schedule:



 


Roof Area

 

Quarterly Surcharge



Less than 3,000 square feet
 

$15



3,000 square feet to 4,999 square feet
 

$30



5,000 square feet to 9,999 square feet
 

$50



10,000 square feet and up
 

$65




 



      (2)   There shall be one surcharge per property, regardless of
the number of downspout connections. The Superintendent shall provide the
Clerk with a current list of buildings with downspout connections. The
surcharge shall be part of the sewer service bill and collected in the same
manner.



(1999 Code, § 97.02)  (Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016; Ord. 2556, passed
10-24-2017)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.08  SEDIMENTATION AND EROSION CONTROL.



   No building permit will be issued or subdivision plat approved unless
adequate measures are taken to reduce, control or eliminate erosion during
development, as well as improvements reasonably required to prevent erosion
after completion of the development.



   (A)   Permit required. Development sites that result in a total
disturbed area of one or more acres shall obtain an erosion control permit
prior to any land disturbing activities.



   (B)   Erosion control permits. All erosion control permits shall be
issued by the City Engineering Department upon approval of a completed
erosion control permit application. The application shall be signed by the
title holder of the site, together with the applicant, if different from the
title holder. Any site required to obtain an erosion control permit is also
required to obtain the Iowa DNR NPDES General Permit Number 2.



   (C)   Application. A major erosion control permit application shall
include the following:



      (1)   A completed application for erosion control permit on a
form provided by the city.



      (2)   A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)
conforming to:



         (a)   The requirements of this chapter, and the
requirements of General Permit No. 2.



         (b)   If a SWPPP for the site has previously been
submitted to the city and has not been modified, the applicant shall submit a
signed and dated statement that the SWPPP has not been modified, in which
case the SWPPP need not be resubmitted.



         (c)   Payment of the permit fee, which is scheduled at
$100. Erosion control permits are good for one year from date of issuance.



   (D)   All SWPPPs shall comply with all current minimum mandatory
requirements for SWPPPs promulgated by the Iowa DNR in connection with the
General Permit No. 2, including those published as summary guidance for
General Permit No. 2 by the Iowa DNR. All SWPPPs shall be signed and dated by
a qualified professional certified in preparation of a SWPPP in the State of
Iowa or a licensed engineer in the State of Iowa.



   (E)   The City Engineer or designee may inspect all sites in
response to reports from third parties or at any other time, at the City
Engineer’s discretion. The City Engineer or designee may issue a notice to
comply to the responsible party or parties, describing any problems and
specifying a compliance date. Failure to achieve a specified compliance date
is a violation of this section. The City Engineer may issue a notice of
violation in writing which may order the discontinuance of work and ordering
action to correct it. Failure to respond and comply after the notice of
violation within a four- day period will result in enforcement by civil
action including action of injunctive relief, withholding of occupancy
permits, and a municipal infraction.



(Ord. 2390, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see §
53.99



§ 53.09  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.



   When necessary the Public Works Director may require the owner or
developer of a property to submit a stormwater management plan. The plan
shall be required when it is determined that the existing natural or manmade
drainage ways are not adequate to carry stormwater flow from a proposed
development. Plans and specifications shall be prepared and certified by a
professional engineer registered in the state.



   (A)   Design criteria.  The design of stormwater runoff systems,
structures and facilities shall be based on the following minimum standards
which do not preclude the use of higher design standards.



   (B)   Applicability.  The provisions of divisions (C) through (G)
below shall apply to the following areas under development:



      (1)   All residential development of two acres or more and all
commercial and industrial developments in excess of one-half acres;



      (2)   Any development where the percentage of the impervious
area of the lot is 50% or greater; and



      (3)   Any development which, in the opinion of the City
Engineer, lacks an adequate internal or external excess stormwater passageway.



   (C)   Runoff calculation.



      (1)   Design flows shall normally be calculated using the
procedures outlined in the Soil Conservation Services, Technical Release No.
55 Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds and the Iowa Users Guide and
Supplement for the Technical Release No. 55. For drainage basins of 20 acres
or less, the rational method may be used.



      (2)   In all cases, all areas are to be considered fully
developed, in accordance with the city’s current comprehensive plan.



   (D)   Storm sewers. Storm sewers and intakes shall be designed for a
five-year frequency storm in a manner that the flooded street width shall not
exceed ten feet on each side from the face of the curb.



   (E)   Excess stormwater passageway.  An excess stormwater
passageway shall be provided for all developments. The passage shall have the
capacity to convey through the proposed development the excess stormwater
from the tributary watershed. The capacity of the excess stormwater passage
shall be constructed in a manner as to transport the peak rate of runoff from
a 100-year return frequency storm.



   (F)   Open channels.  The size and shape of open channels shall be
designed to meet the requirements of runoff, depth, side slopes, gradient and
velocity limitations in accordance with the site conditions. Runoff shall be
based on 100-year storm frequency. Manning’s formula as cited in most civil
engineering handbooks, shall be used in hydraulic design of open channels.
Channel banks shall be protected by use of low vegetation, rip-rap, turf
reinforcement matting, or paving as design velocity dictates subject to the
approval of the City Engineer.



   (G)   Easements.



      (1)   Drainage easements shall be provided for all conduits
and those bypass channels where the 100-year runoff exceeds one cubic foot
per second.



      (2)   Whenever any stream or water course is located in an
area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall dedicate a public
right-of-way or drainage easement conforming substantially with the lines of
the stream or water course and shall include the additional area adjoining
both edges of the stream or water course that has been affected by damaging
flood waters and/or inundated by the 100-year flood waters, as determined by
the city engineer. Maintenance of the stream and banks shall be the
responsibility of the landowners upon which the stream is located. This
maintenance responsibility shall be clearly defined in a recorded document.
The subdivider shall also provide reasonable public easements for access.



      (3)   It shall be noted on the final plat, “Owners of lots
on which a drainage easement has been established as a stormwater passageway
shall maintain the easement as a lawn, planted in grass and free of
structures, fences, fill, bushes, trees, shrubs or other landscaping that
would impede the flow of water.” In the event that the area established as
a drainage easement is reshaped or otherwise restricted for use as a drainage
easement, the city will cause the restrictions to be removed at the expense
of the parties causing the restrictions.



(Ord. 2390, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see §
53.99



§ 53.10  STORMWATER DETENTION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of these regulations is to diminish
threats to public health, safety and welfare caused by runoff of excessive
stormwater from new development and redevelopment. This excessive stormwater
could result in flooding of damageable properties. The cause of increase in
stormwater runoff quantity is the development and improvement of land and, as
such, this section regulates these activities to reduce adverse impacts.



   (B)   Applicability.  No building permit shall be issued for the
construction, reconstruction or structural alteration of a building and/or
its parking area nor shall a certificate of occupancy be granted for a use
nor shall a preliminary plat, final plat or site plan be approved without
conformity with the provisions of the stormwater detention regulations.



   (C)   Stormwater detention criteria.



      (1)   All stormwater storage areas must be designed to contain
and safely pass stormwater runoff. When platting, the land extending to the
centerline of any adjacent right-of-way shall be considered part of the
development for purposes of determining the runoff rate. Adequate spillway
provisions shall be provided to transport peak runoff from a 100-year storm
assuming the outlet to be plugged. All stormwater facilities shall be
designed in accordance with the design standards established by the city
engineer.



      (2)   For the release for drainage, the combined capacity of
these storage areas shall be sufficient to contain the stormwater runoff from
a 100-year storm from the development with a peak release rate less than or
equal to the predevelopment release of five-year storm having a runoff co-
efficient “c” of 0.15, when using the rational method for areas under 20
acres or a curve number of 60 when using the S.C.S. TR-55.



      (3)   For the release for drainage, the combined capacity of
these storage areas shall be sufficient to contain the stormwater runoff from
a two-year storm from the development with a peak release rate less than or
equal to the predevelopment release of two-year storm having a runoff co-
efficient “c” of 0.15, when using the rational method for areas under 20
acres or a curve number of 60 when using the S.C.S. TR-55.



      (4)   For the release for drainage, the combined capacity of
these storage areas shall be sufficient to contain the stormwater runoff from
a one-year storm from the development with a peak release rate less than or
equal to the predevelopment release of one-year storm having a runoff co-
efficient “c” of 0.15, when using the rational method for areas under 20
acres or a curve number of 60 when using the S.C.S. TR-55.



   (D)   Exemptions.  The following shall be exempt from these
regulations.



      (1)   Any final plat approved within three years of October
28, 2008, and based upon a preliminary plat which was approved prior to the
October 28, 2008, subject to the development not being required to provide
detention facilities by any other ordinances of the city.



         (a)   Any preliminary or final plat of a single-family
or two-family development consisting of no more than two acres in total area;



         (b)   A preliminary or final plat of single-family
development consisting of lots, all of which are one acre or larger; and



         (c)   Any developed lot zoned commercial, industrial or
multi-family which existed on October 28, 2008, where the sum of
modifications or additions:



            1.   Does not increase the stormwater runoff more
than 20% for any storm, as determined, using the rational formula; and



            2.   Does not increase the impervious area more
than 5,000 square feet.



      (2)   (a)   Any developed lot zoned commercial, industrial
or multi-family which existed on October 28, 2008, which does not qualify for
these exemptions shall provide stormwater detention sufficient to store the
increased runoff resulting from the alterations and additions; and



         (b)   Any single-family and two-family developed and
undeveloped lots which existed on October 28, 2008.



   (E)   Stormwater detention plan review.  Stormwater detention plans
shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review.



      (1)   For new or expanding commercial, industrial and
multi-family developments, a stormwater detention plan shall be submitted as
part of the site plan review.



      (2)   For new single-family and two-family residential
developments, a stormwater detention plan shall be submitted as part of the
plat review.



      (3)   If no plat or site plan review is required, a stormwater
detention plan must be approved by the City Engineer before a building permit
is issued.



   (F)   Stormwater detention plan requirements.  Each applicant shall
submit all calculations and other information as deemed necessary to
demonstrate to the City Engineer the stormwater runoff rate and capacity of
stormwater storage facilities. Required information may vary according to the
size of development but shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   Map of the property and immediate vicinity showing
elevation or contours (based on city datum);



      (2)   Mapping and description of existing and proposed
drainage system features of the property and immediate vicinity;



      (3)   Physical features of the property and immediate
vicinity; and



      (4)   If the development is to be staged, a plan of how the
stormwater detention requirement will be met for each stage.



   (G)   Common detention facilities.  The city may, in lieu of
on-site detention facilities, accept the furnishing of off-site facilities
which, when added to on-site detention facilities shall provide sufficient
storage capacity to provide the stormwater detention required to meet this
regulation. Until the time as the permanent off-site stormwater detention
facilities are available, temporary on-site detention shall be provided. An
acceptable legal contract between the developer and the off-site land owner
shall be approved by the City Council.



   (H)   Completion of facilities.  The stormwater detention
facilities shall be constructed and in use according to the following
criteria.



      (1)   For commercial, industrial and multi-family
developments, the facilities shall be constructed concurrent with site
grading. A certificate of completion shall be furnished by the developer’s
engineer certifying that they have been constructed according to the approved
plans before an occupancy permit is issued by the city.



      (2)   For single-family and two-family residential buildings,
the developer’s engineer shall certify that the structural improvements
have been substantially complete and the detention facility rough graded
before a building permit is issued. A certificate of completion shall be
furnished by the engineer certifying that the facilities into which the
lot(s) drain have been constructed according to the approved plans before an
occupancy permit is issued by the city. These requirements may be delayed for
six months when the developer provides to the city a performance bond, by
cash or certified check, guaranteeing construction of the detention facility
in an amount equal to 150% of the estimated cost. The city shall assume its
maintenance responsibilities upon the receipt of the engineer’s certificate
of completion.



   (I)   Responsibilities.



      (1)   Industrial, commercial, condominiums and multi-family
developments and single-family or two-family lots or development with
individual detention facilities or single-family or two-family lots or
development when the developer elects that the maintenance of the stormwater
detention facility shall be the responsibility of parties other than the city.



         (a)   The developer shall be responsible for providing a
plan of ownership of the detention facilities involving a single owner, an
association or another plan of ownership approved by the city.



         (b)   The owner shall be responsible to ensure the
continuing functioning of the facility as originally designed and intended.



         (c)   The owner(s) shall be responsible for the
continued functioning and adequate maintenance and repairs of the detention
facility.



         (d)   The developer shall dedicate an easement to the
city reserving the land for use as a stormwater detention facility providing
the city with the right to inspect the facility and the necessary easements
for ingress and egress.



         (e)   The Public Works Director, or his or her designee,
shall provide inspection of the detention facilities at the schedule
established by Council resolution. If the Director finds any maintenance work
is necessary, the Director shall serve a written order to the owner of the
facilities specifying therein the work necessary to be done and providing for
a reasonable time for its completion. Any property owner to whom an order is
directed shall have the right, within three days from service of the order,
to appeal to the City Administrator who shall review the order within five
working days and file his or her decision. Unless the order is revoked or
modified, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the owner as
directed within the time established by the Director’s written order or the
time as modified by the City Administrator’s decision. When an owner to
whom an order has been issued fails to comply within the time specified, the
Director shall remedy the condition, or contract with others for the purpose,
and charge all costs, including administration, to whom the order is
directed. If the cost of remedying a condition is not paid within 30 days
after the mailing of a statement therefore from the Public Works Director,
the cost shall be assessed against the property for collection in the same
manner as a property tax. In the event the association fails or is unable to
pay the costs associated with detention facility maintenance, these costs
shall be assessed against those users of the facility based upon their
percentage of use.



      (2)   Single-family and two-family development with common
detention facilities where maintenance or the stormwater detention facility
shall be the responsibility of the city.



         (a)   Common detention facilities, for the purpose of
this section, shall be defined as a facility which serves two or more lots
which has outlet pipes and structures in conformance with city design and
construction standards.



         (b)   The developer shall dedicate an easement to the
city reserving the land for use as a stormwater detention facility; the right
to enter upon the lands to inspect, reconstruct, regrade, maintain and repair
the facility including the levee and detention structures and the necessary
easements for ingress and egress.



         (c)   The owner of the land upon which the detention
easement is located shall mow and maintain the grass, trees and other
vegetation, but shall not plant or allow to grow trees, shrubs or bushes on
or within ten feet of the detention levee or berm. The owner may place
nonfloatable benches or other nonfloatable amenities within the easement area
but same shall be maintained by the owner.



         (d)   The city shall be responsible for the continued
functioning maintenance and repair or the detention levee or berms, storm
sewer, inlet structures or similar appurtenances.



   (J)   Appeal.  The City Council may, in the resolution approving
the preliminary plat of any subdivision and upon appeal of the developer or
the recommendation of the Director of Community Development, waive or change
the requirements of this chapter for a particular development whenever the
developer demonstrates either:



      (1)   Due to the location of the property, strict compliance
would provide no discernible benefit for reduction of flooding on any plat
adjacent or downstream property;



      (2)   Due to the nature of the property, strict compliance
would create unusual hardship out of proportion to any foreseeable benefit
and that the requested change or reduction in requirements will not increase
the risk of flooding of any building or the buildable portion of any lot on
any adjacent or downstream property; or



      (3)   The developer, in lieu of a detention facility, provides
stormwater management sufficient to achieve the purpose of this chapter by
keeping stormwater runoff from the property in accordance with division (C)
above.



(Ord. 2390, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see §
53.99



§ 53.11 ILLICIT DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For purposes of §§ 53.11 through 53.18, a RESPONSIBLE PARTY
is one or more persons that control or are in possession of or own property.
RESPONSIBLE PARTIES shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance
with §§ 53.11 through 53.18 and jointly and severally liable for any
illicit discharge from the property controlled, possessed or owned. For
purposes of §§ 53.11 through 53.18, PROPERTY includes but is not limited to
real estate, fixtures, facilities and premises of any kind located upon,
under or above the real estate.



   (B)   Nothing in §§ 53.11 through 53.18 shall be deemed to relieve
a responsible party subject to an IDNR-issued industrial discharge permit or
any other federal, state or city permit, statute, ordinance or rule from any
obligation imposed by the permit, statute, ordinance or rule if any
obligation is greater than any obligation imposed by §§ 53.11 through 53.18.



   (C)   Any discharge into the city’s storm sewer system prohibited
by the city’s MS4 permit, the terms of which are hereby incorporated by
reference, shall be deemed an illicit discharge in violation of §§ 53.11
through 53.18.



   (D)   Sediment pollution originating from excessive erosion rates on
a construction site or sediment pollution entering a municipal storm sewer
that causes a water quality violation as determined by the DNR shall be
deemed an illicit discharge in violation of §§ 53.11 through 53.18.



(Ord. 2320, passed 3-14-2006; Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see §
53.99



§ 53.12  ILLICIT CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   For purposes of §§ 53.11 through 53.18, an ILLICIT
CONNECTION to the city’s storm sewer system is any physical connection or
other topographical or other condition, natural or artificial, which is not
specifically authorized by ordinance or written rule of the city, which
causes or facilitates, directly or indirectly, an illicit discharge.



   (B)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of
any illicit connection shall constitute a violation of §§ 53.11 through
53.18.



   (C)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time
of connection.



(Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see § 53.99



§ 53.13  INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES.



   (A)   Any responsible party subject to an industrial NPDES discharge
permit issued by the IDNR shall comply with all provisions of the permit.



   (B)   Proof of compliance with the permit may be required in a form
acceptable to the enforcement officer prior to discharges to the storm sewer
system authorized by the permit.



(Ord. 2320, passed 3-14-2006; Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see §
53.99



§ 53.14  ILLICIT DISCHARGE DETECTION AND REPORTING; COST RECOVERY.



   (A)   All detection activities permitted under §§ 53.11 through
53.18 shall be conducted by the Water Pollution Control Plant Superintendent,
or his or her designee, hereinbefore and after referred to as the enforcement
officer.



   (B)   The city shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect
consequences to persons or property of an illicit discharge or circumstances
which may cause an illicit discharge, undetected by the city.



   (C)   Every responsible party has an absolute duty to monitor
conditions on property owned or controlled by them, to prevent all illicit
discharges and to report to the enforcement officer illicit discharges, which
the responsible party knows or should have known to have occurred. Failure to
comply with any provision of §§ 53.11 through 53.18 is a violation of those
sections.



      (1)   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as
any responsible party has information of any known or suspected illicit
discharge, the responsible party shall immediately take all necessary steps
to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of the discharge at the
responsible party’s sole cost.



      (2)   If the illicit discharge consists of hazardous
materials, the responsible party shall also immediately notify emergency
response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services.



      (3)   If the illicit discharge emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of the establishment shall
also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken
to prevent its recurrence. Records shall be retained for at least three years.



      (4)   A report of an illicit discharge shall be made in person
or by phone or facsimile or email to the enforcement officer immediately but
in any event within 24 hours of the illicit discharge.



   (D)   Any person or entity shall also report to the city any illicit
discharge or circumstances which the person or entity reasonably believes
pose a risk of an illicit discharge.



   (E)   Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous divisions, or
otherwise coming into possession of information indicating an actual or
imminent illicit discharge, the enforcement officer shall conduct an
inspection of the site as soon as reasonably possible and thereafter shall
provide to the responsible party, and any third party reporter, a written
report of the conditions which may cause or which have already caused an
illicit discharge. The responsible party shall immediately commence
corrective action or remediation and shall complete the corrective action or
remediation within 24 hours.



   (F)   The enforcement officer shall be permitted to enter and
inspect property subject to regulation under this section as often as is
necessary to determine compliance with this section. If a responsible party
has security measures that require identification and clearance before entry
to its property or premises, the responsible party shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access by the enforcement officer. By way of
specification but not limitation:



      (1)   A responsible party shall allow the enforcement officer
ready access to all parts of the property for purposes of inspection,
sampling, examination and copying of records related to a suspected, actual
or imminent illicit discharge, and for the performance of any additional
duties as defined by state and federal law;



      (2)   The enforcement officer shall have the right to set up
on any property the devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
enforcement officer to conduct monitoring and/or sampling related to a
suspected, actual or imminent illicit discharge;



      (3)   The enforcement officer shall have the right to require
any responsible party at responsible party’s sole expense to install
monitoring equipment and deliver monitoring data or reports to the
enforcement officer as the enforcement officer directs. The sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the responsible party at responsible party’s sole
expense. All devices shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy;



      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the responsible party at the written or oral order of the enforcement
officer and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing the access shall be
borne by the responsible party;



      (5)   An unreasonable delay in allowing the enforcement
officer access to a property is a violation of §§ 53.11 through 53.18; and



      (6)   If the enforcement officer has been refused access to
any part of the property from an illicit connection and/or illicit discharge
to a municipal storm sewer is occurring, suspected or imminent, and is able
to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
§§ 53.11 through 53.18, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as
part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with §§ 53.11 through 53.18 or any order issued hereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then
the enforcement officer may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court
of competent jurisdiction.



   (G)   If it is determined that an illicit discharge is imminent or
has occurred, the actual administrative costs incurred by the city in the
enforcement of §§ 53.11 through 53.18 shall be recovered from the
responsible party. The enforcement officer shall submit an invoice to the
responsible party reflecting the actual costs and wages and expenses incurred
by the city for the enforcement activities undertaken. Failure to pay charges
invoiced under §§ 53.11 through 53.18 within 30 days of billing shall
constitute a violation of §§ 53.11 through 53.18.



(Ord. 2320, passed 3-14-2006; Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see §
53.99



§ 53.15  SUSPENSION OF ACCESS TO THE CITY’S STORM SEWER SYSTEM.



   (A)   Emergency suspension. The enforcement officer may, without
prior notice, suspend storm sewer system access to a property when the
emergency suspension is necessary to stop an ongoing or imminent illicit
discharge. If the responsible party fails to immediately comply with an
emergency suspension order, the enforcement officer shall take steps as
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize the illicit discharge. All costs of
the action shall be recovered from the responsible party for the property
identified as the source of the illicit discharge.



   (B)   Non-emergency suspension. If the enforcement officer detects
or is informed of circumstances which could cause an illicit discharge but
the illicit discharge is not ongoing or imminent, and if the suspension of
storm sewer system access would reasonably be expected to prevent or reduce
the potential illicit discharge, the enforcement officer shall notify the
responsible party of the proposed suspension of storm sewer system access and
the time and date of the suspension. Notice to one responsible party for the
property shall be sufficient notice to all. Remediation of the circumstances
shall avoid a violation of §§ 53.11 through 53.18 provided that no illicit
discharge occurs. In the alternative, the responsible party may request a
meeting with the enforcement officer for the purpose of presenting
information which the responsible party believes will show that remediation
is unnecessary, and if the enforcement officer finds the information is
satisfactory the enforcement officer may rescind or modify the notice of
suspension. If the enforcement officer finds the information unsatisfactory
the enforcement officer shall issue a final written order of suspension
including the date and time of suspension and the order may be appealed as
provided hereinafter. Any physical action to reinstate storm sewer system
access to property subject to the order prior to obtaining a court order of
relief shall be deemed a violation of §§ 53.11 through 53.18. An order of
suspension shall not preclude charging the responsible party with a municipal
infraction as provided hereinafter or taking any other enforcement action
permitted by statute or ordinance.



(Ord. 2320, passed 3-14-2006; Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016)



§ 53.16  WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or the
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property below the elevation of the 100-year flood free of trash,
debris, grass clippings or other organic wastes and other obstacles that
would pollute, contaminate or significantly alter the quality of water
flowing through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that the structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function or physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Ord. 2320, passed 3-14-2006; Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016)  Penalty, see §
53.99



§ 53.17  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Violation of any provision of §§ 53.11 through 53.18 may be
enforced by civil action including an action for injunctive relief. In any
civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial, the city shall be
entitled to recover its attorneys’ fees and costs from a person who is
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated §§ 53.11
through 53.18.



   (B)   Violation of any provision of § 53.11 through 53.18 may also
be enforced as a municipal infraction within the meaning of § 10.99,
pursuant to the city’s municipal infraction division.



   (C)   Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by
the enforcement officer upon the advice and consent of the City Attorney.



(Ord. 2320, passed 3-14-2006; Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016)



§ 53.18  APPEAL.



   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the enforcement
officer may appeal the decision to the City Council. The appeal shall be
completed by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 14
days from the date of issue of the written decision by the enforcement
officer. For appeal purposes, the date of issue shall be the date the
enforcement officer signs, dates and mails the written decision. Failure to
file a timely notice of appeal as required herein shall constitute a waiver
of the right to appeal and the decision of the enforcement officer shall be
final.



   (B)   The notice of appeal shall clearly set forth with specificity
each and every ground that serves as the basis for the appeal, and it shall
be accompanied by any pertinent information which may be required to
adequately evaluate the appeal. Any matter not specifically raised in the
notice of appeal shall be deemed to be final and shall not be reviewed by the
City Council.



   (C)   The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a $100 filing fee
for administrative and publication costs.



   (D)   Upon receipt of a timely filed notice of appeal, a hearing
shall be scheduled no later than 20 working days after the date on which the
written petition was filed and may be extended for a reasonable period by the
Mayor’s discretion, or upon written request from the petitioner or the
building official, for good cause shown.



   (E)   In the event that an ambiguity arises as to an interpretation
of the code, the City Council may interpret the code as applied to the
specific instance presented. The decisions shall be on a case by case basis
and shall not be binding in future cases.



   (F)   The City Council shall not waive any requirements of the code
unless the City Council concludes that the provision(s) is unduly burdensome
or impracticable under the circumstances. The decisions will also be as a
case by case basis and shall not be binding in future cases.



(Ord. 2320, passed 3-14-2006; Ord. 2543, passed 9-27-2016)



§ 53.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter commits a
municipal infraction. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation, nor shall the violation be permitted to continue. All
persons shall be required to correct or remedy the violations or defects
within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, the application
of the penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of the
prohibited condition.



(Ord. 2390, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



   Chapter



      70.   ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC CODE



      71.   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES



      72.   GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



        73.   SPEED REGULATIONS



      74.   TURNING REGULATIONS



      75.   STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED



      76.   LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS



      77.   PEDESTRIANS



      78.   ONE-WAY TRAFFIC



      79.   PARKING REGULATIONS



      80.   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES



      81.   BICYCLE REGULATIONS



      82.   RAILROAD REGULATIONS



      83.   CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES



      84.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



      85.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC CODE



Section



Administration of Traffic Code



   70.01   Title



   70.02   Definitions



   70.03   Administration and enforcement



   70.04   Power to direct traffic



   70.05   Traffic accidents; reports



   70.06   Peace officer’s authority



   70.07   Obedience to peace officers



   70.08   Parades regulated



   70.09   Traffic Study Commission



Enforcement of Traffic Code



   70.20   Arrest or citation



   70.21   Scheduled violations



   70.22   Parking violations; alternate



   70.23   Parking violations; vehicle unattended



   70.24   Presumption in reference to illegal parking



   70.25   Impounding vehicles



ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE



§ 70.01  TITLE.



   Chapters 70 through 85 of this code of ordinances may be known and
cited as the Clinton Traffic Code.



(1999 Code, § 60.01)



§ 70.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Where
words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by state law, the
definitions apply to their use in the Traffic Code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are
reiterated, and other words and phrases used herein, have the following
meanings.



(Iowa Code § 321.1)



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a
highway when 50% or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet
or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.



   PARK or PARKING.  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.



   PEACE OFFICER.  Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic
or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where 40% or
more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of 300 feet or more is
occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for business.



   SCHOOL DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a highway
for a distance of 200 feet in either direction from a school house.



   STAND or STANDING.  The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.



   STOP.  When required, the complete cessation of movement.



   STOP or STOPPING.  When prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or
traffic control sign or signal.



   SUBURBAN DISTRICT.  All other parts of the city not included in the
business, school or residence districts.



   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.  All signs, signals, markings and devices not
inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.



   VEHICLE.  Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street or alley.



(1999 Code, § 60.02)



§ 70.03  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   Provisions of this chapter and state law relating to motor vehicles and
law of the road are enforced by the Police Department.



(Iowa Code § 372.13(4))  (1999 Code, § 60.03)



§ 70.04  POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.



   A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace officer, any officer of
the Fire Department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the
event of an emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require,
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.



(Iowa Code §§ 102.4, 321.236(2))  (1999 Code, § 60.04)



§ 70.05  TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS; REPORTS.



   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident within the limits of
the city shall file a report as and when required by the State Department of
Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the city for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of
Iowa Code § 321.271.



(Iowa Code §§ 321.273)  (1999 Code, § 60.05)



§ 70.06  PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY.



   A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle to require exhibition
of the driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum of
traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the
vehicle with reference to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or
other manifest of employment, tires and safety equipment or to inspect the
registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel order or
permit of the vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a
vehicle may require exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage
card issued for the vehicle.



(Iowa Code § 321.492)  (1999 Code, § 60.06)



§ 70.07  OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority to
direct, control or regulate traffic.



(Iowa Code § 321.229)  (1999 Code, § 60.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.08  PARADES REGULATED.



   No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any street except as
provided herein.



   (A)   Definition.  For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      PARADE.  Any march or procession of persons or vehicles
organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or
manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or
advertised to the public as a parade.



   (B)   Permit required.  No parade shall be conducted without first
obtaining a written permit from the City Administrator. The permit shall
state the time and date for the parade to be held and the streets or general
route therefor. The written permit granted to the person organizing or
sponsoring the parade shall be permission for all participants therein to
parade when the participants have been invited by the permittee to
participate therein. No fee shall be required for the permit.



   (C)   Parade not a street obstruction.  Any parade for which a
permit has been issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully
participating therein, shall not be deemed an obstruction of the streets
notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary.



   (D)   Control by police and firefighters.  Persons participating in
any parade shall at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions
in the performance of their duties of law enforcement personnel and members
of the Fire Department.



(1999 Code, § 60.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.09  TRAFFIC STUDY COMMISSION.



   A Traffic Study Commission is hereby established consisting of five
members who are residents of the city, appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council. Each member is appointed for a term of six years.
The terms of the members are staggered, with each term of office to expire on
March 31. If any vacancy occurs, the Mayor, with the approval of the Council,
shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. The Police Chief,
Fire Chief and Public Works Director are ex officio members of the
Commission. The members of the Traffic Study Commission receive no
compensation for their services. The Commission shall study and analyze any
traffic problems in the city and report their recommendations regarding the
matters to the Council. The Traffic Study Commission may elect any officers
and adopt any rules it deems necessary for the operation of the Commission.



(1999 Code, § 60.09)



ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC CODE



§ 70.20  ARREST OR CITATION.



   Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person
has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, the officer may:



   (A)   Immediate arrest.  Immediately arrest the person and take the
person before a local magistrate; or



   (B)   Issue citation.  Without arresting the person, prepare in
quintuplicate a combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the
State Commissioner of Public Safety and deliver the original and a copy to
the court where the defendant is to appear, two copies to the defendant and
retain the fifth copy for the records of the city.



(Iowa Code §§ 805.6, 321.485)  (1999 Code, § 70.01)



§ 70.21  SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS.



   For violations of the Traffic Code which are designated by Iowa Code §
805.8 to be scheduled violations, the scheduled fine for each of those
violations shall be as specified in Iowa Code § 805.8.



(Iowa Code §§ 805.6, 805.8)  (1999 Code, § 70.02)



§ 70.22  PARKING VIOLATIONS; ALTERNATE.



   (A)   Admitted violations of parking restrictions imposed by this
code of ordinances may be charged upon a simple notice of a fine payable at
the office of the City Clerk.



      (1)   The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount of
$25 for all violations except two- or three-hour overtime parking violations
and improper use of a persons with disabilities parking permit. The simple
notice of a fine for improper use of a persons with disability parking permit
is $100.



      (2)   The simple notice of a fine for two- or three-hour
overtime parking violations is $5. If the fine is not paid within 48 hours,
it shall be increased to $25. In the event any person receives more than one
overtime parking violation without the vehicle having been moved, the second
and subsequent violations shall be subject to a fine of $10. If the fine is
not paid within 48 hours, it shall be increased to $25.



   (B)   Failure to pay the simple notice of a fine shall be grounds
for the filing of a complaint in District Court.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(1)(a))  (1999 Code, § 70.03)  (Ord. 2229, passed
11-14-2000)



Editor’s note:



   A snow route parking violation occurs when the driver of a vehicle
impedes or blocks traffic on a designated snow route. See § 79.10.



§ 70.23  PARKING VIOLATIONS; VEHICLE UNATTENDED.



   When a vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic
Code, and the driver is not present, the notice of fine or citation as herein
provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous place.



(1999 Code, § 70.04)



§ 70.24  PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING.



   In any proceeding charging a standing or parking violation, a prima
facie presumption that the registered owner was the person who parked or
placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the
violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:



   (A)   Described vehicle.  The particular vehicle described in the
information was parked in violation of the Traffic Code; and



   (B)   Registered owner.  The defendant named in the information was
the registered owner at the time in question.



(1999 Code, § 70.05)



§ 70.25  IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.



   A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or cause to be removed,
a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or
maintained by the city, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:



   (A)   Disabled vehicle.  When a vehicle is so disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of
the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to an extent as to
be unable to provide for its custody or removal;



(Iowa Code § 321.236(1))



   (B)   Illegally parked vehicle.  When any vehicle is left
unattended and is so illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;



(Iowa Code § 321.236(1))



   (C)   Snow removal.  When any vehicle is left parked in violation
of a ban on parking during snow removal operations;



   (D)   Parked over 24 or 48 hours.  When any vehicle is left parked
for a continuous period of 24 hours or more on any street or 48 hours or more
in any municipal parking lot; and



   (E)   Costs.  In addition to the standard penalties provided, the
owner or driver of any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be required to pay the reasonable cost of
towing and storage.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(1))



(1999 Code, § 70.06)  (Ord. 2117, passed 7-25-2000; Ord. 2299, passed
8-23-2005)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES



Section



   71.01   Traffic control devices



   71.02   Installation



   71.03   Compliance



   71.04   Crosswalks



   71.05   Traffic lanes



   71.06   Necessity of signs



   71.07   Moving or damaging devices



   71.08   Standards



§ 71.01  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.



   The Council shall establish by resolution, and cause to be placed and
maintained, appropriate traffic control devices to indicate parking spaces
and zones, no parking zones, limited parking zones, reserved parking zones,
loading zones, safety zones, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones,
traffic zones other than the above, truck routes, load limits, school stops,
stop intersections, yield right-of-way intersections, one-way streets and
streets to be laned for traffic. The Council shall also have the power to
designate and indicate by resolution intersections at which traffic shall be
controlled by traffic signals; intersections at which left turns, right turns
and U-turns shall be prohibited; and intersections at which markers, buttons
or other indications shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by
vehicles traversing or turning at the intersections.



(1999 Code, § 61.01)



§ 71.02  INSTALLATION.



   The Council shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control
devices to carry out the provisions of the Traffic Code of the city under
state law or to regulate, guide or warn traffic. The city shall keep a record
of all traffic control devices.



(Iowa Code §§ 321.254, 321.255)  (1999 Code, § 61.02)



§ 71.03  COMPLIANCE.



   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this
Traffic Code unless at the time otherwise directed by a peace officer.



(Iowa Code § 321.256)  (1999 Code, § 61.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.04  CROSSWALKS.



   The Council is hereby authorized to designate and maintain crosswalks
by appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic
conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or
roadway, and at other places as traffic conditions require.



(Iowa Code §§ 372.13(4), 321.255)  (1999 Code, § 61.04)



§ 71.05  TRAFFIC LANES.



   Where traffic lanes have been marked on street pavements at places as
traffic conditions require, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle to fail or refuse to keep the vehicle within the boundaries of any
lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a
lawful turning movement.



(Iowa Code §§ 372.13(4), 321.255)  (1999 Code, § 61.05)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 71.06  NECESSITY OF SIGNS.



   No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in a viewable position and sufficiently
legible to an ordinarily observant person.



(1999 Code, § 61.06)



§ 71.07  MOVING OR DAMAGING DEVICES.



   It is unlawful for any person to move, deface or otherwise damage any
sign, signal or other traffic control device placed upon the streets of the
city.



(1999 Code, § 61.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.08  STANDARDS.



   Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by The
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.



(1999 Code, § 61.08)



CHAPTER 72:  GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



   72.01   Violation of regulations



   72.02   Vehicles on sidewalks



   72.03   Clinging to vehicle



   72.04   Quiet zones



   72.05   Funeral processions



   72.06   Tampering with vehicle



   72.07   Eluding or attempting to elude pursuing law enforcement
vehicle



   72.08   Obstructing view at intersections



   72.09   Reckless driving



   72.10   Careless driving



   72.11   Milling



   72.12   Traffic on flood control construction



   72.13   Vehicles prohibited on Joyce’s and Willow Islands



   72.14   Recreational trail



   72.15   Open container of alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on
streets and highways



   72.16   Engine brakes and compression brakes



   72.17   Unlawful riding



   72.18   Unlawful driving



 



   72.99   Penalty



§ 72.01  VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Any person who willfully fails or refuses to comply with any
lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a Fire Department officer
during a fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the
following state statutory laws relating to motor vehicles and the statutory
law of the road is in violation of this section.



   (B)   These sections of the Iowa Code are adopted by reference and
are as follows:



      (1)   Section 321.20B - Proof of security against liability;



      (2)   Section 321.32 - Registration card, carried and
exhibited;



      (3)   Section 321.37 - Display of plates;



      (4)   Section 321.38 - Plates, method of attaching, imitations
prohibited;



      (5)   Section 321.79 - Intent to injure;



      (6)   Section 321.98 - Operation without registration;



      (7)   Section 321.174 - Operators licensed;



      (8)   Section 321.174A - Operation of motor vehicles with
expired license;



      (9)   Section 321.180 - Instruction permits;



      (10)   Section 321.180B - Graduated driver’s licenses for
persons aged 14 through 17;



      (11)   Section 321.193 - Restricted licenses;



      (12)   Section 321.194 - Special minor’s licenses;



      (13)   Section 321.216 - Unlawful use of license and
nonoperator’s identification card;



      (14)   Section 321.216B - Use of driver’s license or
nonoperator’s identification card by underage person to obtain alcohol;



      (15)   Section 321.219 - Permitting unauthorized minor to
drive;



      (16)   Section 321.220 - Permitting unauthorized person to
drive;



      (17)   Section 321.221 - Employing unlicensed chauffeur;



      (18)   Section 321.222 - Renting motor vehicle to another;



      (19)   Section 321.223 - License inspected;



      (20)   Section 321.224 - Record kept;



      (21)   Section 321.232 - Radar jamming devices; penalty;



      (22)   Section 321.234A - All-terrain vehicles;



      (23)   Section 321.247 - Golf cart operation on city streets;



      (24)   Section 321.259 - Unauthorized signs, signals or
markings;



      (25)   Section 321.262 - Damage to vehicle;



      (26)   Section 321.263 - Information and aid;



      (27)   Section 321.264 - Striking unattended vehicle;



      (28)   Section 321.265 - Striking fixtures upon a highway;



      (29)   Section 321.275 - Operation of motorcycles and
motorized bicycles;



      (30)   Section 321.278 - Drag racing prohibited;



      (31)   Section 321.288 - Control of vehicle; reduced speed;



      (32)   Section 321.295 - Limitation on bridge or elevated
structures;



      (33)   Section 321.297 - Driving on right-hand side of
roadways; exceptions;



      (34)   Section 321.298 - Meeting and turning to right;



      (35)   Section 321.299 - Overtaking a vehicle;



      (36)   Section 321.302 - Overtaking on the right;



      (37)   Section 321.303 - Limitations on overtaking on the left;



      (38)   Section 321.304 - Prohibited passing;



      (39)   Section 321.307 - Following too closely;



      (40)   Section 321.308 - Motor trucks and towed vehicles;
distance requirements;



      (41)   Section 321.309 - Towing; convoys; drawbars;



      (42)   Section 321.310 - Towing four-wheel trailers;



      (43)   Section 321.312 - Turning on curve or crest of grade;



      (44)   Section 321.313 - Starting parked vehicle;



      (45)   Section 321.314 - When signal required;



      (46)   Section 321.315 - Signal continuous;



      (47)   Section 321.316 - Stopping;



      (48)   Section 321.317 - Signals by hand and arm or signal
device;



      (49)   Section 321.319 - Entering intersections from different
highways;



      (50)   Section 321.320 - Left turns; yielding;



      (51)   Section 321.321 - Entering through highways;



      (52)   Section 321.322 - Vehicles entering stop or yield
intersection;



      (53)   Section 321.323 - Moving vehicle backward on highway;



      (54)   Section 321.324 - Operation on approach of emergency
vehicles;



      (55)   Section 321.329 - Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing
or working on highways;



      (56)   Section 321.330 - Use of crosswalks;



      (57)   Section 321.332 - White canes restricted to blind
persons;



      (58)   Section 321.333 - Duty of drivers;



      (59)   Section 321.340 - Driving through safety zone;



      (60)   Section 321.341 - Obedience to signal of train;



      (61)   Section 321.342 - Stop at certain railroad crossings;
posting warning;



      (62)   Section 321.343 - Certain vehicles must stop;



      (63)   Section 321.344 - Heavy equipment at crossing;



      (64)   Section 321.354 - Stopping on traveled way;



      (65)   Section 321.359 - Moving other vehicle;



      (66)   Section 321.362 - Unattended motor vehicle;



      (67)   Section 321.363 - Obstruction to driver’s view;



      (68)   Section 321.364 - Preventing contamination of food by
hazardous material;



      (69)   Section 321.365 - Coasting prohibited;



      (70)   Section 321.367 - Following fire apparatus;



      (71)   Section 321.368 - Crossing fire hose;



      (72)   Section 321.369 - Putting debris on highway;



      (73)   Section 321.370 - Removing injurious material;



      (74)   Section 321.371 - Clearing up wrecks;



      (75)   Section 321.372 - School buses;



      (76)   Section 321.381 - Movement of unsafe or improperly
equipped vehicles;



      (77)   Section 321.382 - Upgrade pulls; minimum speed;



      (78)   Section 321.383 - Exceptions; slow vehicles identified;



      (79)   Section 321.384 - When lighted lamps required;



      (80)   Section 321.385 - Head lamps on motor vehicles;



      (81)   Section 321.386 - Head lamps on motorcycles and
motorized bicycles;



      (82)   Section 321.387 - Rear lamps;



      (83)   Section 321.388 - Illuminating plates;



      (84)   Section 321.389 - Reflector requirement;



      (85)   Section 321.390 - Reflector requirements;



      (86)   Section 321.392 - Clearance and identification lights;



      (87)   Section 321.393 - Color and mounting;



      (88)   Section 321.394 - Lamp or flag on projecting load;



      (89)   Section 321.395 - Lamps on parked vehicles;



      (90)   Section 321.398 - Lamps on other vehicles and equipment;



      (91)   Section 321.402 - Spot lamps;



      (92)   Section 321.403 - Auxiliary driving lamps;



      (93)   Section 321.404 - Signal lamps and signal devices;



      (94)   Section 321.405 - Self-illumination;



      (95)   Section 321.406 - Cowl lamps;



      (96)   Section 321.408 - Back-up lamps;



      (97)   Section 321.409 - Mandatory lighting equipment;



      (98)   Section 321.415 - Required usage of lighting devices;



      (99)   Section 321.417 - Single-beam road-lighting equipment;



      (100)   Section 321.418 - Alternate road-lighting equipment;



      (101)   Section 321.419 - Number of driving lamps required or
permitted;



      (102)   Section 321.420 - Number of lamps lighted;



      (103)   Section 321.421 - Special restrictions on lamps;



      (104)   Section 321.422 - Red light in front;



      (105)   Section 321.423 - Flashing lights;



      (106)   Section 321.430 - Brake, hitch and control
requirements;



      (107)   Section 321.431 - Performance ability;



      (108)   Section 321.432 - Horns and warning devices;



      (109)   Section 321.433 - Sirens, whistles and bells
prohibited;



      (110)   Section 321.434 - Bicycle sirens or whistles;



      (111)   Section 321.436 - Mufflers, prevention of noise;



      (112)   Section 321.437 - Mirrors;



      (113)   Section 321.438 - Windshields and windows;



      (114)   Section 321.439 - Windshield wipers;



      (115)   Section 321.440 - Restrictions as to tire equipment;



      (116)   Section 321.441 - Metal tires prohibited;



      (117)   Section 321.442 - Projections on wheels;



      (118)   Section 321.444 - Safety glass;



      (119)   Section 321.445 - Safety belts and safety harnesses;
use required;



      (120)   Section 321.446 - Child restraint devices;



      (121)   Section 321.449 - Motor carrier safety regulations;



      (122)   Section 321.450 - Hazardous materials transportation;



      (123)   Section 321.454 - Width of vehicles;



      (124)   Section 321.455 - Projecting loads on passenger
vehicles;



      (125)   Section 321.456 - Height of vehicles; permits;



      (126)   Section 321.457 - Maximum length;



      (127)   Section 321.458 - Loading beyond front;



      (128)   Section 321.460 - Spilling loads on highways;



      (129)   Section 321.461 - Trailers and towed vehicles;



      (130)   Section 321.462 - Drawbars and safety chains;



      (131)   Section 321.463 - Maximum gross weight;



      (132)   Section 321.465 - Weighing vehicles and removal of
excess;



      (133)   Section 321.466 - Increased loading capacity;
reregistration; and



      (134)   Section 321E.1 through 321E.34 Vehicles of Excessive
Size and Weight.



(1999 Code, § 62.01) (Ord. 2497, passed 7-9-2013)



§ 72.02  VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or within any sidewalk
area except at a driveway.



(1999 Code, § 62.02)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.03  CLINGING TO VEHICLE.



   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of the city unless
all passengers of the vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended
for their accommodation. No person shall ride on the running board of a motor
vehicle or in any other place not customarily used for carrying passengers.
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates,
sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any
vehicle upon a roadway.



(1999 Code, § 62.03)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.04  QUIET ZONES.



   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no
person operating a motor vehicle within any zone shall sound the horn or
other warning device of a vehicle except in an emergency.



(1999 Code, § 62.04)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.05  FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   Upon the immediate approach of a funeral procession, the driver of
every other vehicle, except an authorized emergency vehicle, shall yield the
right-of-way. An operator of a motor vehicle which is part of a funeral
procession shall not be charged with violating traffic rules and regulations
relating to traffic signals and devices while participating in the procession
unless the operation is reckless.



(Iowa Code § 321.324A)  (1999 Code, § 62.05)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.06  TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE.



   It is unlawful for any person, either individually or in association
with one or more other persons, willfully to injure or tamper with any
vehicle or break or remove any part or parts of or from a vehicle without the
consent of the owner.



(1999 Code, § 62.06)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.07  ELUDING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE PURSUING LAW ENFORCEMENT VEHICLE.



   No driver of a motor vehicle shall willfully fail to bring the motor
vehicle to a stop or otherwise elude or attempt to elude a marked official
law enforcement vehicle driven by a uniformed peace officer after being given
a visual or audible signal to stop and in doing so exceed the speed limit by
25 mph or more. The signal given by the peace officer shall be by flashing
red light or siren.



(Iowa Code § 321.279)  (1999 Code, § 62.07)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.08  OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.



   It is unlawful to allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other object to
obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons from having a
clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any
obstruction shall be deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard
penalty may be abated in the manner provided by Chapter 90 of this code of 
  ordinances.



(1999 Code, § 62.08)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.09  RECKLESS DRIVING.



   No person shall drive any vehicle in a manner as to indicate a willful
or a wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.



(Iowa Code § 321.277)  (1999 Code, § 62.09)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.10  CARELESS DRIVING.



   No person shall intentionally operate a motor vehicle on a street or
highway in any one of the following ways:



   (A)   Creating or causing unnecessary tire squealing, skidding or
sliding upon acceleration or stopping;



   (B)   Simulating a temporary race;



   (C)   Causing any wheel or wheels to unnecessarily lose contact with
the ground; or



   (D)   Causing the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway.



(Iowa Code § 321.277A)  (1999 Code, § 62.10)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.11  MILLING.



   It is unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle, either singly or with
others, in any processional milling or repeated movement over any street to
the interference with normal traffic use, or to the annoyance or offense of
any person.



(1999 Code, § 62.11)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.12  TRAFFIC ON FLOOD CONTROL CONSTRUCTION.



   The riding of horses or the operation of bicycles or the operation of
motor vehicles or any motor-driven vehicle, including automobiles, scooters,
motorcycles, trucks and snowmobiles, on any dikes, levees and other flood
control construction projects is prohibited, except on roadways designated
for public use. Motor vehicles operated by employees of the city and its
commissions or boards may be operated on the dikes and levees provided they
are on official business, including but not limited to maintenance,
inspection and operation of the facility.



(1999 Code, § 62.12)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.13  VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON JOYCE’S AND WILLOW ISLANDS.



   The operation of motor vehicles or any motor-driven vehicle, including
automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, scooters and snowmobiles is prohibited on
Joyce’s Island and Willow Island. Motor vehicles operated by employees of
the city and its commissions or boards may be operated on Joyce’s Island
and Willow Island provided they are on official business, including, but not
limited to, maintenance, inspection and operation of the facility.



(1999 Code, § 62.13)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.14  RECREATIONAL TRAIL.



   The operation of motor vehicles or any motor-driven vehicle, including,
but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, mopeds, scooters,
all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles on the recreational trail from Eighth
Avenue South to the Eagle Point Park entrance in the city is hereby
prohibited. Authorized vehicles, including but not limited to emergency
vehicles, maintenance vehicles and public safety vehicles are exempt from the
prohibition created in this section. The riding or leading of horses is also
prohibited on the recreational trail.



(1999 Code, § 62.14)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.15  OPEN CONTAINER OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE, WINE OR BEER ON STREETS AND
HIGHWAYS.



   A person driving a motor vehicle shall not knowingly possess in a motor
vehicle upon a public street or highway an open or unsealed bottle, can, jar
or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage, wine or beer with the
intent to consume the alcoholic beverage, wine or beer while the motor
vehicle is upon a public street or highway. Evidence that an open or unsealed
receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage, wine or beer was found during an
authorized search in the glove compartment, utility compartment, console,
front passenger seat or any unlocked portable device and within the immediate
reach of the driver while the motor vehicle is upon a public street or
highway is evidence from which the court or jury may infer that the driver
intended to consume the alcoholic beverage, wine or beer while upon the
public street or highway if the inference is supported by corroborative
evidence. However, an open or unsealed receptacle containing an alcoholic
beverage, wine or beer may be transported at any time in the trunk of the
motor vehicle or in some other area of the interior of the motor vehicle not
designed or intended to be occupied by the driver and not readily accessible
to the driver while the motor vehicle is in motion.



(Iowa Code § 321.284)  (1999 Code, § 62.15)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.16  ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or
operate or cause to be used or operated within the city, any engine brake,
compression brake or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking
or deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual or
explosive noise from the vehicle.



   (B)   The usage of an engine brake, compression brake or mechanical
exhaust device designed to aid in braking or deceleration in a manner so as
to be audible at a distance of 300 feet from the motor vehicle shall
constitute evidence of a prima facie violation of this section.



(Ord. 2242, passed 7-10-2001)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.17  UNLAWFUL RIDING.



   No person shall ride in or on any portion of a vehicle that was not
primarily designed, manufactured and intended for use by motor vehicle
passengers. This section shall preclude persons from riding within truck
bodies in space designed, manufactured or intended for hauling goods or
merchandise, unenclosed pickup truck beds, luggage racks and similar devices
or areas. This section shall not apply to employees, 18 years of age or
older, actively engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty that requires
the employee to ride within the unenclosed body of a truck or unenclosed bed
of a pickup truck; or upon private property within the city; or while the
vehicle is participating in an organized and permitted parade or special
event within the city. This section shall not apply to riding in the bed of a
pickup truck that is enclosed on all sides, including the roof.



(Ord. 2245, passed 8-28-2001)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.18  UNLAWFUL DRIVING.



   A driver who operates a motor vehicle while any passenger of the
vehicle is riding the vehicle in violation of § 72.17 is guilty of unlawful
driving.



(Ord. 2245, passed 8-28-2001)  Penalty, see § 72.99



§ 72.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Engine brakes and compression brakes.  The scheduled fine for
a violation of § 72.16 shall be $50.



(Ord. 2242, passed 7-10-2001)



CHAPTER 73:  SPEED REGULATIONS



Section



   73.01   General provisions



   73.02   State Code speed limits



   73.03   Minimum speed



   73.04   Emergency vehicles



§ 73.01  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and
proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and
of any other conditions then existing, and no person shall drive a vehicle on
any street at a speed greater than will permit him or her to bring it to a
stop within the assured clear distance ahead, the driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using the street will observe the law.



(Iowa Code § 321.285)  (1999 Code, § 63.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.02  STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS.



   The following speed limits are established in Iowa Code § 321.285 and
any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.



 


District

 

Speed Limit

 

Iowa Code Section



Business district
 

20 mph

 

§ 321.285(1)



Residence or school district
 

25 mph

 

§ 321.285(2)



Suburban district
 

45 mph

 

§ 321.285(4)




 



(1999 Code, § 63.02)



§ 73.03  MINIMUM SPEED.



   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.



(Iowa Code § 321.294)  (1999 Code, § 63.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 73.04  EMERGENCY VEHICLES.



   The speed limitations set forth in this chapter do not apply to
authorized emergency vehicles or the rider of a police bicycle when
responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or
suspected perpetrator of a felony or in response to an incident dangerous to
the public and the drivers thereof use an audible signaling device or a
visual signaling device. This provision does not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle or the rider of a police bicycle from the duty
to drive or ride with due regard for the safety of others.



(Iowa Code § 321.231)  (1999 Code, § 63.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 74:  TURNING REGULATIONS



Section



   74.01   Authority to mark



   74.02   U-turns



   74.03   Left turn for parking



§ 74.01  AUTHORITY TO MARK.



   The Council may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic
conditions require, that a different course from that specified by the state
law be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when markers,
buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle
at an intersection other than as directed and required by the markers,
buttons or signs.



(Iowa Code § 321.311)  (1999 Code, § 64.01)



§ 74.02  U-TURNS.



   It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection,
however, U-turns are prohibited within the business district and at any
intersection where a sign prohibiting U-turns is posted in accordance with
Chapter 71 of this Traffic Code.



(Iowa Code § 321.255)  (1999 Code, § 64.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 74.03  LEFT TURN FOR PARKING.



   No person shall make a left hand turn, crossing the centerline of the
street, for the purpose of parking on the street.



(1999 Code, § 64.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 75:  STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED



Section



   75.01   Stop or yield



   75.02   School signs



   75.03   Stop before crossing sidewalk



   75.04   Stop when traffic is obstructed



   75.05   Yield to pedestrians in crosswalks



§ 75.01  STOP OR YIELD.



   Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as directed by traffic
control devices posted in accordance with Chapter 71 of this Traffic Code.



(1999 Code, § 65.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.02  SCHOOL SIGNS.



   At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle approaching the
zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten feet from the
approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and
thereafter proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall
have passed through the school crossing zone.



(Iowa Code § 321.249)  (1999 Code, § 65.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.03  STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private roadway, alley,
driveway or building shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto
the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only
when able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is
entering.



(Iowa Code § 321.353)  (1999 Code, § 65.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.04  STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED.



   Notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed, no
driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle.



(1999 Code, § 65.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 75.05  YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS.



   Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping,
if need be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked
crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.



(Iowa Code § 321.327)  (1999 Code, § 65.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 76:  LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS



Section



   76.01   Temporary embargo



   76.02   Permits for excess size and weight



   76.03   Load limits upon certain streets



   76.04   Load limits on bridges



   76.05   Truck route



   76.06   Municipal dock route



   76.07   Double-bottom trucks



   76.08   Motor vehicles coming from or going to Illinois



   76.09   Truck weighing stations



§ 76.01  TEMPORARY EMBARGO.



   If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by reason of
deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets
will be seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an
amount specified by the signs, no vehicles shall be operated on streets so
designated by the signs erected in accordance with Chapter 71 of this Traffic
Code.



(Iowa Code §§ 321.471, 321.472)  (1999 Code, § 66.01)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 76.02  PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT.



   The Council may, upon application and good cause being shown therefor,
issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or
move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load
exceeding the maximum specified by state law or city ordinance over those
streets named in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the city and
for which the city is responsible for maintenance.



(Iowa Code §§ 321.473, 321E.1)  (1999 Code, § 66.02)



§ 76.03  LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS.



   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate
any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on the
signs upon any of the streets or parts of streets for which the signs are
erected in accordance with Chapter 71 of this Traffic Code, unless the
vehicle is making a pickup or delivery at a property located on the street.



(Iowa Code §§ 321.473, 321.475)  (1999 Code, § 66.03)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 76.04  LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES.



   Where it has been determined that any city bridge has a capacity less
than the maximum permitted on the streets of the city, or on the street
serving the bridge, the Council may cause to be posted and maintained signs,
in accordance with Chapter 71 of this Traffic Code, on the bridge and at
suitable distances ahead of the entrances thereof to warn drivers of the
maximum load limits, and no person shall drive a vehicle weighing, loaded or
unloaded, upon the bridge in excess of the posted limit.



(Iowa Code § 321.471)  (1999 Code, § 66.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 76.05  TRUCK ROUTE.



   (A)   Trucks registered for a gross weight limit exceeding 10,000
pounds (five tons) shall travel over marked highways when operating in the
city and shall not depart from such marked highways, except that any truck
whose destination or local delivery is in the city may depart from such
highway at that point on the highway nearest to its destination and then
proceed directly to such destination. The following shall be designated as
marked highways:



      (1)   Highway 67;



      (2)   Highway 136;



      (3)   Highway 30;



      (4)   Mill Creek Parkway;



      (5)   South Second Street from the intersection of 7th Avenue
South heading south to 15th Avenue South and then west on 15th Avenue South
to South 3rd Street then south to 17th Avenue South and then west on 17th
Avenue South.



   (B)   Trucks whose trips originate within the city shall travel by
the most direct route to the point on a marked highway nearest to such point
of origin.



   (C)   Trucks entering the city on an unmarked highway shall proceed
to the nearest marked highway by the most direct route and then proceed to
their destination, except when the destination lies between the point of
entry into the city and the marked highway.



   (D)   The City Engineer is authorized to designate and establish by
appropriate signs alternate motor truck routes and to post signs limiting
trucks registered with a gross weight limit exceeding 10,000 pounds (five
tons) from operating on non-highway streets. Notwithstanding provisions for
local delivery above, truck traffic is prohibited from any street so marked.
Further, the following streets are prohibited from travel by trucks in excess
of 10,000 pounds (five tons) unless making delivery to a location on that
street:



      (1)   Harrison Drive from South 14th Street to South 21st
Street;



      (2)   8th Avenue South from 3rd Street/Highway 67 to South 2nd
Street;



      (3)   12th Avenue North from North 11th Street, east to
parking lot termination;



      (4)   16th Street N.W.;



      (5)   15th Avenue South from South 3rd Street to South 4th
Street;



      (6)   Springdale Drive from 13th Avenue North to 19th Avenue
North;



      (7)   19th Avenue North from North 2nd Street to Randall Court;



      (8)   19th Avenue Northwest from Randall Court to Main Avenue.



   (E)   The provisions of this section governing the travel of trucks
on residential streets shall not apply to city buses, emergency vehicles,
public or private carriers of passengers on tour, fixed or demand response
vehicles, school or church buses.



   (F)   Any person who violates this section shall be fined in the
amount of $50.



(Ord. 2500, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 2541, passed 9-13-2016; Ord. 2556, passed
10-24-2017)



§ 76.06  MUNICIPAL DOCK ROUTE.



   All trucks traveling to and from the municipal dock shall use the South
Second Street underpass, and the trucks are prohibited from using the South
Fourth Street underpass.



(1999 Code, § 66.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 76.07  DOUBLE-BOTTOM TRUCKS.



   Double-bottom trucks not to exceed 65 feet in length are permitted
within the city on the main arterial highways, namely U.S. Highway 30, U.S.
Highway 136 and U.S. Highway 67, provided they are traveling to or from
either Mississippi River Bridge and their terminal.



(1999 Code, § 66.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 76.08  MOTOR VEHICLES COMING FROM OR GOING TO ILLINOIS.



   A motor vehicle entering the corporate limits of the city from the
State of Illinois or going to Illinois from the city may be operated on
designated truck routes irrespective of weight and length limitations imposed
by the laws of the state if the weight and length of the motor vehicle is in
compliance with the laws relating to weight and length of motor vehicles of
the State of Illinois.



(1999 Code, § 66.08)



§ 76.09  TRUCK WEIGHING STATIONS.



   Any person operating a motor vehicle within the city shall, at the
request of a police officer, immediately proceed to a designated weighing
station to have the truck weighed. If the operator of the motor vehicle
refuses to permit the weighing of the truck, the operator’s refusal shall
be considered prima facie evidence of violation of this chapter. The Police
Chief is directed to designate the official weighing stations to be used for
the weighing of trucks.



(1999 Code, § 66.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 77:  PEDESTRIANS



Section



   77.01   Walking in street



   77.02   Hitchhiking



   77.03   Pedestrian crossing



§ 77.01  WALKING IN STREET.



   Pedestrians shall at all times, when walking on or along a street, walk
on the left side of the street.



(Iowa Code § 321.326)  (1999 Code, § 67.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 77.02  HITCHHIKING.



   No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the
purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.



(Iowa Code § 321.331)  (1999 Code, § 67.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 77.03  PEDESTRIAN CROSSING.



   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



(Iowa Code § 321.328)  (1999 Code, § 67.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 78:  ONE-WAY TRAFFIC



Section



   78.01   One-way traffic required



§ 78.01  ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED.



   When appropriate signs are in place, as provided for in Chapter 71 of
this Traffic Code, vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross traffic,
shall move only in the direction indicated on the signs.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(4))  (1999 Code, § 68.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 79:  PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   79.01   Parking limited or controlled



   79.02   Park adjacent to curb



   79.03   Park adjacent to curb; one-way street



   79.04   Angle parking



   79.05   Angle parking; manner



   79.06   Parking for certain purposes illegal



   79.07   Parking prohibited



   79.08   Persons with disabilities parking



   79.09   Truck parking limited



   79.10   Calendar parking



   79.11   Municipal parking lots



   79.12   Parking permits



   79.13   Private property



   79.14   Downtown parking regulations



   79.15   Prohibiting the parking of semi-tractors and semi-trailers,
and regulating the parking of boats, recreational vehicles, campers and motor
homes



 



   79.99   Penalty



§ 79.01  PARKING LIMITED OR CONTROLLED.



   Parking of vehicles shall be controlled or limited where so indicated
by designated traffic control devices in accordance with Chapter 71 of this
Traffic Code. No person shall stop, park or stand a vehicle in violation of
any posted parking regulations unless in compliance with the directions of a
peace officer.



(1999 Code, § 69.01)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.02  PARK ADJACENT TO CURB.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18
inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in
the case of angle parking and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of
one-way streets.



(Iowa Code § 321.361)  (1999 Code, § 69.02)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.03  PARK ADJACENT TO CURB; ONE-WAY STREET.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle on the left-hand side of a
one-way street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the
direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the
vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as
hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking.



(Iowa Code § 321.361)  (1999 Code, § 69.03)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.04  ANGLE PARKING.



   Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only on those streets or
portions of streets which are designated as angle parking areas.



(1999 Code, § 69.04)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.05  ANGLE PARKING; MANNER.



   Upon those streets or portions of streets which have been signed or
marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than
at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the
roadway as indicated by signs and markings. No part of any vehicle, or the
load thereon, when parked within a diagonal parking district, shall extend
into the roadway more than a distance of 16 feet when measured at right
angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway. No person shall back a
vehicle into an angle parking space.



(Iowa Code § 321.361)  (1999 Code, § 69.05)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.06  PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL.



   No person shall park a vehicle on any street for more than 24 hours or
upon any public property for any of the following principal purposes:



   (A)   Sale.  Displaying the vehicle for sale;



   (B)   Repairing.  For lubricating, repairing or for commercial
washing of the vehicle except repairs as are necessitated by an emergency;



   (C)   Advertising.  Displaying advertising; and/or



   (D)   Merchandise sales.  Selling merchandise from the vehicle
except in a duly established market place or when so authorized or licensed
under the code of ordinances.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(1))  (1999 Code, § 69.06)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.07  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
peace officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places.



 


Place

 

Prohibition - No Parking

 

Iowa Code Section





Alleys
 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in a manner or under the
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property; the provisions of this division
shall not apply to a vehicle parked in any alley which is 18 feet wide or
less, provided the vehicle is parked to deliver goods or services; parking is
prohibited in the alleys in the Central Business District, unless the vehicle
is making a pickup or delivery which requires less than 15 minutes and at
least a 10-foot width of the alley remains unblocked; the Central Business
District is the area between South First Street, Eighth Avenue South, South
Fourth Street and Second Avenue South
 

§ 321.236(1)



Area between lot line and curb line
 
The area of the public way not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot
line and the curb line, where curbing has been installed
 




Center parkway
 
On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided street
 

§ 321.236(1)



Crosswalk
 
On a crosswalk
 

§ 321.358(5)



Double parking
 
On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street
 

§ 321.358(11)



Driveway
 
In front of a public or private driveway
 

§ 321.358(2)



Excavations
 
Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when the stopping,
standing or parking would obstruct traffic
 

§ 321.358(10)



Fire hydrant
 
Within five feet of a fire hydrant
 

§ 321.358(4)



Fire station
 
Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side
of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of the
entrance when properly sign posted
 

§ 321.358(9)



Front yard
 
Off-street parking within a front yard shall be prohibited unless located on
a hard-surfaced driveway.  Front yard is defined as a yard extending across
the full width of the lot from the front line of the building to the front
property line of the lot.  The Police Department, parking enforcement
officer, or designee may exercise sound judgement and discretion in
enforcement and is hereby authorized to utilize selective enforcement
procedures to promote the purpose of this entry and may take into
consideration the purpose with regard to the parking of such delivery of
appliances or furniture, use of moving vans or trucks, or other special
circumstances.
 


Hazardous locations
 
When, because of restricted visibility or when standing or parked vehicles
would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic conditions
require, the Council may cause curbs to be painted with a yellow color and
erect no parking or standing signs
 

§ 321.358(13)



In more than one space
 
In any designated parking space so that any part of the vehicle occupies more
than one space or protrudes beyond the markings designating the space
 




Intersection
 
Within or within ten feet of an intersection of any street or alley
 

§ 321.358(3)



Mailboxes
 
Within 20 feet on either side of a mailbox which is so placed and so equipped
as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the roadway
 

§ 321.236(1)



Parade routes
 
On any street used as a parade route for bands and other walking units from
one hour prior to the commencement of the parade until the completion of the
parade, except persons with handicapped parking permits on their vehicles,
will be allowed to park along the parade route in the 200 block of Fifth
Avenue South; the Public Works Department shall post temporary “No
Parking” signs along the parade route informing the public of the parking
restriction by 12:00 p.m. on the day of the parade
 




Parked over 24 or 48 hours
 
When any vehicle is left parked for a continuous period of 24 hours or more
on any street or 48 hours or more in any municipal parking lot; in order for
any vehicle to be exempt from the provisions set forth in this division, the
vehicle must move at least 25 feet under its own power
 




Railroad crossing
 
Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, except when parked
parallel with the rail and not exhibiting a red light
 

§ 321.358(8)



Ramps
 
In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private property
in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp
 

§ 321.358(15)



Sidewalks
 
On or across a sidewalk
 

§ 321.358(1)



Stop sign or signal
 
Within ten feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop or yield sign,
or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway
 

§ 321.358(6)



Theatres, hotels and auditoriums
 
A space of 50 feet is hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of
any theatre, auditorium, hotel having more than 25 sleeping rooms, hospital,
nursing home, taxicab stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large
assemblages of people are being held, within which space, when clearly marked
as such, no motor vehicle shall be left standing, parked or stopped except in
taking on or discharging passengers or freight, and then only for a length of
time as is necessary for the purpose
 

§ 321.360





 



(1999 Code, § 69.07)  (Ord. 2102, passed 10-12-1999; Ord. 2299, passed
8-23-2005 ; Am. Ord. 2434, passed 11-23-2010)   Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.08  PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING.



   (A)   Program established.  There is hereby established a program
to provide persons with disabilities parking spaces in residential areas in
the city subject to certain terms and conditions.



   (B)   Application.  All applications for persons with disabilities
parking spaces in residential areas shall be submitted by the applicant to
the Public Works Office. The application shall be on a form provided by the
Public Works Office. The application shall state the name and address of the
disabled person, the location of the requested space, license and
registration of an operable vehicle to be parked in the requested space, the
reason for the request, that the individual has a persons with disabilities
parking permit issued by the state, and the persons with disabilities parking
permit number. The applicant shall present the state persons with
disabilities parking permit and a photocopy of the permit shall be made and
kept on file at the Public Works Office. The initial year’s approved permit
shall be good for the remainder of the calendar year following approval of
the City Council and including the following year through and including
November 30.



   (C)   Decision process. 



      (1)   If approved by the Public Works Department, the Public
Works Department shall forward the application to the Police Department for
further review of the requested location.  If the Police Department
recommends approval of the application, it shall be forwarded to the City
Clerk for submission to the City Council for approval or denial by Council
resolution.  If the Public Works Department and the Police Department split
their recommendation or recommend denial of the application, the application
shall be denied and the reasons for said denial will be communicated in
writing to the applicant along with a description of the procedure for
appeal. Following written notice of the denial, applicants wishing to contest
the denial must file a written request for hearing before the City
Administrator within 14 calendar days of receipt of the denial. Failure to
timely file said written request for hearing shall constitute a waiver of the
right to any appeal. The decision of the City Administrator shall be final.



      (2)   If the Public Works Department and the Police Department
approve the application, or if the City Administrator, following appeal,
approves the application, the recommendations of the Public Works Department,
the Police Department, and the written recommendation of the City
Administrator if applicable, shall be forwarded in writing to the City Clerk
for transmission to the  City Council for approval or denial by Council
Resolution.



   (D)   Criteria for approval or denial. Permits shall be approved by
city staff and the City Council, but subject to the following requirements:



      (1)    The applicant must have a disability as defined by the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 that prevents him or her from walking
long distances. 



      (2)   The applicant must produce a Disabled Person License
Plate or a permanent Disabled Person Placard ID Card, with adequate
identification, as required by Iowa law.



      (3)   The applicant must prove he or she is a full-time
resident of the address in question.  The applicant shall provide two forms
of proof of residency including:



         (a)   A rental agreement or homeowner's insurance
agreement; and



         (b)   One other form of proof, i.e. utility bill or
driver's license showing the permanent mailing address of the applicant.



      (4)   The applicant must prove he or she is the owner of the
property or, in the alternative, must provide written permission of the owner
to establish a disabled person parking stall on the street adjacent to the
property.



      (5)   The applicant must provide a vehicle registration in
his/her own name or provide vehicle registration of his/her primary live-in
caretaker who resides full-time at the applicant's address.  The vehicle
registration must match the proposed address adjacent to which the parking
stall will be delineated.



      (6)   The applicant must establish that off-street parking
(driveway, garage and/or parking lot) is unavailable, or where available,
such parking is not accessible to persons with disabilities, as further
described below:



         (a)   Garage specifications:



            1.   If the applicant owns a lift-equipped van,
the applicant must show he or she either has no garage or the garage width is
less than 17 feet (interior width).



            2.   If the applicant owns a passenger vehicle,
the applicant must show he or she either has no garage or the garage width is
less than 14 feet (interior width).



         (b)   Driveway specifications:



            1.   If the applicant owns a lift-equipped van the
applicant must show he or she either has no driveway or the driveway width is
less than 17 feet, and/or the slope of the driveway is greater than 5% (1:20).



            2.   If the applicant owns a passenger vehicle,
the applicant must show he or she either has no driveway or the driveway
width is less than 14 feet, and/or the slope of the driveway is greater than
5% (1:20).



      (7)   There must not be more than one other existing disabled
person parking stall in the same block within 150 feet of the applicant's
address, in any direction.



      (8)   The surface of accessible parking spaces on streets and
access aisles from street parking must not exceed a 5% slope (1:20) in any
direction and no other hazardous surface condition exists in the immediate
area, such as a speed bump.



      (9)   The applicant's residence must be adjacent to an ADA
compliant corner curb ramp or the applicant's driveway must substantially
comply with ADA curb ramp standards. However, if a compliant corner curb ramp
does not exist or if the applicant's driveway does not substantially comply
with current ADA standards, a disabled person parking stall may be still be
delineated if the applicant meets all other eligibility requirements and
signs a statement of understanding that the stall does not fully comply with
accessibility regulations. The city will not install corner curb ramps, and
will not permit or install mid-block curb ramps, for the purposes of
delineating a disabled person parking stall. 



      (10)   The proposed disabled person parking stall must not
create site line or safety issues under Iowa DOT or other applicable
standards.



      (11)   The requested parking space must not be within 40 feet
of an intersection.



      (12)   The creation of the parking space must not otherwise
violate city code.



   (E)   Reapplication for existing permit holders.  Permits shall
expire on November 30 of the year following the calendar year in which the
permit was initially approved by the City Council, and on November 30 of each
year thereafter, unless properly renewed pursuant to this section. Current
permit holders shall apply for renewal by September 30 of the year following
initial approval by the City Council, and by September 30 of each year
thereafter. If a renewal application is not received by September 30, of any
year, the permit shall be canceled and the handicapped parking sign at the
address of the applicant will be removed during the second week of December.
All current permit holders will be notified by mail annually to reapply for
their permit and an application form shall accompany the notice. Renewal
permits shall be for a period of one year. Late renewal applications may be
approved only for good cause shown by special approval of the City
Administrator, and the decision of the City Administrator shall be final.
Under such circumstances, the City Administrator may, in his or her complete
discretion, reinstate the permit. For renewal permits, the same proof must be
submitted by the applicant as was required with the initial permit
application, unless the applicant certifies the accuracy of existing records
on file, in which case the existing records may be accepted.



   (F)   Cost. For initial permits approved by the City Council,
applicants shall pay a $25 permit fee to pay for the installation of the
sign. The handicap parking sign shall only be installed after payment of the
permit fee. In subsequent renewal years, there will be a fee of $5 required
with each application, except that the fee for any late application shall be
$25.



   (G)   Relocation of permit holder.  If the permit holder moves to a
new residence in the city limits and the handicapped parking space is needed
at the new address, the city will relocate the sign to the new address
without an additional fee. However, prior to relocation of said sign, the
permit holder shall submit a new application for permit reflecting the new
address. Approval of the new application, including especially the new
address, shall be a prerequisite to relocation of said sign.



   (H)   Limitations on use of space. The disabled parking space is not
a private space and may be used by other vehicles licensed to park in a
disabled parking zone on a first-come first-served basis. The vehicle shall
display license plates indicating the disabled status of the owner, or other
state-issued indicia of disabled status. The space shall not be used for
long-term storage of vehicles. The vehicle must be kept in good repair and
shall be operational, as outlined in Iowa law and this code. Long-term
storage of vehicles is defined as any vehicle parked or left standing on a
public street in the same location and not driven or moved more than 14
consecutive calendar days.



(1999 Code, § 69.08)  (Ord. 2098, passed 7-27-1999; Ord. 2303, passed
10-12-2005; Ord. 2344, passed 2-13-2007; Ord. 2419, passed 7-27-2010; Ord.
2604, passed 3-12-2019)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.09  TRUCK PARKING LIMITED.



   Excepting only when the vehicles are actually engaged in the delivery
or receiving of merchandise or cargo within the prohibited area, no person
shall park or leave unattended a motor truck, semi-trailer or other motor
vehicle with trailer attached on any streets within a business district. When
actually receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo, the vehicle shall be
stopped or parked in a manner which will not interfere with other traffic.
The provisions of this section do not apply to pick-up, light delivery or
panel delivery trucks.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(1))  (1999 Code, § 69.09)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.10  CALENDAR PARKING.



   (A)   General provisions.  Calendar parking shall be activated with
the occurrence of a snow event, which is defined as the accumulation of one
inch or more of snow upon the public right-of-way.



   (B)   (1)   During the period from November 15 through March 15,
when a snow event has occurred, parking is restricted in the public
right-of-way to alternate sides of the roadway in the following manner:



         (a)   On odd-numbered days, vehicles shall only be
parked, stopped or left standing on that side of the roadway having
odd-numbered addresses.



         (b)   On even-numbered days, vehicles shall only be
parked, stopped or left standing on that side of the roadway having
even-numbered addresses.



      (2)   A snow event will remain in effect for 24 hours after
the snow has stopped.



      (3)   The hours for calendar parking will be from 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m. Vehicles will have three hours to be moved to the correct side of
the roadway.



      (4)   The date at 6:00 a.m. shall determine if the day is odd
or even.



      (5)   During a snow emergency, calendar parking shall be in
effect except on designated snow routes where no parking will be permitted
until the snow emergency has been cancelled.



      (6)   This section shall not apply to commercial districts
where parking is designated on both sides of the street.



(1999 Code, § 69.10)  (Ord. 2233, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 2259, passed
9-24-2002; Ord. 2468, passed 1-10-2012; Ord. 2510, passed 8-12-2014; Ord.
2527, passed 10-13-2015)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.11  MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS.



   The following regulations apply to parking in municipal parking lots.



   (A)   No person shall back a vehicle into a parking space in any
municipal parking lot.



   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle with a gross weight of four
tons or more in any municipal parking lot.



      (1)   An exception shall be made and the city shall allow the
temporary parking of charter, tour or sightseeing buses on the western two
rows of parking on the Clinton Park municipal parking lot located west of
South 3rd Street between 3rd Avenue South and 4th Avenue South. Said
exception shall also apply to the Clinton Fire Department for the purpose of
conducting training exercises.



      (2)   The western second and third rows of the Clinton Park
municipal parking lot shall be the exclusive area of the lot to be used by
any charter, tour or sightseeing bus that departs from the city that wishes
to use a city parking lot or area for its pickup point or staging area and
for parking of the personal vehicles of their patrons or passengers.



   (C)   No person shall park a truck trailer in any municipal parking
lot.



   (D)   No person shall park a vehicle for more than 48 hours in any
municipal parking lot.



(1999 Code, § 69.11)   (Ord. 2454, passed 7-26-2011)   Penalty, see §
79.99



§ 79.12  PARKING PERMITS.



   (A)   Off-street parking permits.



      (1)   The City Clerk shall issue three-month window stickers
or placards authorizing parking for up to eight consecutive hours in the
following parking lots:



         (a)   Fourth Avenue South and South Second Street;



         (b)   Sixth Avenue South and South Second Street; and



         (c)   The 200 block of Sixth Avenue South.



      (2)   The fee for the window sticker or placard will be
established by City Council resolution. The number of reserved parking spaces
in these specified off-street parking lots will also be established by City
Council resolution. The window sticker or placard shall be valid for up to
two vehicle license numbers.



   (B)   On-street parking spaces.  Persons who are handicapped and
work in the downtown area may apply for a parking permit allowing them to
park in the downtown parking area on-street as long as they want except from
2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. when there is no parking downtown. Application shall
be made to the City Clerk’s office for the permit by presenting a
state-approved handicap parking permit, a letter from their employer that
they are employed downtown and unable to walk from the unrestricted parking
lot to the place of employment, and a copy of their driver’s license. The
state-approved handicap parking permit and employment status will be reviewed
periodically. The administration fee for issuing the permit and for the
monthly fee for the permit shall be established by resolution. The City Clerk
shall issue a placard showing on-street parking is permitted. The placard
must be displayed on the dashboard of the vehicle in order for the vehicle
not  to  be  issued a  parking  ticket for parking in excess of the
posted limit. The vehicle may be parked on-street in either handicapped
parking spaces or regular parking spaces.



   (C)   Special off-street parking permits.  The City Council may
from time to time approve, by resolution, special off-street parking permit
arrangements for various purposes such as the development of permanent
housing in the downtown area.



   (D)   Daily parking permits.  The Clerk may issue daily parking
permits as necessary for the purpose of having tools or equipment available
at a job site or for any other reasonable purpose in off-street or on-street
parking areas, with the fee for the daily permits to be established by
Council resolution.



(1999 Code, § 69.12)  (Ord. 2263, passed 1-14-2003; Ord. 2284, passed
11-9-2004)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.13  PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person shall drive onto, stop, stand or park a vehicle upon
privately owned property or an area developed as a private off-street parking
facility without the consent of the owner, lessee or person in charge of the
privately owned property or facility.



(1999 Code, § 69.13)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.14  DOWNTOWN PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to:



      (1)   Create a customer friendly parking environment where
on-street parking is utilized for short term parking primarily by patrons of
individuals or organizations occupying downtown properties;



      (2)   Promoting the use of off-street parking lots by
employees or others who need longer-term parking in the downtown area;



      (3)   Establish a uniform and consistent administrative
procedure for handling dismissal of improvidently issued parking citations;



      (4)   Establish a gradually increasing financial penalty to
discourage habitual parking violators;



      (5)   Establish a validation system so that no customer,
patron or client visiting the downtown will pay a parking fine;



      (6)   Eliminate the three-hour per day time limit for parking
in the downtown district; and



      (7)   Permit the Parking Administrator to utilize selective
enforcement in order to maximize the effectiveness of parking enforcement
officers and promote the purposes of this section.



   (B)   Downtown parking zone boundaries.  The boundaries are as
follows:



      Commencing at the intersection of the south line of Third Avenue
South with the westerly line of South Fourth Street, in the city, which is
the point of beginning; thence easterly along the south line of Third Avenue
South to the intersection of the south line with the west line of South First
Street; then southerly along the west line of South First Street and vacated
South First Street to the intersection of the west line with the north line
of Eighth Avenue South; then westerly along said north line of Eighth Avenue
South to the intersection of the north line with the westerly line of South
Fourth Street; then northerly along said westerly line of South Fourth Street
to the point of beginning; all located in the city.



   (C)   Selective enforcement.  The Parking Administrator is hereby
authorized to utilize selective enforcement procedures to promote the
purposes of this section and maximize the use of parking enforcement funds.



   (D)   Parking citations.  Parking citations shall have the
following information printed on the citation:



      Downtown patrons (not employees, business owners, sales or
delivery people) may present this citation to any downtown merchant for a
free validation.



      Anyone not eligible for free validation may contest this charge
within seven days after issuance of the citation by filing a written
complaint on a form available at City Hall at the address listed above.
Failure to pay a judgment for a parking violation will be grounds for refusal
to renew a vehicle registration, impoundment of a vehicle, Court action
and/or suspension of a vehicle owner’s driver’s license.



   (E)   Parking validation program.



      (1)   The downtown partnership division of the city’s Area
Chamber of Commerce is hereby authorized to issue free parking validation
stickers to all businesses and organizations in the downtown district
eligible to participate in the parking validation program. The Parking
Administrator is hereby authorized to establish rules and regulations for
disqualification of downtown businesses or organizations who abuse the
validation program by issuing validation stickers to ineligible violators. A
participating business or organization is entitled to one warning from the
Parking Administrator before being disqualified from the validation system. A
business disqualified from participating in the validation system may reapply
for participation after an ineligibility period of 12 months.



      (2)   The downtown partnership will reimburse the city at the
rate of $2.50 per validated parking violation. The Downtown Partnership is
hereby authorized to use funds from the Self Supporting Municipal Improvement
District tax to subsidize the parking ticket validation program. The Downtown
Partnership is also encouraged to promote the validation system to businesses
and customers through coop advertising or other marketing programs conducted
by the Downtown Partnership. Funds utilized to subsidize the validation
program shall not exceed $1,250 per year unless additional authorization is
received from the City Council.



   (F)   Dismissal of contested citation.



      (1)   A complaint contesting a citation must be presented in
writing within seven days following issuance of the citation at City Hall, on
a form provided at the City Clerk’s Office in City Hall. The complaint may
be delivered in person or by mail.



      (2)   Citations shall be voided due to any of the following
data entry errors.



         (a)   Wrong vehicle make or model;



         (b)   Wrong location;



         (c)   Wrong date;



         (d)   Wrong time;



         (e)   Wrong tag number;



         (f)   Incomplete information on citation; or



         (g)   Downtown customer.



      (3)   A citation may be dismissed if the violation was due to
circumstances beyond the vehicle operator’s control such as:



         (a)   Vehicle mechanical problems (if a vehicle is
temporarily inoperable and the vehicle is moved within eight hours); or



         (b)   Vehicle operator health problem (such as sudden
illness).



      (4)   An out of town or out of state license tag will not be
grounds to dismiss a citation. If the cost to collect a citation exceeds the
amount of the fine, the Parking Administrator is authorized to consider and
implement alternate collection methods permit by law.



      (5)    If a vehicle operator fails to display a mirror placard
it is not grounds to dismiss.



      (6)   An administrative fee of $5 will be charged for a
citation contested if the fine is greater than $5.



      (7)   A contractor working on a building is not grounds to
dismiss a citation. Permitting procedures can be found under § 79.12(D).



      (8)   Other situations of undue hardship, excusable oversight
or inequity. A dismissal of the citation will not be considered if the
dismissal would create an inequality in enforcement that the general public
is required to follow. The Parking Administrator is authorized to gather
statistical information from citation data.



      (9)   The director of the Municipal Transit Authority is
hereby designated as Parking Administrator. Any dismissal of a citation under
division (F)(8) of this section must be approved by both the Parking
Administrator and the Police Chief or his or her designee. Any other
dismissals may be approved by the Parking Administrator or the
Administrator’s designated agent. The City Administrator or the
Administrator’s designee, shall conduct a semi-annual random audit of
parking citation dismissals to review compliance with the provisions of this
division.



(Ord. 2283, passed 11-9-2004; Ord. 2507, passed 5-27-2014)  Penalty, see §
79.99



Cross-reference:



   Specific downtown parking regulations, see Chapter 85, Schedule I



§ 79.15  PROHIBITING THE PARKING OF SEMI-TRACTORS AND SEMI-TRAILERS, AND
REGULATING THE PARKING OF BOATS, RECREATIONAL VEHICLES, CAMPERS AND MOTOR
HOMES.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to prohibit the
parking of semi-tractors and semi-trailers on streets and to regulate boats,
recreational vehicles, campers, motor homes and other large vehicles from
parking on streets.



   (B)   Parking of semi-tractors and semi-trailers prohibited.  No
person shall park a semi-tractor or semi-trailer on any street in the city,
except this section does not apply to trucks or trailers being used for the
purpose of delivering or collecting goods, wares, merchandise, materials, or
for the purpose of performing a necessary function, when the vehicles are
parked for a period of time not longer than is necessary for the expeditious
delivery, collection or function thereof.



   (C)   Parking of boats, recreational vehicles, campers and motor
homes regulated.  No person shall park a boat, recreational vehicle, camper
or motor home on any street in the city between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. The
prohibition applies whether the boat, recreational vehicle or camper is
attached to a motor vehicle or not. This prohibition does not apply to any
motorized recreational vehicle that is less than 22 feet long, eight feet
high and eight feet six inches wide. From March 16 to November 14 of each
year, motor homes and recreational vehicles will be exempt from this
provision.



   (D)   Parking of large vehicles regulated.  No person shall park a
vehicle exceeding eight feet six inches in width on any street in the city,
except this section does not apply to vehicles being used for the purpose of
delivering services or delivering or collecting goods, wares, merchandise,
materials or for the purpose of performing a necessary function, when the
vehicles are parked for a period of time not longer than is necessary for the
expeditious delivery, collection or function thereof. Commercial utility
trailers are exempt from the 24-hour parking restriction. Government owned
vehicles and vehicles eight feet six inches or less in width are exempt from
this prohibition. Provisions in this section do not absolve vehicles from
being regulated by any other parking ordinances.



(Ord. 2338, passed 10-24-2006)  Penalty, see § 79.99



§ 79.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this
chapter, for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Section 79.14 - Downtown parking regulations.



      (1)   One courtesy ticket will be issued per license number
for the life of that number. The courtesy ticket will consist of a standard
enforcement ticket, which will enter the license number into the parking
system records. A second courtesy notice will be placed on the violator’s
windshield explaining the courtesy ticket policy.



      (2)   The following penalties apply after issuance of an
initial courtesy ticket:



         (a)   Any person parking a vehicle in violation of §
79.14 shall be subject to a penalty of $5 for the first five violations in a
calendar year. After five citations have been issued in a calendar year to
any license number, the fine for the next five citations in the same calendar
year will increase to $10 per citation. Thereafter, the fine for each
successive series of five violations in the same calendar year will increase
in the same fashion by $5 for each citation for each series of five
additional violations in a calendar year;



         (b)   The penalty for multiple parking violations within
any one-24 hour period will be $5 for the first violation, $10 for the second
violation and $20 for the third violation; and



         (c)   An additional penalty of $20 per violation is
hereby assessed for any parking violation not paid within seven business days
in which City Hall is open for business following issuance of the citation.



   (C)   Section 79.15 - Vehicles ticketed and towed.  Any vehicle
found in violation of § 79.15 (B), (C) or (D) shall be ticketed for the
violation with a fine of $15 for the first offense, $50 for subsequent
offenses. If the vehicle is still in violation 24 hours after the vehicle is
ticketed, the vehicle shall be ticketed again, towed and impounded with the
vehicle owner to pay the costs of towing and impoundment.



   (D)   Section 79.10 - Calendar parking.  The fine for a violation
of § 79.10 shall be $15.



(Ord. 2283, passed 11-9-2004; Ord. 2338, passed 10-24-2006; Ord. 2468, passed
1-10-2012; Ord. 2538, passed 7-12-2016)



CHAPTER 80:  ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES



Section



   80.01   Purpose



   80.02   Definitions



   80.03   General regulations



   80.04   Places of operation



   80.05   Negligence



   80.06   Accident reports



   80.07   Operation by Police Department, Fire Department, emergency
medical services or first responders, Parks Department or Downtown SSMID



   80.08   Limitation of liability of city and adjoining owners



§ 80.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and snowmobiles within the city.



(1999 Code, § 75.01)



§ 80.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV.  A motorized flotation-tire vehicle with
not less than three and not more than six low pressure tires, that is
designed primarily for off-road use but not including farm tractors or
equipment, construction equipment, forestry vehicles, or lawn and grounds
maintenance vehicles.



(Iowa Code § 321.1)



   SNOWMOBILE.  A motorized vehicle weighing less than 1,000 pounds which
uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread, or any combination
of runners, skis or tread, and is designed for travel on snow or ice.



(Iowa Code § 321G.1(20))



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.



(1999 Code, § 75.02)  (Ord. 2266, passed 5-27-2003; Ord. 2428, passed
9-14-2010)



§ 80.03  GENERAL REGULATIONS.



   No person shall operate an ATV or snowmobile within the city in
violation of the provisions of the Iowa Code Chapter 321G or rules
established by the Natural Resource Commission of the Department of Natural
Resources governing their registration, numbering, equipment and manner of
operation.



(Iowa Code Chapters 321G and 321I)  (1999 Code, § 75.03)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 80.04  PLACES OF OPERATION.



   The operators of ATVs and snowmobiles shall comply with the following
restrictions as to where ATVs and snowmobiles may be operated within the city



   (A)   Streets.  ATVs and snowmobiles shall be operated only upon
streets which have not been plowed during the snow season and on such other
streets as may be designated by resolution of the Council. In addition to the
general prohibition of ATVs and snowmobiles on all city streets, as defined,
ATVs and snowmobiles are specifically prohibited on all of the Mill Creek
Parkway right-of-way, the city recreational trail and all flood control
levees.



(Iowa Code § 321G.9(4)(a))



   (B)   Exceptions.  ATVs and snowmobiles may be operated on
prohibited streets only under the following circumstances.



      (1)   Emergencies.  ATVs and snowmobiles may be operated on
any street in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations
where snow upon the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles
impractical.



(Iowa Code § 321G.9(4)(c))



      (2)   Direct crossing.  ATVs and snowmobiles may make a
direct crossing of a prohibited street provided:



         (a)   The crossing is made at an angle of approximately
90 degrees to the direction of the street and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing;



         (b)   The ATV or snowmobile is brought to a complete
stop before crossing the street;



         (c)   The driver yields the right-of-way to all
on-coming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; and



         (d)   In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made
only at an intersection of the street with another street.



(Iowa Code § 321G.9(2))



   (C)   Railroad right-of-way.  ATVs and snowmobiles shall not be
operated on an operating railroad right-of-way. An ATV or snowmobile may be
driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at an established
crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if necessary,
use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all
oncoming traffic.



(Iowa Code § 321G.13(8))



   (D)   Trails.  ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails and
snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails except where
so designated.



(Iowa Code §§ 321G.9(4)(f))



   (E)   Parks and other city land.  ATVs and snowmobiles shall not be
operated in any park, playground or upon any other city-owned property
without the express permission of the city. A snowmobile shall not be
operated on any city land without a snow cover of at least one-tenth of one
inch.



   (F)   Sidewalk or parking.  ATVs and snowmobiles shall not be
operated upon the public sidewalk or that portion of the street located
between the curb line and the sidewalk or property line commonly referred to
as the “parking” except for purposes of crossing the same to a public
street upon which operation is authorized by this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 75.04)  (Ord. 2266, passed 5-27-2003)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 80.05  NEGLIGENCE.



   The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for any
injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or
snowmobile.



(Iowa Code § 321G.18)  (1999 Code, § 75.05)



§ 80.06  ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   If an all-terrain vehicle or snowmobile is involved in an accident
resulting in injury or death to anyone or property  amounting to $1,000 or
more, either the operator or someone acting for the operator shall
immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident
report within 48 hours, in accordance with state law.



(Iowa Code § 321I.11)  (1999 Code, § 75.06) (Ord. 2428, passed
9-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 80.07 OPERATION BY POLICE DEPARTMENT, FIRE DEPARTMENT, EMERGENCY MEDICAL
SERVICES OR FIRST RESPONDERS, PARKS DEPARTMENT OR DOWNTOWN SSMID.



   The provisions of this chapter with regard to restriction of use and
operation shall not apply to the use of an all-terrain vehicle, ATV or
snowmobile by the City Police Department, Fire Department, Emergency Medical
Services or First Responders in the course of their official duties and
operations. Additionally, provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
officials designated by the Downtown Self- Supported Municipal Improvement
District (“SSMID”) operating said vehicles within the SSMID, or to Parks
Department officials on city business.



(Ord. 2428, passed 9-14-2010; Ord. 2568, passed 3-27-2018)



§ 80.08 LIMITATION OF LIABILITY OF CITY AND ADJOINING OWNERS.



   The city and the owners or tenants of property adjoining public lands
or right of way of a public street or roadway and their agents and employees
owe no duty of care to keep public lands, ditches, or land contiguous to a
street or roadway under the control of the city safe for entry or use by
persons operating an all-terrain vehicle, ATV or snowmobile, or to give any
warning of a dangerous condition, use, structure, or activity on the premises
to persons entering for such purposes, except in the case of willful or
malicious failure to guard or warn against a dangerous condition, use,
structure, or activity.  This section does not create a duty of care or
grounds for liability on behalf of the city, or owners or tenants of property
adjoining public lands or the right of way of public street or roadways and
their agents and employees for injury to persons or property in the operation
of an all-terrain vehicle, ATV or snowmobile in a ditch or on land contiguous
to a street or roadway under the control of the city.  The city, and the
owners or tenants of property adjoining public lands or the right of way of a
public street or roadway and their agents and employees are not liable for
the operation of an all-terrain vehicle, ATV or snowmobile in violation of
this chapter.



(Ord. 2428, passed 9-14-2010)



CHAPTER 81:  BICYCLE REGULATIONS



Section



   81.01   Scope of regulations



   81.02   Traffic Code applies



   81.03   Double riding restricted



   81.04   Two abreast limit



   81.05   Bicycle paths



   81.06   Speed



   81.07   Emerging from alley or driveway



   81.08   Carrying articles



   81.09   Riding on sidewalks



   81.10   Towing



   81.11   Improper riding



   81.12   Parking



   81.13   Equipment requirements



§ 81.01  SCOPE OF REGULATIONS.



   These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any
street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
subject to those exceptions stated herein.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(10))  (1999 Code, § 76.01)



§ 81.02  TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES.



   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by the laws of the state declaring rules of the road applicable
to vehicles or by the Traffic Code of the city applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application. Whenever a person dismounts from a bicycle the person shall be
subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.



(Iowa Code § 321.234)  (1999 Code, § 76.02)



§ 81.03  DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED.



   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to
carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.



(Iowa Code §§ 321.234(3), 321.234(4))  (1999 Code, § 76.03)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 81.04  TWO ABREAST LIMIT.



   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles. All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right
and shall be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the
roadway.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(10))  (1999 Code, § 76.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.05  BICYCLE PATHS.



   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(10))  (1999 Code, § 76.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.06  SPEED.



   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable
and prudent under the conditions then existing.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(10))  (1999 Code, § 76.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.07  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.



   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the
sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(10))  (1999 Code, § 76.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.08  CARRYING ARTICLES.



   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handle bars.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(10))  (1999 Code, § 76.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.09  RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   The following shall apply to riding bicycles on sidewalks.



   (A)   Business districts.



      (1)   No bicycles, skateboard, roller blades or roller skates,
or any other wheeled means of transportation designed for recreation shall be
operated upon the public sidewalk in the Lyons Business District on Main
Avenue from North Third Street to McKinley Street, and in the Downtown or
Central Business District on South Second Street from Eighth Avenue South to
Second Avenue South; on South Third Street from Seventh Avenue South to
Fourth Avenue South; on South First Street from Sixth Avenue South to Fourth
Avenue South; on South Fourth Street from Sixth Avenue South to Fourth Avenue
South; on Sixth Avenue South from South Fourth Street to South First Street,
and on Fourth Avenue South from South Fourth Street to South First Street all
as contained and marked in the map attached to this amendment and included
herein by reference.



      (2)   The above designated streets shall be marked with
appropriate signage as per the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.



   (B)   Other locations.  When signs are erected on any sidewalk or
roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person
shall disobey the signs.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(10))



   (C)   Yield right-of-way.  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle
upon a sidewalk, the person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(10))



   (D)   Exemption. A police officer riding a police bicycle shall be
exempt from the prohibition against riding a bicycle on a sidewalk.



(1999 Code, § 76.09) (Ord. 2417, passed 7-13-2010; Ord. 2435, passed
12-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Bicycle riding on sidewalks, see Chapter 84, Schedule VIII



§ 81.10  TOWING.



   It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow
any other vehicle upon the streets of the city.



(1999 Code, § 76.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.11  IMPROPER RIDING.



   No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless manner such
as zigzagging, stunting, speeding or otherwise so as to disregard the safety
of the operator or others.



(1999 Code, § 76.11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.12  PARKING.



   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the
roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the
bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in a manner as to afford the
least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(10))  (1999 Code, § 76.12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 81.13  EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   Every person riding a bicycle shall be responsible for providing and
using equipment as provided herein.



   (A)   Lamps required.  Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall
be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible
from a distance of at least 300 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear
exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear except
that a red reflector on the rear, of a type which shall be visible from all
distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, may be used in lieu of a
rear light.



(Iowa Code § 321.397)



   (B)   Brakes required.  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a
brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry,
level, clean pavement.



(Iowa Code § 321.236(10))



(1999 Code, § 76.13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 82:  RAILROAD REGULATIONS



Section



   82.01   Definitions



   82.02   Warning signals



   82.03   Obstructing streets



   82.04   Crossing maintenance



   82.05   Speed



§ 82.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OPERATOR.  Any individual, partnership, corporation or other
association which owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad train.



   RAILROAD TRAIN.  An engine or locomotive, with or without cars coupled
thereto, operated upon rails.



(Iowa Code § 321.1(58))



(1999 Code, § 81.01)



§ 82.02  WARNING SIGNALS.



   Operators shall sound a horn at least 1,000 feet before a street
crossing is reached and after sounding the horn, shall ring the bell
continuously until the crossing is passed.



(Iowa Code § 327G.13)  (1999 Code, § 81.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.03  OBSTRUCTING STREETS.



   (A)   Operators shall not operate any train in a manner as to
prevent vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a period of time in
excess of ten minutes except:



      (1)   Comply with signals.  When necessary to comply with
signals affecting the safety of the movement of trains;



      (2)   Avoid striking.  When necessary to avoid striking any
object or person on the track;



      (3)   Disabled.  When the train is disabled;



      (4)   Safety regulations.  When necessary to comply with
governmental safety regulations including, but not limited to, speed
ordinances and speed regulations;



      (5)   In motion.  When the train is in motion except while
engaged in switching operations; and



      (6)   No traffic.  When there is no vehicular traffic waiting
to use the crossing.



   (B)   Operators violating any provision of this section commit a
municipal infraction. An employee is not guilty of a violation if the action
is necessary to comply with the direct order or instructions of a railroad
corporation or its supervisors. Guilt is then with the railroad corporation.



(Iowa Code § 327G.32)  (1999 Code, § 81.03)  (Ord. 2560, passed
12-12-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 82.04  CROSSING MAINTENANCE.



   Operators shall construct and maintain good, sufficient and safe
crossings over any street traversed by their rails.



(Iowa Code § 364.11)  (1999 Code, § 81.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Editor’s note:



   See Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 (1943)



§ 82.05  SPEED.



   It is unlawful to operate any railroad train through any street
crossing within the platted areas of the city at a speed greater than 20 mph.



(1999 Code, § 81.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Editor’s note:



   See Girl vs. United States R. Admin., 194 Iowa 1382, 189 N.W. 834 (1923)



CHAPTER 83:  CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES



Section



   83.01   Exercise of police power



   83.02   Definition



   83.03   Right of access limited



   83.04   Access controls imposed



   83.05   Unlawful use of controlled access facility



   83.06   Permitted access points



§ 83.01  EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER.



   This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the
city under Iowa Code Chapter 306A, for the preservation of the public peace,
health, safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.



(Iowa Code § 306A.1)  (1999 Code, § 140.01)



§ 83.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY.  A highway or street especially designed
for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants of
abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a controlled
right or easement of access, light, air or view by reason of the fact that
their property abuts upon the controlled access facility or for any other
reason.



(Iowa Code § 306A.2)  (1999 Code, § 140.02)



§ 83.03  RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED.



   No person has any right of ingress or egress to, from or across any
controlled access facility to or from abutting lands except at the designated
points at which access may be permitted.



(Iowa Code § 306A.4)  (1999 Code, § 140.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 83.04  ACCESS CONTROLS IMPOSED.



   Access control is established on the following streets:



   (A)   Eighth Avenue South from South Fourth Street to South Third
Street (being from station 1996+30.5 to station 2106+86.1);



   (B)   Eleventh Avenue South from Camanche Avenue to South Fourth
Street;



   (C)   Fourth Street (South Fourth Street) from Eighth Avenue South
to Seventh Avenue South;



   (D)   Fourth Street (South Fourth Street) from Eleventh Avenue South
to Eighth Avenue South;



   (E)   United States Highway No. 30, being Camanche Avenue, from
South Fourteenth Street to Eleventh Avenue South;



   (F)   Main Avenue from Second Street East to the Fulton-Lyons Bridge;



   (G)   Second Street from Seventh Avenue to Main Avenue; and



   (H)   Seventh Avenue South from South Fourth Street to Second Street.



(1999 Code, § 140.04)



§ 83.05  UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY.



   It is unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Cross dividing line.  Drive a vehicle over, upon or across
any curb, central dividing section, or other separation or dividing line on a
controlled access facilities;



   (B)   Turns.  Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except
through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section,
separation or line or make any turn at any cross-over where an official sign
prohibits the turn;



   (C)   Use of lanes.  Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane
provided for that purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the
central dividing curb, separation section or line; and



   (D)   Enter facility.  Drive any vehicle into the controlled access
facility from a local service road except through an opening provided for
that purpose in the dividing curb or dividing section or dividing line which
separates the service road from the controlled access facility property.



(Iowa Code § 321.366)  (1999 Code, § 140.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 83.06  PERMITTED ACCESS POINTS.



   Points of access locations consisting of accessways from abutting
property to the adjacent traffic lane or roadway, are expressed in terms of
stations (each representing a distance of 100 feet) measured along the
centerline of the controlled access facility from the points of reference.
The measurements shall refer to the center of the accessways which shall be
18 feet in width for residential and agricultural purposes and 35 feet in
width for commercial purposes. Points of access are hereby permitted as
follows:



 


Station

 

Point of Access

 

Width

 

Type of Access




Project  FA-18






1942+05

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline local road




1950+98

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1952+76

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1952+80

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1960+09

 

Left

 

24 feet

 

Field entrance




1967+55

 

Right

 

30 feet

 

Commercial




1976+94

 

Left

 

21 feet

 

Field entrance




1977+00

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Field entrance




1982+30

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1982+69

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1983+31

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1984+77

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1985+32

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1986+32

 

Right

 

22 feet

 

Commercial




1986+85

 

Left

 

45 feet

 

Commercial




1988+60

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1989+45

 

Left

 

15 feet

 

Residential




1990+08

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




1990+12

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1991+16

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1991+78

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




Project No. U-UG-30-9 (3) - 44-23




1903+85

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1903+86

 

Right

 

32 feet

 

Type B




1912+40

 

Right

 

45 feet

 

Type A




1916+50

 

Left

 

24 feet - slab

 

Intersection




1916+50

 

Right

 

45 feet

 

Joint Commercial Entrance




1923+10

 

Right

 

30 feet

 

Joint Commercial Entrance




1923+10

 

Left

 

30 feet

 

Type B




1930+11

 

Left

 

31 feet

 

Commercial




1933+65

 

Left

 

45 feet

 

Commercial




1934+00

 

Right

 

41 feet

 

Commercial




1936+80

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1938+50

 

Right

 

45 feet

 

Joint Commercial




1942+53

 

Right

 

31 feet- B-B

 

Intersection




1942+53

 

Left

 

31 feet- B-B

 

Intersection




1953+40

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1953+45

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1950+06

 

Left

 

45 feet

 

Commercial




1958+93

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1958+92

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1961+18

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1965+95

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1968+20

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1967+92

 

Left

 

46 feet

 

Joint Commercial




1977+48

 

Right

 

34 feet

 

Commercial




1978+50

 

Left

 

53 feet- B-B

 

Commercial




1981+42

 

Left

 

31 feet- B-B

 

Intersection




1982+46

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1983+13

 

Left

 

45 feet

 

Commercial




1985+81

 

Left

 

36 feet

 

Commercial




1986+46

 

Right

 

34.5 feet

 

Commercial




1987+16

 

Left

 

36 feet

 

Commercial




1988+52

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1988+01

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1989+81

 

Left

 

23 feet

 

Residential




1990+40

 

Left

 

25 feet

 

Residential




1991+52

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1992+90

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1993+11

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1996+60

 

Left

 

41 feet- B-B

 

Intersection




1996+60

 

Right

 

49 feet- B-B

 

Intersection




1997+14

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1998+46

 

Right

 

24 feet

 

Residential




1999+09

 

Right

 

24 feet

 

Residential




1999+51

 

Right

 

24 feet

 

Residential




2000+12

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Residential




2001+10

 

Right

 

24 feet

 

Residential




2001+70

 

Right

 

24 feet

 

Residential




2002+50

 

Right

 

24 feet

 

Residential




2002+41

 

Left

 

26 feet

 

Intersection




U.S. Highway No. 67




13927+02

 

Left

 

24 feet

 

Farm Entrance




13924+61

 

Right

 

45 feet

 

Commercial




Project No. UN-922




1995+32.7

 

N. side Rte. 30

 

Width of 27th Ave. South

 

City Street




1992+67.5

 

N. side Rte. 30

 

35 feet

 

Commercial Drive




1995+01.87

 

Right

 


 

Centerline Overhead




1995+32.7

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Twenty-Seventh Ave. South




1996+30.5

 

Left

 


 

Centerline S. Fourteenth Street




1997+18

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1998+19

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




1998+38

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1998+77

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Residential




1999+19

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




1999+70

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Residential




1999+93

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Commercial




2000+82

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2001+39

 

Right

 

15 feet

 

Residential




2002+09.9

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Barker Street




2002+25

 

Right

 

15 feet

 

Residential




2002+78

 

Right

 

15 feet

 

Residential




2003+27

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2003+30

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2003+54

 

Left

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2003+89

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2005+18

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2005+25

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2006+53.9

 

Right

 


 

Centerline Twenty-Fifth Place




2006+59.5

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Twenty-Fifth Place




2007+11

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2007+56

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2008+71

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2009+46

 

Left

 

24 feet

 

Commercial




2009+53

 

Right

 

20 feet

 

Commercial




2010+10

 

Left

 

24 feet

 

Commercial




2010+73

 

Left

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2010+86

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2011+70

 

Left

 

15 feet

 

Residential




2012+22

 

Left

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2012+71

 

Left

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2013+26

 

Left

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2013+40

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2013+68

 

Left

 

15 feet

 

Residential




2013+88

 

Left

 

14 feet

 

Residential




2014+36

 

Left

 

15 feet

 

Residential




2015+05.0

 

Left and Right

 


 

Centerline Twenty-Fourth Place




2015+68

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2015+75

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2016+20

 

Left

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2016+48

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2016+65

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2016+94

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2018+20

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2019+39

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2019+70

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2020+41

 

Left

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2021+46.9

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Twenty-Third Place




2022+32

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2022+79

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2023+68

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2024+12

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2025+25

 

Right

 

24 feet

 

Commercial




2025+92.8

 

Left and Right

 


 

Centerline Twenty-Second Place




2026+91

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2027+14

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2028+08

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2028+60

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2028+58

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2028+95

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2029+10

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2029+57

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2029+90

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2030+12

 

Right

 

15 feet

 

Residential




2030+65

 

Right

 

24 feet

 

Joint Residential and Commercial




2030+66

 

Left

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2031+09

 

Left

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2031+57

 

Left

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2032+12

 

Left

 

30 feet

 

Joint Residential and Commercial




2031+83

 

Right

 

31 feet

 

Joint Residential and Commercial




2032+89.1

 

Left and Right

 


 

Centerline Twenty-First Place




2033+32

 

Right

 

24 feet

 

Commercial




2034+20

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2034+31

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2035+01

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2035+03

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2035+43

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2035+65

 

Left

 

36 feet

 

Joint Residential and Commercial




2036+24.8

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Twentieth Place




2036+89

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2037+28

 

Left

 

16 feet

 

Residential (curb cut but no drive)




2037+95

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2038+09.0

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Nineteenth Place




2038+40

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2038+92

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2039+46

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2039+58

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2039+66

 

Left

 

15 feet

 

Residential




2040+41

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2041+00

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2041+61.7

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Eighteenth Place




2041+67

 

Right

 

43 feet

 

Joint Residential and Commercial




2043+15.85

 

Right

 


 

Centerline Eighteenth Place




2045+05.1

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Seventeenth Place




2046+98

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2047+82

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2048+17

 

Left

 

16 feet

 

Commercial




2048+48

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2049+62

 

Right

 

32 feet

 

Commercial




2049+93.0

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Sixteenth Place




2050+76

 

Left

 

25 feet

 

Commercial




2051+47

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2052+78

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2053+15

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2053+47

 

Left

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2054+29

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2055+00

 

Left

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2056+35

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2057+21

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2057+72.2

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Fifteenth Avenue




2058+36

 

Left

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2059+13

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2060+54

 

Right

 

24 feet

 

Residential




2061+22.6

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Fourteenth Avenue




2061+27

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2061+63

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2062+16

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2062+66

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Commercial




2063+64

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2064+69

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2065+68

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2066+92.25

 

Left and Right

 


 

Centerline Thirteenth Avenue




2068+76

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2069+36

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2070+48

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2070+81

 

Right

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2070+78

 

Left

 

18 feet

 

Residential




2071+92

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2072+35

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2072+54

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2072+62.3

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Twelfth Avenue




2072+83

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2073+30

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2073+82

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2074+29

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2074+79

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2075+74

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2075+94

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2077+18

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2077+48

 

Left

 

17 feet

 

Residential




2078+45

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Residential




2079+05

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2080+53.5

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Eleventh Avenue S.




2080+31

 

Right

 

34 feet

 

Commercial




2081+25

 

Left and Right

 


 

Centerline South Fifth Street




The following drives are on the resurfacing portion of the project:




2082+00

 

Right

 

28 feet

 

Commercial




2082+08

 

Left

 

9 feet

 

Private




2084+10

 

Right

 

8 feet

 

Private




2084+56

 

Right

 

6 feet

 

Private




2085+08

 

Right

 

8 feet

 

Private




2085+21

 

Left

 

10 feet

 

Private




2086+12

 

Left

 

12 feet

 

Private




2086+54

 

Left

 

10 feet

 

Private




2086+70

 

Left

 

10 feet

 

Private




2086+82

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2087+50

 

Right

 

20 feet

 

Commercial




2088+05.9

 

Right

 


 

Centerline Eleventh Avenue S.




2088+05.9

 

Right

 


 

Centerline Fourth Street S.




2088+60

 

Right

 

42 feet

 

Commercial




2090+77

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2091+30

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2091+90.6

 

Left and Right

 


 

Centerline Tenth Avenue S.




2092+93

 

Right

 

47 feet

 

Joint Commercial




2093+90

 

Right

 

17 feet

 

Commercial




2094+10.2

 

Left and Right

 


 

Centerline alley




2095+37

 

Right

 

60 feet

 

Commercial




2096+25.4

 

Left and Right

 


 

Centerline Ninth Avenue S.




2098+40.0

 

Left and Right

 


 

Centerline alley




2100+85.2

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Eighth Avenue S.




2100+85.2

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Fourth Street S.




2102+11

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




2102+38

 

Right

 

10 feet

 

Private




2103+39

 

Left

 

20 feet

 

Private




2104+55

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Private




2105+80

 

Right

 

13 feet

 

Private




2106+42

 

Right

 

14 feet

 

Private




2107+64.14

 

Left and Right

 


 

Centerline South Third Street




Project P-1095




0+41

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




0+46

 

Right

 

45 feet

 

Commercial




1+07

 

Right

 

45 feet

 

Commercial




1+09

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




1+80

 

Right and Left

 


 

Alley




2+10

 

Right

 

20 feet

 

Commercial




3+80

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Seventh Avenue S.




4+51

 

Right

 

30 feet

 

Commercial




6+44

 

Left

 

15 feet

 

Commercial




6+93

 

Left

 

15 feet

 

Commercial




7+40

 

Right

 

30 feet

 

Commercial




7+45

 

Left

 

15 feet

 

Commercial




7+95

 

Left

 

15 feet

 

Commercial




8+45

 

Left

 

15 feet

 

Commercial




8+95

 

Left

 

15 feet

 

Commercial




9+45

 

Left

 

16 feet

 

Commercial




9+95

 

Left

 

15 feet

 

Commercial




10+60

 

Right and Left

 


 

South Third Street




12+10

 

Left

 


 

Alley




13+38

 

Left

 

9 feet

 

Commercial




13+96

 

Left

 

8 feet

 

Residential




14+46

 

Right

 

10 feet

 

Residential




15+58

 

Right

 


 

Alley




15+85

 

Left

 


 

Alley




17+40.5

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline South Second Street




19+41

 

Right and Left

 


 

Alley




21+41

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Sixth Avenue S.




22+96

 

Right

 

11 feet

 

Commercial




23+41

 

Right and Left

 


 

Alley




25+52.0

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Fifth Avenue S.




27+61

 

Right and Left

 


 

Alley




29+61.8

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Fourth Avenue S.




31+29

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




31+62

 

Right and Left

 


 

Alley




33+61.5

 


 


 

Centerline Third Avenue S.




35+62

 

Right and Left

 


 

Alley




35+88

 

Right

 

45 feet

 

Commercial




36+86

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




37+61.9

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Second Avenue S.




38+68

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




39+30

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




39+61.5

 

Right and Left

 


 

Alley




40+00

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




41+61.4

 

Left

 


 

Centerline First Avenue S.




41+76.5

 

Right

 

40 feet

 

Commercial




42+60

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




42+97

 

Right

 

23 feet

 

Commercial




44+59

 

Right

 

40 feet

 

Commercial




44+73

 

Left and Right

 


 

Commercial




45+59

 

Left

 

45 feet

 

Joint Commercial




46+68

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




47+35.4

 

Left and Right

 


 

Centerline Third Avenue N.




48+37

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




49+23

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




49+82

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




49+87

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




50+37.4

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Fourth Avenue N.




51+21

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




52+28

 

Right

 

12 feet

 

Commercial




52+53

 

Left

 

14 feet

 

Commercial




52+68

 

Right

 

9 feet

 

Residential




53+10

 

Right

 

10 feet

 

Residential




54+12.2

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Fifth Avenue N.




55+24.5

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




55+68

 

Right

 

11 feet

 

Vacant Lot




56+86

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




57+20

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




57+88

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Sixth Avenue N.




58+31.5

 

Right

 

27 feet

 

Commercial




58+74

 

Right

 

20 feet

 

Commercial




59+80

 

Right

 


 

Alley




61+61

 

Left

 


 

Centerline Seventh Avenue N.




61+71.5

 

Right

 


 

Alley




62+65

 

Left

 

7 feet

 

Residential




63+10

 

Right

 

12 feet

 

Residential




63+73

 

Right

 

10 feet

 

Residential




63+83

 

Left

 

8 feet

 

Residential




66+00

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




66+71.2

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Eighth Avenue N.




67+67

 

Right

 

9 feet

 

Residential




68+06

 

Left

 

7 feet

 

Residential




68+07

 

Right

 

8 feet

 

Residential




68+58

 

Left

 

11 feet

 

Residential




69+03

 

Right

 

10 feet

 

Residential




70+05

 

Right

 

8 feet

 

Residential




70+06

 

Left

 

8 feet

 

Residential




70+57

 

Right

 

9 feet

 

Residential




71+36.6

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Ninth Avenue N.




72+16.5

 

Left

 

28 feet

 

Commercial




72+64

 

Left

 

33 feet

 

Commercial




72+96

 

Left

 

10 feet

 

Residential




72+98

 

Right

 

15 feet

 

Residential




73+43

 

Right

 

10 feet

 

Residential




73+44

 

Left

 

11 feet

 

Residential




73+91

 

Right

 

10 feet

 

Residential




74+44

 

Right

 

9 feet

 

Residential




74+54

 

Left

 

7 feet

 

Residential




74+92

 

Right

 

8 feet

 

Residential




76+20.3

 

Right and Left

 


 

Tenth Avenue N.




78+23

 

Left

 

9 feet

 

Residential




78+60

 

Left

 

30 feet

 

Commercial




79+09

 

Right

 

9 feet

 

Residential




79+79

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




80+19

 

Left

 

30 feet

 

Commercial




80+33.5

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




80+88.3

 

Right and Left

 


 

Eleventh Avenue N.




81+52

 

Right

 

26 feet

 

Commercial




82+64

 

Left

 

9 feet

 

Residential




82+92.5

 

Right

 

24 feet

 

Commercial




83+12.5

 

Left

 

10 feet

 

Residential




84+11

 

Right

 

30 feet

 

Commercial




85+53.8

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Twelfth Avenue N.




86+68

 

Left

 

10 feet

 

Residential




86+80

 

Right

 

10 feet

 

Residential




86+90

 

Left

 

9 feet

 

Residential




87+91

 

Left

 

11 feet

 

Residential




88+30

 

Right

 

7 feet

 

Residential




88+48

 

Left

 

10 feet

 

Residential




88+90

 

Left

 

8 feet

 

Residential




88+93.5

 

Right

 

16 feet

 

Commercial




89+52

 

Left

 

11 feet

 

Residential




90+31.3

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Thirteenth Avenue N.




90+39.5

 

Right

 

20 feet

 

Commercial




92+19

 

Left

 

8 feet

 

Residential




93+35

 

Right

 

12 feet

 

Commercial




93+92

 

Right

 

33 feet

 

Commercial




95+01

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Fourteenth Avenue N.




95+77

 

Right

 

28 feet

 

Commercial




97+41

 

Left

 

8 feet

 

Residential




98+49

 

Right

 

10 feet

 

Residential




99+28

 

Right

 

31 feet

 

Commercial




99+83.4

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Fifteenth Avenue N.




104+63.5

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Sixteenth Avenue N.




106+09

 

Right

 

8 feet

 

Residential




106+58

 

Right

 

9 feet

 

Residential




107+82

 

Right

 

8 feet

 

Residential




109+43.1

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Seventeenth Avenue N.




111+79

 

Left

 

10 feet

 

Residential




111+94

 

Right

 

11 feet

 

Residential




112+73

 

Left

 

10 feet

 

Residential




112+89

 

Right

 

10 feet

 

Residential




114+25.1

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Eighteenth Avenue N.




114+91

 

Left

 

8 feet

 

Residential




115+58

 

Right

 

8 feet

 

Residential




117+52

 

Right and Left

 


 

Alley




119+15.4

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Nineteenth Avenue N.




120+04

 

Right

 

9 feet

 

Residential




120+05

 

Left

 

8 feet

 

Residential




120+73

 

Left

 


 

Alley




121+83

 

Left

 

9 feet

 

Residential




123+28

 

Left

 


 

Alley




123+53

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




123+98

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




124+75.8

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Twentieth Avenue N.




125+28

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




125+77

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




126+00

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




126+81

 

Left

 

24 feet

 

Residential




127+23

 

Right

 

8 feet

 

Residential




127+55

 

Right

 

9 feet

 

Residential




128+10

 

Left

 


 

Alley




129+51.5

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Twenty-First Avenue N.




130+91

 

Left

 


 

Alley




132+72

 

Left

 


 

Alley




132+86

 

Left

 

12 feet

 

Commercial




134+17.4

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Twenty-Second Avenue N.




135+89

 

Left

 

12 feet

 

Residential




136+17

 

Left

 

16 feet

 

Residential




136+91

 

Left

 

8 feet

 

Residential




137+77

 

Right

 

9 feet

 

Residential




138+83.6

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Twenty-Third Avenue N.




139+36

 

Right

 

24 feet

 

Commercial




141+25.5

 

Left

 

11 feet

 

Residential




142+63

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




143+02.4†

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




144+94

 

Right and Left

 


 

Alley




146+68.4

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Roosevelt Street




148+40

 

Right and Left

 


 

Alley




150+13

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Garfield Street




151+88

 

Right and Left

 


 

Alley




153+59.8

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline McKinley Street




155+33

 

Right and Left

 


 

Alley




155+66

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




156+02

 

Left

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




157+16

 

Right and Left

 


 

Centerline Grant Street




158+06

 

Right

 

35 feet

 

Commercial




159+87

 


 


 

Centerline Harding Street



† Station 143+54.3 coming from south Sta. 143+20 going east; this point is
intersection of North Second Street and Main Street




 



(1999 Code, § 140.06)



CHAPTER 84:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Speed limits in public parks



      II.   Speed limits in alleys



      III.   Special speed restrictions



      IV.   One-way traffic



      V.   Two-way traffic



      VI.   Snow routes



      VII.   Prohibited passing zones



      VIII.   Bicycle riding on sidewalks



SCHEDULE I:  SPEED LIMITS IN PUBLIC PARKS.



 


Park

 

Prohibition

 

Speed Limit



Eagle Point Park
 
No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle
 
At a speed in excess of 15 mph


Any other park, including Riverview Park and on Riverview Drive
 
No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle
 
At a speed in excess of 20 mph



 



(1999 Code, § 63.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE II:  SPEED LIMITS IN ALLEYS.



 


Location

 

Prohibition



Any alley
 
A speed in excess of 15 mph is unlawful



 



(1999 Code, § 63.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE III:  SPECIAL SPEED RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   In accordance with requirements of the State Department of
Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in § 73.02
is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to
exist at any intersection or other place or upon any part of the city street
system, the Council shall determine and adopt by ordinance a higher or lower
speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at the location.



   (B)   The following special speed zones have been established:



 


Special 15 mph Speed Zones



A speed in excess of 15 mph is unlawful on any of the following designated
streets or parts thereof


   Bobetta Court



 



 


Special 20 mph Speed Zones





A speed in excess of 20 mph is unlawful on any of the following designated
streets or parts thereof


   Second Street from Eighth Avenue South to First Avenue


   Third Street from Second Avenue South to Seventh Avenue South


   Main Avenue from Second Street to Harding Street


   Twenty-Fifth Avenue North from Fourth Street to Ninth Street


   North Ninth Street from Twenty-Fifth Avenue North to Twenty-Eighth
Avenue North


   Twenty-Eighth Avenue North from Ninth Street to Fourth Street


   North Third Street between Cragmor Drive and the entrance to Eagle
Point Park




 



 


Special 25 mph Speed Zones





A speed in excess of 25 mph is unlawful on any of the following designated
streets or parts thereof


   Second Street from Main Avenue to Twenty-Ninth Avenue North


   Second Avenue South from Seventh Street to Bluff Boulevard


   Fourth Street from Second Avenue South to Seventh Avenue South


   Seventh Avenue South from Argyle Court to Melrose Court


   Tenth Street from Eighth Avenue South to Eleventh Avenue South


   Sixteenth Street from Second Avenue South to Eighth Avenue South


   Bluff Boulevard from College Avenue to South Nineteenth Street


   Springdale Drive from Bluff Boulevard to North Drive of Mt. St. Clare
Dormitory


   Twenty-Seventh Avenue South from South Fourteenth Street to South
Eighteenth Street


   Second Street from Twenty-Third Avenue North to Main Avenue


   Main Avenue from North Fifth Street to North Second Street


   Bluff Boulevard from South Fourteenth Street to 900 feet westerly of
South Fourteenth Street


   South Fourteenth Street from Bluff Boulevard to Eleventh Avenue South




 



 


Special 30 mph Speed Zones





A speed in excess of 30 mph is unlawful on any of the following designated
streets or parts thereof


   Second Street from Twenty-Ninth Avenue North to Thirty-First Avenue
North


   Second Avenue South from Fourth Street to Seventh Street


   Second Avenue South from Bluff Boulevard to Fourteenth Street


   Third Street from Second Avenue South to Twentieth Avenue North


   Third Street from Twentieth Avenue North to Thirty-Third Avenue North


   Fourth Street from Seventh Avenue South to Eighteenth Avenue South


   Fourth Street from Second Avenue South to Seventeenth Avenue North


   Fifth Avenue South from Fourth Street to Bluff Boulevard


   Seventh Avenue South from Second Street to Argyle Court


   Seventh Avenue South from Melrose Court to Bluff Boulevard


   Seventh Avenue North from Fourth Street to Bluff Boulevard


   Eighth Avenue South from Gateway Bridge to Fourth Street


   Eighth Avenue South from Melrose Court to Bluff Boulevard


   Tenth Street from Eleventh Avenue South to Fifteenth Avenue South


   Eleventh Avenue South from Fourth Street to Camanche Avenue


   Eleventh Street from Second Avenue South to Thirteenth Avenue North


   Thirteenth Avenue North from Fourth Street to Seventh Street


   South Fourteenth Street from Camanche Avenue to Eleventh Avenue South


   Seventeenth Avenue North from Third Street to Fourth Street


   Nineteenth Street from Manufacturing Drive to Harrison Drive


   Bluff Boulevard from Seventh Avenue North to South Fourteenth Street
and on Bluff Boulevard from 900 feet westerly of South Fourteenth Street to
College Avenue


   Manufacturing Drive from Bluff Boulevard to Nineteenth Street


   Springdale Drive from North Drive to Mt. St. Clare Dormitory to
Thirteenth Avenue North


   Thirteenth Avenue North from Fourteenth Street to Springdale Drive


   Stockwell Lane from U.S. Highway 67 to entrance of Eagle Point Park


   South Bluff Boulevard and Harts Mill Road from South Nineteenth Street
to Windsor Drive


   South Eighteenth Street from Eighth Avenue South to Second Avenue South


   South Second Street from Eighth Avenue South to Fifteenth Avenue South


   U.S. Highway 30/67 from 200 feet south of South Sixth Street to Eighth
Avenue South (Gateway Bridge)


   Third Street from Seventh Avenue South to Eleventh Avenue South


   Eighteenth Street from Second Avenue South to one-half mile north of
Second Avenue South


   Forty-Fourth Avenue South from the west city limits to 200 feet east of
Rock Creek




 



 


Special 35 mph Speed Zones





A speed in excess of 35 mph is unlawful on any of the following designated
streets or parts thereof


   Second Street from First Avenue to Twenty-Third Avenue North


   Second Avenue South from Fourteenth Street to .8 mile west of Mill
Creek Parkway


   Eighteenth Street from Thirteenth Avenue North to one-half mile south
of Thirteenth Avenue North


   Camanche Avenue (U.S. Highway 30/67) from 200 feet south of South Sixth
Street to 100 feet west of South Sixteenth Street


   Deer Creek Road from U.S. 67 east to city limits


   Lincolnway from Fourteenth Street to Sixteenth Street


   Stockwell Lane from U.S. Highway 136 to U.S. Highway 67


   U.S. Highway 67 from Thirty-Third Avenue North to Thirty-Ninth Avenue
North


   Springdale Drive from North Drive to Mt. St. Clare Dormitory to
Thirteenth Avenue North


   Thirteenth Avenue North from Mill Creek Parkway to North Fourteenth
Street


   Thirteenth Avenue North from Springdale Drive to Seventh Street


   Main Avenue from North Fifth Street to North Thirteenth Street


   Nineteenth Avenue North from North Second Street to the east city limits


   Sixteenth Street Northwest from Thirteenth Avenue North to U.S. Highway
136


   South Thirty-Second Street from Second Avenue South to Harts Mill Road


   Harts Mill Road from South Thirty-Second Street to the entrance to
Valley Oaks Golf Course


   Anamosa Road between U.S. Highway 30 and Forty-Fourth Avenue South


   Eighth Street Northwest between Stockwell Lane North and Forty-Fourth
Avenue North


   Valley West Drive from Manufacturing Drive to Mill Creek Parkway




 



 


Special 40 mph Speed Zones



A speed in excess of 40 mph is unlawful on any of the following designated
streets or parts thereof


   U.S. Highway 30/67 from 100 feet west of South Sixteenth Street to 200
feet west of South Nineteenth Street



 



 


Special 45 mph Speed Zones





A speed in excess of 45 mph is unlawful on any of the following designated
streets or parts thereof


   Twenty-First Street from Manufacturing Drive to Harrison Drive


   Harts Mill Road from Windsor Drive South to Thirty-Second Street


   U.S. Highway 67 from Thirty-Ninth Avenue North to Stockwell Lane


   U.S. Highway 30 from a point 200 feet west of South Nineteenth Street
westerly 10,219 feet to a point 3,055 feet west of Mill Creek Parkway


   Manufacturing Drive from Nineteenth Street to U.S. 30


   U.S. Highway 136 from North Thirteenth Street to city limits


   On Thirteenth Avenue North from Mill Creek Parkway to west city limits


   U.S. Highway 67 from its south junction with U.S. Highway 30 to the
south city limits


   Forty-Fourth Avenue South from 200 feet east of Rock Creek to South
Fifty-Fourth Street


   Mill Creek Parkway from U.S. Highway 30 to U.S. Highway 136 (Main
Avenue)


   Second Avenue South from .8 mile west of Mill Creek Parkway


   Main Avenue from North Fifth Street to 450 feet west of Mill Creek
Parkway


   Main Avenue from 450 west of Mill Creek Parkway to the city limits




 



 


Special 55 mph Speed Zones





A speed in excess of 55 mph is unlawful on any of the following designated
streets or parts thereof


   Second Avenue Road from Mill Creek Bridge to city limits


   Forty-Fourth Avenue North from Eighth Street Northwest to the west city
limits


   Sixteenth Street Northwest from U.S. Highway 136 to city limits


   Harts Mill Road from the entrance to Valley Oaks Golf Course to South
Sixty-Second Street


   South Thirtieth Street from Harts Mill Road to U.S. Highway 30


   South Fortieth Street from Harts Mill Road to U.S. Highway 30


   South Fifty-Fourth Street from Second Avenue Road to south city limits


   South Sixty-Second Street from Second Avenue Road to U.S. Highway 30


   Deer Creek Road from U.S. Highway 67 west and north to city limits


   South Sixtieth Street from U.S. Highway 30 to Harts Mill Road


   U.S. Highway 30 from a point 3,055 feet west of  Mill Creek Parkway
westerly 3,000 feet to a point 582 feet east of South Fortieth Street




 



(Iowa Code § 321.290)  (1999 Code, § 63.05)  (Ord. 2095, passed 6-8-1999;
Ord. 2237, passed 4-24-2001; Ord. 2249, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2254, passed
2-12-2002; Ord. 2261, passed 12-10-2002; Ord. 2278, passed 7-13-2004; Ord.
2282, passed 11-9-2004; Ord. 2336, passed 10-10-2006; Ord. 2343, passed
2-13-2007; Ord. 2361, passed 2-26-2008; Ord. 2388, passed 10-14-2008 ; Ord.
2441, passed 4-26-2011; Ord. 2463, passed 9-13-2011 )  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE IV:  ONE-WAY TRAFFIC.



   (A)   One-way traffic.  The following are one-way traffic locations:



 


Location

 

Restriction



North-south alley from Eighth Avenue North to Seventh Avenue North between
North Third Street and Park Place
 
One-way traffic in a southbound direction



 



   (B)   Signs.  The Public Works Director is directed to post the
appropriate signs.



(Ord. 2227, passed 10-24-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE V:  TWO-WAY TRAFFIC.



   (A)   Two-way traffic.  The following are two-way traffic locations:



 


Location

 

Restriction



The north-south alley from Twelfth Avenue North to Thirteenth Avenue North
between Pershing Boulevard and North Second Street
 
Two-way alley



 



   (B)   Signs.  The Public Works Director is directed to remove any
one-way signs.



(Ord. 2228, passed 10-24-2000)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE VI:  SNOW ROUTES.



    The following streets and avenues are hereby designated as snow routes
and a sign designating the streets or avenues as a snow route shall be posted
in each block affected. This section shall not be construed as suspending
parking limitations or restrictions imposed by any other ordinances.



 



Bluff Boulevard, Hart’s Mill Rd. to Seventh Avenue North


Camanche Avenue, South Fourteenth Street to Eleventh Avenue South


College Avenue, Bluff Boulevard to South Eighteenth Street


Eighteenth Avenue South, Margaret Place to ADM Entrance


Eighteenth Avenue South, South Fourth St. to South Fifth Street


Eighteenth Street, College Avenue to Thirteenth Avenue North


Eighth Avenue South, South Eighteenth Street to Terrace Drive


Eighth Avenue South, South Ninth to South Tenth Street


Eighth Avenue South, South Third to South Fourth Street


Eleventh Avenue South, South Third St. to Camanche Avenue


Eleventh Street,  Second Avenue South to Thirteenth Avenue North


Fifteenth Avenue South, Grandview to Harrison


Fifth Avenue South, from First Street to Bluff Boulevard


Fifth Street, Eleventh Avenue South to Seventh Avenue North


Fourteenth Avenue North, North Second Street to North Fourth Street


Fourth Street from Eighteenth Avenue South to Seventeenth Avenue North


Grandview Drive, South Tenth Street to Fifteenth Avenue South


Harrison Drive, Fifteenth Avenue South to South Fourteenth Street


Hart’s Mill Road, Bluff Boulevard to Mill Creek Parkway


Main Avenue, Harding Street to North Thirteenth Street


Manufacturing Drive, U.S. Highway 30 to Bluff Boulevard


Margaret Place, Eighteenth to Nineteenth Avenue South


Meadowview Drive, Skyline Drive to North Third Street


Mill Creek Parkway, U.S. Highway 30 to Main Avenue


Nineteenth Avenue North, bridge approach to North Second Street


Nineteenth Avenue South, South Fifth Street to Margaret Place


Scenic Drive, Thirty-Third Avenue North to Tower Road


Second Avenue South from South Second Street to Mill Creek Parkway


Second Street, Fourteenth Avenue South to Thirty-First Avenue North


Seventeenth Avenue North, North Third to North Fourth Street


Seventh Avenue North, North Second Street to Bluff Boulevard


Seventh Avenue South, South Second Street to Bluff Boulevard


Sixteenth Street Northwest, Thirteenth Avenue North to Main Avenue


Sixth Street, Camanche Avenue to Bluff Boulevard


Skyline Drive, Tower to Meadowview Drive


South 9th Street, Bluff Boulevard to Eighth Avenue South


South Fifth Street, Nineteenth Avenue South to Eighteenth Avenue South


South Fourteenth Street, Camanche Avenue to Bluff Boulevard


South Nineteenth Street, U.S. Highway 30/67 to Manufacturing Drive


South Second Street, Hart’s Mill Road to Twelfth Avenue South


South Tenth Street, Eighth Avenue South to Grandview Drive


Springdale Drive, Bluff Boulevard to Thirteenth Avenue North


Terrace Drive, Bluff Boulevard to Eighth Avenue South


Third Street, Eleventh Avenue South to Stockwell Lane


Thirteenth Avenue North, North Second Street to Mill Creek Parkway


Thirty-First Avenue North, North Second to North Third Streets


Thirty-Third Avenue North, North Third Street to Scenic Drive


Tower Road, Scenic Drive to Skyline Drive


Twelfth Avenue South, Windsor Drive to South Second Street


Twenty-Third Place, South Fourteenth Street to Camanche Avenue


Windsor Drive, Hart’s Mill Road to Twelfth Avenue South




 



(Ord. 2233, passed 3-27-2001)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE VII:  PROHIBITED PASSING ZONES.



   (A)   Prohibited passing zones.  The following are prohibited
passing zones:



 


Street

 

Prohibition



Anamosa Road
 
A prohibited passing zone established on a distance of 500 feet in each
direction from the main entrance to the Equistar plant



 



   (B)   Pavement markings.  The Street Superintendent is directed to
paint a double yellow line and erect the necessary signs to designate the
prohibited passing zone.



(Ord. 2262, passed 12-10-2002)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SCHEDULE VIII:  BICYCLE RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.



   No bicycle, skateboard, roller blades or roller skates or any other
wheeled means of transportation designed for recreation shall be operated
upon the public sidewalk in:



 


Business District

 

From

 

Location



Lyons Business District on Main Avenue
 

From

 
The Flood Control Levee to North Third Street


In the 2300 block of North Second Street
 


 


Central Business District
 

From

 
Second Avenue South to Eighth Avenue South between South First Street and
South Fourth Street



 



(Iowa Code § 321.236(10))



CHAPTER 85:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



      I.   Downtown parking



SCHEDULE I:  DOWNTOWN PARKING.



   (A)   Overparking prohibited.  No person shall park a vehicle for
more than two consecutive hours during any one day in any one on-street
parking stall within the downtown parking zone except in the following areas
where the parking limit for on-street parking shall be as indicated: 



 


Location

 

Time Limit



North side of 100 block South Fourth Street from First Street to the west
boundary of the U.S. post office property
 

8 hours



West side of the 300 block of First Street from Fourth Avenue South to Third
Avenue South
 

8 hours




 



   (B)   Parking limit for public parking lots.  The parking limit for
off-street public parking lots will be as follows:



 


Location

 

Time Limit



DeWitt Park lot
 
48 hours except for the easterly side of the first row of parking spaces will
be designated as three-hour parking


Clinton Park lot
 

48 hours



Fifth Avenue South and South First Street lot
 

48 hours



Fourth Avenue South and South Second Street lot
 

3 hours



Sixth Avenue South and South Second Street lot
 

3 hours



200 block Sixth Avenue South lot
 

3 hours




 



(Ord. 2283, passed 11-9-2004)  Penalty, see § 79.99



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      90.   NUISANCE ABATEMENT AND CONTROL



      91.   ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL



        92.   AIR AND NOISE POLLUTION 



      93.   NOISE CONTROL



      94.   GRASS, WEEDS, VINES AND BRUSH



      95.   PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



      96.   PARK REGULATIONS



      97.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



      98.   TREES



      99.   JUNKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES



      100.   GRAFFITI



      101.   DEER MANAGEMENT



      102.   WELLS



      103.   OPEN BURNING



      104.   REGISTRATION OF ABANDONED BUILDINGS



CHAPTER 90:  NUISANCE ABATEMENT AND CONTROL



Section



   90.01   Definition of nuisance



   90.02   Nuisances enumerated



   90.03   Other conditions



   90.04   Nuisances prohibited



   90.05   Right of entry for inspection



   90.06   Warrants



   90.07   Nuisance abatement



   90.08   Notice to abate; contents



   90.09   Method of service



   90.10   Request for hearing



   90.11   Abatement in emergency



   90.12   Abatement by city



   90.13   Collection of costs



   90.14   Installment payment of cost of abatement



   90.15   Failure to abate



   90.16   Interference



   90.17   Liability



   90.18   Foreclosed/rental property



 



   90.99   Penalty



§ 90.01  DEFINITION OF NUISANCE.



   (A)   Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or unreasonably
offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as
essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life
or property is a nuisance.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all residential
and non-residential properties and structures located within the corporate
limits of the city, which property shall include any right-of- way required
to be maintained under § 94.03.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010; Ord. 2591, passed 9-11-2018)



§ 90.02  NUISANCES ENUMERATED.



   The following divisions include, but do not limit, the conditions which
are deemed to be nuisances in the city:



   (A)   Offensive smells.  Erecting, continuing or using any building
or other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture,
which, by occasioning noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or
other annoyances, becomes injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or
property of individuals or the public.



   (B)   Filth or noisome substance.  Causing or suffering any offal,
filth or noisome substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the
prejudice of others.



      (1)   Sanitation.  All exterior, and any interior portion of
the premises of any property shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition.  The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior or
interior portion of the premises which such occupant controls, in a clean,
safe, and sanitary condition so as to protect the life, health and safety of
any occupants or of the public.



      (2)   Containment systems.



         (a)   In any event where a sewage spill or overflow
occurs from any sewer, septic system, portable toilet, holding tank, sewage
or septic transfer vessel, or any other container or containment system where
sewage, human, or animal waste is deposited upon or within a structure or
upon a property located within the corporate limits of the city, upon
verification by the Building and Neighborhood Services Official, such a spill
or overflow shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be subject to the provision
in this chapter in §§ 90.05, 90.06 and 90.09.  All sanitation issues
involving sewage spills and/or overflows shall be considered an emergency and
be subject to immediate action by the city in accordance with § 90.09 of
this chapter.



         (b)   The interior of a structure and equipment therein
shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in sanitary
condition.  All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound,
and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.  In any instance wherein a
structure appears to be found in disrepair or structurally unsound by the
Building and Neighborhood Services Official, it shall be the responsibility
of the property owner to submit a report stating that the structure is sound
and capable of carrying the imposed load, and such report must be signed by
either an architect, structural engineer, or a registered, licensed
contractor that meets the qualifications set forth by the Building and
Neighborhood Services Official.



      (3)   Accumulation of rubbish or garbage.  All exterior
property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free
from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.  For the purpose of this
chapter, RUBBISH shall be defined as any material thrown away as worthless:
trash or debris that has been discarded or is broken, in state of disrepair,
has the potential to cause a fire hazard, or any instance where there is not
a safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel provided from any point in
a building or structure to the public way.  Means of egress shall comply
with the current adopted Fire Prevention Code of the city.



   (C)   Impeding passage of navigable or natural water ways. 
Obstructing or impeding without legal authority the passage of any navigable
river, harbor, natural drainage way, storm water drainage way, stream, creek,
any retention/detention ponds or drainage areas, or collection of water. All
storm water drainage issues between developed properties must be resolved by
the use of an approved drainage system that either collects, directs or
re-directs stormwater to a natural, or, a man-made drainage area.  Storm
water conducted from roofs or other impervious areas shall be dispersed
entirely upon the grounds of the owner of the contributing property or it
shall be drained or conducted into ditches, storm drains or gutters where
available on public property or easements legally usable for that purpose, or
into public streams.  The depositing of storm water, either permanently or
temporarily, onto an abutting property, city right of way, or upon any city
street, road or alley is prohibited unless a storm water management plan has
been submitted, reviewed and approved by the office of the City Engineer.



   (D)   Water pollution.  Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or
impure the water of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the
same from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.



   (E)   Blocking public and private ways.  Obstructing or
encumbering, by fences, buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private
ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places or burying grounds.



   (F)   Billboards.  Billboards, signboards and advertising signs,
whether erected and constructed on public or private property, which so
obstruct and impair the view of any portion or part of a public street,
avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a railroad or street railway track
as to render dangerous the use thereof.  Any billboard, signboard and
advertising signs that are dilapidated, broken, abandoned or in a general
state of disrepair, or, that advertise for a business that is no longer
operating as advertised.



   (G)   Storing of flammable junk.  Depositing or storing of
flammable junk, such as old rags, rope cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by
dealers in such articles within the fire limits of the city, unless in a
building of fireproof construction, or within the confines of an area
similarly protected by a sprinkler system, fire protection equipment or
device, fire brigade or private fire department, or that is regulated and
conforms to the 2006 Life Safety Code.



   (H)   Air pollution.  Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly
ash.



   (I)   Weeds, brush.  Dense growth of all weeds, vines, brush,
grass, other botanical growth and other similar vegetation in the city which
constitute a health, safety or fire hazard or which are obnoxious or
unsightly.



   (J)   Dead or diseased trees.  Any tree in such a state of
deterioration that any part of the tree is likely to fall and damage property
or cause injury to persons.  A dead tree or limb which overhangs a sidewalk,
parkway, city street or alley is a nuisance per se.  In the case of a
portion of a tree that is dead, diseased, broken, dangling, or dangerous,
only that portion that is dead, diseased, broken, dangling, or dangerous
shall be required to be removed and made safe.



   (K)   Airport air space.  Any object or structure hereafter erected
within 1,000 feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established
airport or landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation
including take-off and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a
proper use or enjoyment of the land on which the same is located.



   (L)   Houses of ill fame.  Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose
of prostitution and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons
participating in criminal gang activity prohibited by Iowa Code Chapter 723A
or places resorted to by persons using controlled substances, or any activity
that is in violation of Iowa Code § 124.101, or houses where drunkenness,
quarreling, fighting or breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to
the disturbance of others.  Any building or structure may be determined to
be a house of ill fame, whether by intention, or, by the absence of, or lack
of, proper management or maintenance.




   (M)   Junk and junk vehicles.




      (1)   Storing, accumulating, or allowing to remain on any
private property within the corporate limits of the city any junk or junk
vehicle. Storing of a vehicle on a property that is owned by an individual
that is not the registered owner of said vehicle(s).



      (2)   JUNK is defined as all old or scrap copper, brass, lead
or any other non-ferrous metal: old or discarded rope, rags, batteries,
paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or used lumber, or salvaged wood;
dismantled vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of such vehicles,
machinery or appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous materials;
old or    discarded glass, tin, plastic or old or discarded household
goods or hardware.  Neatly stacked firewood located on a side or a rear yard
is not considered junk.



      (3)   JUNK VEHICLE means any vehicle that is parked, stored or
placed upon a property and that is not able to be moved under its own power
or has not been moved or used as an operating vehicle for a period of seven
days and has any of the following characteristics:



         (a)   Broken glass.  Any vehicle with a broken
windshield or window.



         (b)   Broken or loose part.  Any vehicle with a broken
or loose fender, door, bumper, hood, running board, steering wheel or trunk
top.



         (c)   Habitat for nuisance animals or insects.  Any
vehicle which has become the habitat for rats, mice, or snakes, or any other
vermin or insects.



         (d)   Flammable fuel.  Any vehicle which contains
gasoline or any other flammable fuel, and is inoperable.



         (e)   Inoperable.  Any motor vehicle which lacks an
engine or two or more wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor
vehicle totally inoperable, or which cannot be moved under its own power or
has not been used as an operating vehicle for a period of seven days or more.



         (f)   Defective or obsolete condition.  Any other
vehicle which, because of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other
way constitutes a threat to the public health and safety, and/or can be
described as a nuisance by any of the conditions listed in this chapter.



         (g)   Mobile and/or manufactured homes.  Mobile and/or
manufactured homes that are vacant, dilapidated beyond reasonable repair, or
that are not properly affixed or tied down to a foundation, or a footing or
slab according to Appendix E of the 2006 International Residential Code are
deemed as a nuisance and must be abated as a nuisance according to the
provisions of this chapter.



      (4)   Mere licensing of such a vehicle shall not constitute a
defense to the finding that a vehicle is a junk vehicle.



      (5)   VEHICLE means every device in, upon, or by which a
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway or
street, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks, and includes without limitation a motor vehicle,
automobile, truck, motorcycle, tractor, trailer, buggy, wagon, farm
   machinery, any of which may be licensed or unlicensed, or any
combination thereof.



      (6)   ABANDONED VEHICLE.



         (a)   A junk vehicle that has been left unattended on
public or private property for a 24-hour period, with or without the property
owners consent, or a vehicle that has been left unattended on public or
private property for a 24-hour period without the property owner’s consent,
and one that lacks proper registration or lacks the proper display of
registration plates and/or current registration tags, or one that is
illegally parked on public or private property, with or without the property
owner’s consent.  It shall be considered to be unlawful for a vehicle to
be stored on a property that is not registered to the owner of said property,
or registered to an immediate relative of the owner of the property who is
living, on a permanent basis, in or on the property.



         (b)   1.   Generally. No inoperative or unlicensed
vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall
at any time be in a state of major disrepair, disassembly, or in the process
of being stripped or dismantled.  Painting of vehicles or vehicle parts is
prohibited unless conducted in an approved spray booth.



            2.   Exception. A vehicle of any type is permitted
to undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is
performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed for and
approved for such purposes and that this work is done in an approved area in
conjunction with the Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 159 of this code of ordinances.



   (N)   Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs.  Swimming pools, spas and
hot tubs shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good
repair, and be fitted with appropriate security fencing as required by
AG105.2 in the 2006 International Residential Code as adopted by the city. 
Any swimming pool, spa or hot tub that is kept in an unclean or unsanitary
condition shall be subject to the provisions for penalty and abatement as
described in §§ 90.07, 90.08 and 90.11.



   (O)   Unsafe structures and equipment.



      (1)   Condemnation. Any structure or equipment that is found
by the Building and Neighborhood Services Official to be unsafe, or when a
structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, the
structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
Chapter 150, and/or Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances.  This section
shall cover any structure or equipment upon a residential, commercial or an
industrial property with the corporate limits of the city, and shall include
but are not limited to, fences, porches, decks, ramps, additions, loading
docks, storage lots, or portions of a structure or equipment.  This section
shall also include occupied unregistered rentals that are not currently
compliant with Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances.



      (2)   Unsafe structure. An unsafe structure is one that is
found by the Building and Neighborhood Services Official to be dangerous to
the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the
structure by not providing the minimum standards found in Chapter 150 and
Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances.



      (3)   Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler,
heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the
structure which is in such disrepair or condition that the equipment is
hazardous to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of
the premises or structure.



      (4)   Structure unfit for human occupancy.  A structure is
unfit for human occupancy whenever the Building and Neighborhood Services
Official finds that the structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the
degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is
unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or
lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other
essential equipment required by this section, or by Chapter 150 and/or
Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances.



      (5)   Closing of vacant structures.  If the structure is
vacant and unfit for human occupancy, and is not in danger of structural
collapse, the Building and Neighborhood Services Official is authorized to
post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed
up so far as to not be an attractive nuisance.  Upon failure of the owner to
comply with this section, the provisions of this chapter shall be utilized to
perform any and all necessary work to secure the structure from being a
danger or a hazard to the public or to occupants as stated in § 90.12.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010)  Penalty, see § 90.99



Cross-reference:



   Air pollution, see Chapter 92



   Obstructing view at intersections such as billboards, see § 72.08



   Storage of flammable junk, see Chapter 99



   Trees, see Chapter 98



   Weeds, brush, see Chapter 94



§ 90.03  OTHER CONDITIONS.



   The following chapters of this code of ordinances contain regulations
prohibiting or restricting other conditions which are deemed to be nuisances:



   (A)   Dangerous buildings;



   (B)   Air and noise pollution;



   (C)   Noise control;



   (D)   Storage and disposal of solid waste;



   (E)   Trees.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010)



Cross-reference:



   Air and noise pollution, see Chapter 92



   Dangerous buildings, see Chapter 150



   Noise control, see Chapter 93



   Solid waste, see Chapter 50



   Trees, see Chapter 98



§ 90.04  NUISANCES PROHIBITED.



   The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is prohibited, and a
nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this
chapter or state law.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.05  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.



   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance or
whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists an ordinance
violation in any building or upon any premises or real estate within the
jurisdiction of the city, any authorized official of the city, or his or her
designee, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter the building or
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty
imposed upon the official by this code of ordinances.  Except in emergency
situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant to the inspection has
otherwise been obtained, the city official shall give the owner and/or
occupant, if they can be located after reasonable effort, 24-hours’ written
notice of the official's intention to inspect.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 90.06  WARRANTS.



   If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful
right to exclude, the city officer, designee or employee having the duty to
enter upon or conduct the inspection may apply to the Iowa District Court in
and for the county, pursuant to Iowa Code § 808.14, for an administrative
search warrant.  No owner, operator or occupant or any other person having
charge, care or control of any dwelling, unit, rooming unit, structure,
building or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search
warrant, to permit entry therein by the municipal officer, designee or
employee.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 90.07 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Whenever the Building and Neighborhood Services Official, or
his or her designee, finds that a nuisance exists, such officer shall cause
to be served upon the property owner a written notice to abate the nuisance
within a reasonable time after notice.



   (B)   In cases where a property owner or a tenant has had a nuisance
violation notice served to them for a nuisance at that specific property
location or address that they own or lease within the corporate limits of the
city within the last year (365 days), a citation may be issued immediately
for the creation of a nuisance as stated in § 90.04, at the time of the
inspection, and/or, at the time of notification of a violation.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 90.08  NOTICE TO ABATE; CONTENTS.



   The notice to abate shall contain:



   (A)   Description of nuisance.  A description of what constitutes
the nuisance.



   (B)   Location of nuisance.  The location of the nuisance.



   (C)   Acts necessary to abate.  A statement of the act or acts
necessary to abate the nuisance.



   (D)   Reasonable time.  A reasonable time within which to complete
the abatement.  A nuisance notification shall require seven days to abate
the nuisance after receipt of notification.  If the nuisance is not abated
within the seven-day period, then the property will be placarded as a
nuisance and a posting of the nuisance notification shall be affixed to a
structure, or a conspicuous place upon the property.  The nuisance posting
shall require two days for abatement after the posting occurs.  If the
nuisance is not abated within this two-day period then the city will cause
the nuisance to be abated under the provisions of § 90.12.



   (E)   Assessment of city costs.  A statement that if the nuisance
or condition is not abated as directed and no request for hearing is made
within the time prescribed, the city will abate it and assess the costs
against such person in accordance with Iowa law and the provisions of this
Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010; Ord. 2565, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 90.09  METHOD OF SERVICE.



   (A)   If a property owner has caused or permitted the existence of a
nuisance condition defined in § 90.02(B)(3) of this chapter, the city, at
its sole discretion, may elect to provide notice of the condition via
publication in lieu of providing notice under the remaining provisions of
this section. Should the city so elect, the Code Official shall cause to be
published each year in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a
notice stating that maintaining property as required under this chapter shall
be done, and that the property owner has 14 days from the date of publication
for § 90.02(B)(3) nuisances to cause the work to be done. Further, the
notice shall state that failure to comply after publication of the notice
will result in the city causing the work to be done, and the costs incurred
by the city shall be assessed against the property in the manner provided by
law and this Code of Ordinances. No further notice shall be required,
provided the Code Official may post notices or provide such additional notice
as the Code Official deems appropriate under the circumstances.



   (B)   For all other nuisances defined in this chapter and not
specifically addressed by division (A) above, the notice may be in the form
of an ordinance or sent by certified mail to the property as per  Iowa Code
§ 364.12(3)(h).  If service is made by certified mail the reasonable time
for abatement shall not be deemed to have started until such time as the
certified mail is either collected by the property owner, tenant, or their
agent or the certified mail is returned by the post office to the city after
expiration of time for retrieval.  The use of ordinance or certified mail
does not prohibit the use of any other manner of service as allowed under the
Iowa Rules of Civil Procedure.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010; Ord. 2565, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 90.10  REQUEST FOR HEARING.



    Any person ordered to abate a nuisance may have a hearing with the
Building and Neighborhood Services Official as to whether a nuisance
exists.  A request for a hearing must be made in writing and delivered to
the Building and Neighborhood Services Official ordering the abatement within
the time stated in the notice, or it will be conclusively presumed that a
nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered.  At the conclusion of the
hearing, the hearing officer shall render a written decision as to whether a
nuisance exists.  If the officer finds that a nuisance exists, the officer
must order it abated within an additional time, which must be reasonable
under the circumstances.  An appeal from this decision may be had by
immediately filing a written notice with the hearing officer.  This appeal
will be heard before the Housing Board of Appeals (see § R112 International
Residential Code 2006 as adopted by the city) at a time and place fixed by
the Board.  At the hearing the officer, designee or employee and the person
to whom the notice of abatement was issued are parties to the hearing and
each may testify, call witnesses and offer evidence and argument relevant to
the issues described by or contained within the notice of abatement.  The
findings of the Board shall be conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to
exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable time under the
circumstances.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 90.11  ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY.



   (A)    If it is determined that an emergency exists by reason of the
continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the city may perform any
action which may be required under this chapter without prior notice.  The
Building and Neighborhood Services Official shall make a determination as to
whether or not an emergency exists based upon:



      (1)   Inability to contact the property owner by normal
efforts;



      (2)   The seriousness of the violation due to health hazards
or physical hazards to a private individual or to the public as determined by
the Building and Neighborhood Services Official.



      (3)   Frequency of violations of a property owner or a tenant
when the property owner or a tenant has received more than two nuisance
violation notifications within one calendar year.  This determination is in
effect for one calendar year beginning on the date of the most recent
nuisance violation notification.



   (B)   The city shall assess the costs as provided in § 90.13 after
notice to the property owner under the applicable provisions of §§ 90.07,
90.08 and 90.09 and hearing as provided in § 90.08.



   (C)   In the event that § 90.15 is determined to be an emergency by
the Building and Neighborhood Services Official, the Fire Marshal, the Fire
Chief or the Police Chief of the city, or the Public Health Official of the
County of Clinton, Iowa, the Building and Neighborhood Services Official is
authorized to placard the structure as a dangerous building according to
Chapter 150, and to order vacation of the building and securing of all
equipment and structures so as not to constitute an attractive nuisance. 
This section applies to all structures residential and non-residential.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(h))  (Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 90.12  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition neglects or
fails to abate as directed, the city may perform, or cause to be performed,
the required action to abate, keeping an accurate account of the expense
incurred.  The itemized expense account shall be filed with the Clerk who
shall pay such expenses on behalf of the city.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(3)(h))  (Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 90.13  COLLECTION OF COSTS.



   The Building and Neighborhood Services Director, or his or her
authorized designee, shall send a statement of the total expense incurred by
regular mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to
abate, and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within
one  month, the Clerk shall certify the costs to the County Treasurer and
such costs shall then be collected with, and in the same manner, as general
property taxes. Any liens that are deemed not certifiable by the County will
be turned over to collection for further attempts to collect the debt.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010; Ord. 2565, passed 2-27-2018)



§ 90.14  INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT.



   If the amount expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds $100,
the city may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten annual
installments, to be paid in the same manner and with the same interest rates
provided for assessments against benefited property under state law.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010)



§ 90.15 FAILURE TO ABATE.



   Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall fail or refuse
to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified
in the notice to abate is in violation of this code of ordinances.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.16  INTERFERENCE.



   Interference with the lawful removal or abatement of a nuisance by the
city or its agents is prohibited and any person who violates this section
commits a municipal infraction and may be fined in accordance with the
provisions of § 90.99.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010; Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)  Penalty, see §
90.99



§ 90.17  LIABILITY.



   The owners, agents, contract buyers, tenants, or lessees of all
residential dwellings, commercial establishments, and/or  real estate upon
which a violation of this chapter is found shall be jointly and severally
responsible for compliance with this chapter and jointly and severally liable
for any damages or costs incurred and awarded under this chapter.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.18  FORECLOSED/RENTAL PROPERTY.



   Any real property which is subject to foreclosure, forcible entry and
detainer, eviction, or on which possession is otherwise transferred through
legal process or court action, shall be in full compliance with the code of
ordinances within 48 hours of the transfer of possession.  Failure to comply
with the provisions of this section shall be deemed an emergency.  The city
is authorized to proceed in a manner consistent with the emergency provision
set forth in this chapter.  Any person, firm partnership, corporation, or
other legal entity, including the property owner and, if applicable, a
landlord, violating this section commits a municipal infraction.  Any
violation of this chapter may be pursued as a municipal infraction according
to the terms of §§ 90.99(A) and (B) below in lieu of criminal
prosecution.  Each calendar day a violation is allowed to continue shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010; Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil penalty.  Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or
other legal entity found guilty of a civil violation of this chapter shall be
subject to penalties.  A first offense violation shall be assessed a civil
penalty of $250.  A second offense violation shall be assessed a civil
penalty of $750.  A third and subsequent violation shall be assessed a civil
penalty of $1,000.  Each day that a violation of the code of ordinances
occurs and/or is permitted to exist constitutes a separate offense.  Seeking
a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does not preclude the city from
seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action.  Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the filing and prosecution of a
criminal complaint for violation of either the code of ordinances for the
city or for violation of Iowa Code Chapter 657.  The process of filing and
prosecution of a criminal complaint and the civil municipal infraction or
citation process shall not be mutually exclusive remedies.



   (B)   Administrative penalties.  In addition to or in lieu of
criminal prosecution or municipal infraction and civil penalties proceeding,
any body, department, agency, or official of the city which has issued a
permit, license, certificate, registration, or other authorization to a
person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity keeping,
allowing, or maintaining a nuisance, as defined by the code of ordinances,
may administratively suspend or revoke said permit, license certificate,
registration, or other authorization.



      (1)   In the matter of any permits, license, certificate,
registration, or other authorization for which there is a specific suspension
or revocation process set forth in the code of ordinances, then the
suspension or revocation shall follow that specified process, including the
specified appeals process.



      (2)   In the matter of all permits, licenses, certificates,
registrations, or other authorizations for which there is no specified
process for suspension or revocation set forth elsewhere in the code of
ordinances, the suspension or revocation shall be made by the same authority
issuing the permit, license, certificate, registration, or other
authorization.  The appeal to any said suspension or revocation shall be as
set forth in § 90.10 above.



(Ord. 2414, passed 7-13-2010; Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)



CHAPTER 91:  ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL



Section



General Provisions



   91.001   Definitions



   91.002   Enforcement



   91.003   Interference with Animal Control Officer



   91.004   Running at large



   91.005   Animal welfare



   91.006   Livestock prohibited



   91.007   Livestock neglect



   91.008   Damage or interference



   91.009   Annoyance or disturbance



   91.010   Animal waste



   91.011   Animal in motor vehicle



   91.012   Animal involved in motor vehicle accident



   91.013   Animals in transport



   91.014   Abandonment



   91.015   Animals as prizes



   91.016   Performing animal exhibitions



   91.017   Selling chicks, ducklings and other animals



   91.018   Disposal of deceased animals



   91.019   Maximum number of dogs, cats and ferrets allowed



   91.020   Wild animals prohibited



   91.021   Exemptions



   91.022   Female dogs and cats in heat



   91.023   Restraint of animals



   91.024   Irresponsible animal ownership



   91.025   Citations for violations



   91.026   Rescue of threatened animals



   91.027   Disposition of rescued animals



Licenses



   91.050   Dog, cat and ferret license required



   91.051   [Reserved]



   91.052   Transfer of license



   91.053   Copy of regulations provided with license



   91.054   License application



   91.055   License term



   91.056   License expiration



   91.057   License tags



   91.058   License fee



   91.059   Duplicate animal license



   91.060   Non-transferability of license



   91.061   Change of address



Impoundment; Quarantine; Vaccination



   91.075   Impoundment



   91.076   Reclaiming impounded animal



   91.077   Disposition of animals not reclaimed



   91.078   Adoption to original owner



   91.079   Report of impounded animals



   91.080   Penalty in lieu of impoundment



   91.081   Sterilization



   91.082   Presentation of copy of regulations



   91.083   Rabies vaccination



   91.084   Rabies vaccination certificate and tag



   91.085   Veterinarian reporting requirements



   91.086   Report of bite required



   91.087   Animal bite quarantine requirements



   91.088   Reclaiming animal after quarantine



Animal Shelter Permits



   91.100   Permit required



   91.101   Issuance of regulations



   91.102   Permit term



   91.103   Transfer of commercial establishment



   91.104   Fees



   91.105   Separate permits for separate facilities



   91.106   Kennel animals to be licensed



   91.107   Exemption from fees



   91.108   Reclassification



   91.109   Revocation of permit



   91.110   Denial of issuance of permit



   91.111   Breeding permit



Dangerous Animals



   91.125   Dangerous animal



   91.126   Dangerous animal declaration



   91.127   Dangerous animal confinement



   91.128   Adjudicated or non-contested dangerous animals



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDON. Ceasing to provide control over adequate shelter or food or
water in excess of 24 hours for an animal without having made arrangements
for adequate shelter or food or water by another responsible person.



   ADEQUATE FOOD. The provision at suitable intervals of not more than 24
hours of a quantity of wholesome foodstuff suitable for the species and age,
sufficient to maintain a reasonable level of nutrition in the animal.  The
foodstuff shall be served in a clean receptacle, dish or container.



   ADEQUATE SHELTER. An occupied residence or doghouse or similar
structure for each animal chained, tethered, penned or otherwise restrained
or confined outdoors, that is appropriate for the animal's condition, age,
size and species and is clean, dry and has sides, floor and top that do not
leak water with a cover over the doorway to keep rain and snow from entering
the doghouse or structure and allows the animal unlimited access to and
egress from the doghouse or structure that provides shade from the sun, and
protection from the wind, rain, snow, and extremes of hot and cold.  Clean
bedding must also be provided when the ambient temperature falls below 50º
F.  A portable pet carrier is not considered adequate shelter.



   ADEQUATE WATER. A supply of clean, fresh potable water supplied in a
sanitary manner at least twice daily at suitable intervals for the animal and
not to exceed 12 hours at an interval.



   ANIMAL. A nonhuman vertebrate. 



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. Any person whose primary responsibility is the
enforcement of this chapter or state code, including public service officers,
sworn peace officers and other persons as appointed by the Chief of Police.



   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any facility operated by a humane society or municipal
agency or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or caring for
animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law.



   ASSISTANCE ANIMAL. An assistance dog, and may include other animals
specifically trained at a recognized training facility to perform physical
tasks to mitigate the effects of an individual's disability. Assistance dogs
include guide dogs that guide individuals who are legally blind; hearing dogs
that alert individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing to specific sounds;
and, service dogs for individuals with disabilities other than blindness or
deafness. Service dogs are any dog that is individually trained to do work or
perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including
physical, sensory, psychiatric, intellectual or other mental disability. 
These physical tasks include but are not limited to pulling a wheelchair,
lending balance support, picking up dropped objects or providing assistance
in a medical crisis.  The work or tasks performed by a service dog must be
directly related to the handler's disability.  The presence of an animal for
comfort, protection or personal defense does not qualify as training to
mitigate the effects of an individual's disability and therefore does not
qualify the animal as a service animal.



   AUCTION. Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold
or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. 
This section does not apply to individual sales of animals by owner.



   BEDDING. Straw, hay, cedar or pine wood shavings, or shredded
newspaper, four to six inches thick, blankets, rugs, or other suitable
material to maintain warmth and insulate the animal from the floor of the
shelter.



   BITE. Any puncture, laceration, abrasion, scratch or any other break in
the skin of a human being or animal, caused by an animal.



   CAT. Any member of the felis domestica family.



   CIRCUS. A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public
entertainment.



   COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any pet shop, grooming shop, auction,
riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal
exhibition or licensed kennel.



   DANGEROUS ANIMAL.



      (1)   An animal is dangerous if it meets at least one of the
following:



         (a)   Any animal that bites or attacks any person or
other domestic animal without provocation either on public or private
property; or



         (b)   Any animal with a history, tendency, propensity or
disposition to attack or to cause injury to or to otherwise endanger the
safety of a person or other domestic animals; or



         (c)   Any animal who, in a dangerous or terrorizing
manner, approaches any person or other domestic animal and displays
threatening or aggressive behavior; or



         (d)   Any animal trained for dog fighting, animal
fighting or animal baiting or is owned or kept for such purposes; or



         (e)   Any animal trained to attack human beings, upon
command or spontaneously in response to human activities; or



         (f)   Any animal previously adjudicated by a court to be
dangerous.



      (2)   A DANGEROUS ANIMAL does not include any animal owned by
and under control of the Police Department or a law enforcement agency of the
state, United States, or any branch of the armed forces of the United States.



   DOG. Any domesticated member of the canis familaris, male or female,
whether altered or not.



   FERRET. A domesticated animal of the type Mustela putorius furo.



   GROOMING SHOP. A commercial establishment where animals are bathed,
clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed.



   KENNEL. Any premises wherein any person engages in the boarding,
breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling of dogs or
cats.  Boarding kennels and commercial kennels, as defined in Iowa Code
Chapter 162, are considered kennels for the purpose of this chapter.



   LIVESTOCK. An animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine, ovine or
porcine species; farm deer, as defined in Iowa Code § 481A.1; ostriches,
rheas, emus or poultry. (Iowa Code, § 717.1)



   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping, harboring, in control of, or in
possession of one or more animals.



   PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBITION. Any spectacle, display, act or event
other than a circus, in which performing animals are used.



   PET. Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.



   THREATENED ANIMAL. An animal that is abused as provided in Iowa Code §
717B.2, neglected as provided under § 91.005 of this chapter or Iowa Code §
717B.3, or tortured as provided under Iowa Code § 717B.3A.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL. Any establishment maintained and operated by a
licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and
injuries of animals.



   WILD ANIMAL. Any animal as defined in Iowa Code § 717F.1(5).



   ZOOLOGICAL PARK. Any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel,
displaying or exhibiting one or more species of non domesticated animals
operated by a person, partnership, corporation or government agency.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2571, passed 4-10-2018)



§ 91.002  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Animal Control Officer is responsible for the enforcement of the
animal protection and control provisions of this chapter and shall work under
the direction and supervision of the Police Chief and has arrest powers as
necessary to carry out the duties of this chapter. 



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.003  INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.



   No person shall interfere with the Animal Control Officer while
performing the duties authorized under this chapter.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.004  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to allow any dog or cat or
ferret, regardless of age, to run at large within the city. The fact that a
dog or cat or ferret is running at large without the knowledge or permission
of the owner of such dog, cat, or ferret is not a defense to any charge of a
violation of this section. 



   (B)   For the purposes of this chapter, AT LARGE means:



      (1)   Off the premises of the owner or person given charge of
the animal by the owner, unless:



         (a)   The animal is on a leash, cord, chain or similar
restraint not more than ten feet in length and under the control of a person
mentally and physically competent to keep the animal under restraint at all
times.



         (b)   The animal is within an occupied motor vehicle.



         (c)   The animal is housed within a veterinary clinic,
commercial animal establishment or animal shelter.



         (d)   The animal is trained and used by a government
agency and accompanied by the appropriate government agency handler.



         (e)   The owner and the animal are participating in a
regularly scheduled competitive or exhibition event sanctioned or sponsored
by a nationally recognized organization, local chapter thereof, or other
generally recognized local organization.



         (f)   The animal is actively engaged in training for
hunting or hunting.



         (g)   The animal and the owner are actively engaged in a
generally recognized obedience training program or training for a generally
recognized kennel club event, provided:



            1.   The animal is in the actual physical presence
of the owner or trainer at all times;



            2.   The owner or trainer is at no time more than
50 feet from the animal;



            3.   The animal is immediately obedient to the
commands of the owner or trainer; and



            4.   The owner or trainer has, at all times, on
his or her person a leash of sufficient strength to restrain the animal.



      (2)   On the premises of the owner or person given charge of
the animal by the owner unless the animal is restrained on those premises by
leash, cord, chain, operational invisible fence or other similar restraint
that does not allow an animal to go beyond the owner's real property line.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.005  ANIMAL WELFARE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit animal neglect
against an animal. For purposes of this section, ANIMAL NEGLECT occurs when a
person impounds or confines, in any place, and the person does any of the
following:



      (1)   Fails to supply the animal during confinement with a
sufficient quantity of food or water;



      (2)   Fails to provide a confined dog or cat with adequate
shelter;



      (3)   Tortures, deprives of necessary sustenance, mutilates,
beats, or kills an animal by any means which causes unjustified pain,
distress, or suffering.



   (B)   A person who negligently commits animal neglect is guilty of a
simple misdemeanor. A person who intentionally commits animal neglect,
without serious injury to or death of the animal, is guilty of a simple
misdemeanor.



   (C)   The city shall not issue any animal licenses to any person who
is found guilty or pleads guilty to animal abuse, in violation of Iowa Code
§ 717B.2, animal neglect in violation of this section or Iowa



Code § 717B.3, or animal torture in violation of Iowa Code § 717B.3A, or
any person residing in the same household.



(Ord. 2571, passed 4-10-2018)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.006  LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the city except by
written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the city's zoning
regulations.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.007  LIVESTOCK NEGLECT.



   It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines livestock in any
place to fail to provide the livestock with care consistent with customary
animal husbandry practices or to deprive the livestock of necessary
sustenance or to injure or destroy livestock by any means which causes pain
or suffering in a manner inconsistent with customary animal husbandry
practices.  (Iowa Code § 717.2)



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.008  DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE.



   It is unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow or permit such
animal to pass upon the premises of another thereby causing damage to, or
interference with, the premises.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.009  ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE.



   It is unlawful for the owner, custodian or person exercising control of
an animal to allow or permit such animal to cause serious annoyance or
disturbance to any person or persons by frequent or habitual howling,
yelping, barking, or otherwise; by running after or chasing persons,
bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.010  ANIMAL WASTE.



   It is unlawful for any owner, custodian or person exercising control of
any animal to permit or allow such animal to discharge or deposit on any
property in which such person has no proprietary interest any feces or other
waste matter.  In the event any such animal does discharge or deposit such
matter in such a location, and the owner, custodian or person exercising
control of the animal is present, such person shall immediately remove and
lawfully dispose of such matter.  It is unlawful for the owner, custodian or
person exercising control of any animal to permit excrement or droppings from
said animal to collect on the premises of said person, causing odor or
unsanitary conditions.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.011  ANIMAL IN MOTOR VEHICLE.



   No person shall leave an animal unattended in, or tethered to, a
standing or parked vehicle in excess of 15 minutes when the outdoor
temperature is greater than 75º F.  The animal control officer, public
safety officer or police officer may use reasonable means to remove an animal
from a motor vehicle when there is an apparent violation of this section.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.012  ANIMAL INVOLVED IN MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT.



   Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes an animal
shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall
immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner; in the event
the owner cannot be ascertained or located, such operator shall at once
report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.013  ANIMALS IN TRANSPORT.



   No animal shall be transported in the open bed of a pickup truck or
other open top vehicle, except when the animal is secured inside a cage or
kennel or is secured by a leash or tether sufficiently short to keep the
animal inside the pickup box or other open top vehicle at all times.  No
person shall transport an animal in a box, container, or cage without proper
ventilation and proper space requirements for that animal.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.014  ABANDONMENT.



   A person who has ownership or custody of an animal shall not abandon
the animal except the person may deliver the animal to another person who
will accept ownership and custody of the animal or the person may deliver the
animal to the Clinton Humane Society provided there is room for the animal or
the animal may be placed on the Clinton Humane Society waiting list for owner
turn ins.  An animal is considered abandoned if it has not had shelter, food
or water for 24 hours.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.015  ANIMALS AS PRIZES.



   No person shall give away or auction any live animal, fish, reptile or
bird as a prize for or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other
competition or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement or offer such
animal, fish, reptile or bird as an incentive to enter into any business
agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.016  PERFORMING ANIMAL EXHIBITIONS.



   No performing animal exhibition or circus shall be permitted in which
animals are induced or encouraged to perform through the use of chemical,
mechanical, electrical or manual devices in a manner which will cause or is
likely to cause physical injury or suffering.  All equipment used on a
performing animal shall fit properly and be in good working condition.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.017  SELLING CHICKS, DUCKLINGS AND OTHER ANIMALS.



   Chickens or ducklings younger than eight weeks of age may not be sold
in quantities of less than 25 to a single purchaser.  It shall be unlawful
to dispose of or offer for sale any live animal, bird or fish upon any public
property.  See also § 112.02, Ordinance No. 2413, Goods and Merchandise,
for other prohibitions on the sale of animals.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.018  DISPOSAL OF DECEASED ANIMALS.



   A person who has been caring for or who owns an animal that has died
shall not allow the carcass to lie about the person’s premises.  The
carcass shall be properly disposed of within 24 hours after death.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.019  MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DOGS, CATS, AND FERRETS ALLOWED. 



   No person shall harbor or maintain such number of animals as to create
unhealthful or unsanitary conditions for the humans or animals occupying the
premises, or create any other conditions constituting a nuisance.  If such
conditions exist, the Chief of Police or his/her designee is authorized to
make investigation, issue a citation and after proper notice and hearing to
the person or persons occupying or maintaining the residence or premises, or
the person or persons harboring or maintaining the animals, the magistrate
sitting in Clinton County, Iowa may order such number of animals be removed
from the residence or premises to remedy or correct the unhealthful,
unsanitary or other conditions constituting a nuisance.  Upon the failure of
the person or persons to follow the orders issued by the magistrate
appropriate action may be pursued in the court to enforce the order and/or
correct the conditions and/or abate the nuisance. 



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.020  WILD ANIMALS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his or her premises any
wild animal, as defined in Iowa Code § 717F.1, for any purpose including
display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee.  This
section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, wildlife
sanctuaries, holder of a wildlife rehabilitation permit, performing animal
exhibitions or circuses.  No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild
animal as a pet.  Any wild animal found within the city limits is subject to
immediate seizure as contraband.  Any animal so seized shall be held for
three business days and, if the owner has not petitioned the court regarding
disposition of the animal and served notice of the pendency of the owner's
petition for disposition, the humane society may euthanize the animal or
permanently place it with an entity which is exempt from the provisions of
this section.  The animal control officer has the power to release or order
the release of any infant wild animal kept under temporary permit which is
deemed capable of survival.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.021  EXEMPTIONS. 



   Police service animals shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter during the performance of their duties.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.022  FEMALE DOGS AND CATS IN HEAT. 



   Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or
secure enclosure in such manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into
contact with another animal except for planned breeding with proper permits
per this chapter.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.023  RESTRAINT OF ANIMALS. 



   An owner may use a chain or other tether to restrain an animal under
the following conditions:



   (A)   No animal shall be restrained by a chain or other tether for
more than 14 hours in a 24 hour period.



   (B)   The chain or other tether must be at least ten feet in length
or three times the length of the animal, whichever is longer, as measured
from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail.



   (C)   The chain or other tether must be attached to a stable, fixed
object and to a properly fitting collar or harness worn by the animal. 
Choke or prong collars are prohibited.



   (D)   The chain or other tether shall not weigh more than one-eighth
of the animal's body weight.



   (E)   The chain or other tether must have swivels on both ends.



   (F)   Chaining or tethering must be done in a manner to prevent the
animal or tether from becoming entangled with other objects or animals or
from extending over an object or edge that could result in strangulation or
injury to the animal.



   (G)   Chaining or tethering must be done in a manner to permit the
animal to consume adequate food and adequate water and unlimited access to
adequate shelter.



   (H)   The chained or otherwise tethered animal cannot leave the
property of the owner.



   (I)   No person shall chain or otherwise tether an animal in a way
that permits the animal to pass onto, over or across any public sidewalk,
street, alley, or private property other than the owner’s.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.024  IRRESPONSIBLE ANIMAL OWNERSHIP.



   (A)   Any animal owner that has been convicted of three violations
of this chapter, excluding violations of § 91.125, Dangerous Animal, within
the last 36 months shall be designated an irresponsible animal owner. Any
animal owner who has been convicted of one violation of § 91.125 within the
last 36 months shall be designated an irresponsible animal owner.



   (B)   If an animal owner is convicted of a fourth violation of this
chapter, including violations of § 91.125, or is convicted of a second
violation of § 91.125, the owner may be cited as an irresponsible animal
owner. Upon conviction, the court may order the confiscation of all animals
and issue a fine. The city shall not issue any licenses under this chapter to
anyone residing at the irresponsible animal owner’s residence for a period
of 36 months. Failure to comply with the court’s order may result in a
contempt action against the irresponsible animal owner.



   (C)   No person designated as an irresponsible animal owner shall
sell or otherwise transfer ownership of any animal to another person. This
division (C) does not prohibit voluntary relinquishment of animals to the
Clinton Humane Society.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2571, passed 4-10-2018)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 91.025  CITATION FOR VIOLATIONS. 



   The Chief of Police or his or her designee is authorized to issue and
deliver citations to persons accused of violating any of the provisions of
this chapter.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to limit the
city's authority to proceed in accordance with other law concerning animal
control.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.026  RESCUE OF THREATENED ANIMALS.



   (A)   If an Animal Control Officer has cause to believe an animal is
threatened, after consulting with a veterinarian licensed pursuant to Iowa
Code Ch. 169, the Animal Control Officer may rescue the threatened animal by
entering on public or private property. The Animal Control Officer may enter
onto property of a person to rescue the animal if the Animal Control Officer
obtains a search warrant issued by a court, or enters onto the premises in a
manner consistent with the laws of the State of Iowa and the United States,
including Article I, section 8, of the Constitution of the State of Iowa, or
the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.



   (B)   If an animal is rescued pursuant to this section, the city
shall provide for the maintenance of the animal and may contract with the
Clinton Humane Society or another animal care provider for the maintenance of
the animal. The city shall provide the owner of the animal with a notice of
the rescue stating the animal has been rescued by the city pursuant to this
section. The notice may be accomplished by doing any of the following:



      (1)   Delivering written notice to the responsible party’s
last known address by the United States postal service or personal service;



      (2)   Posting a notice in a conspicuous place at the location
where the animal was rescued.



   (C)   Within ten days after the date that an animal is rescued, the
city shall initiate a dispositional proceeding pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.



   (D)   The city shall pay the animal care provider for the animal’s
maintenance, regardless of proceeds received from the disposition of the
animal or any reimbursement order by a court.



(Ord. 2571, passed 4-10-2018)



Statutory reference:



   For similar provisions under state law, see Iowa Code § 717B.5.



§ 91.027  DISPOSITION OF RESCUED ANIMALS.



   (A)   Upon petition by the city after rescue of a threatened animal
pursuant to § 91.026, the court shall determine if the animal is a
threatened animal and order its disposition after a hearing.



   (B)   The matter shall be heard within ten days from the filing of
the petition for disposition by the city.



   (C)   If the animal has been rescued, and the court determines it is
a threatened animal, the city shall be deemed the owner of said animal and
shall exercise its discretion and either place the animal for adoption in a
suitable home or have it humanely euthanized.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to limit the
city’s authority to proceed pursuant to other law concerning the
disposition of animals.



(Ord. 2571, passed 4-10-2018)



LICENSES



§ 91.050  DOG, CAT, AND FERRET LICENSE REQUIRED. 



   All dogs, cats, and ferrets over the age of four months shall be
licensed with the city of Clinton.  This requirement does not apply to
nonresident owners keeping a dog, cat or ferret within the city for less than
30 days in 12 consecutive months.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.051  [RESERVED.]



§ 91.052  TRANSFER OF LICENSE. 



   A person who takes ownership of a previously licensed dog, cat, or
ferret shall, within five days of the transfer, notify the Clinton Finance
Department of the transfer.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.053  COPY OF REGULATIONS PROVIDED WITH LICENSE. 



   Upon request of a first time licensee the Clinton City Clerk or the
Clinton Humane Society shall provide a copy of these regulations.  The
obligations of this section may be satisfied by e-mailing a copy of the
regulations or directing the person to the on-line Code of Ordinances for the
City of Clinton. 



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.054  LICENSE APPLICATION. 



   Written application for a dog, cat, or ferret license shall be made to
the Clinton City Clerk or the Clinton Humane Society.  Such applicant shall
provide a rabies certificate from a licensed veterinarian which contains the
tag number and expiration date of the rabies vaccination, evidence that the
animal has or has not been spayed or neutered, and the name, color, sex and
breed of the dog, cat or ferret.  The applicant shall also provide the name,
address, phone number, and date of birth of the owner.  No license shall be
issued to a person under the age of 18.  The application must be made within
30 days after obtaining a dog, cat or ferret over the age of four months.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.055  LICENSE TERM. 



   The animal licensing period begins January 1 and runs for the calendar
year.  Re-application for a license may be made until March 1 without
assessment of a license fee surcharge as per § 91.058(A).



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.056  LICENSE EXPIRATION. 



   All animal licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year of the date
of issuance.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.057  LICENSE TAGS.



   (A)   Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the
Clinton City Clerk or the Clinton Humane Society shall issue a durable tag,
stamped with an identifying number and the year of issuance.  Tags shall be
designed so that they may be conveniently fastened or riveted to the animal's
collar or harness.



   (B)   Dogs, cats and ferrets must wear the city issued license tag
at all times when off the premises of the owners.  Any dog, cat or ferret
found without the city issued license tag when off the premises of the owner
may be impounded.  The owner shall display the city issued license tag,
rabies vaccination tag, and rabies vaccination certificate to the Animal
Control Officer upon demand.



   (C)   The Clinton City Clerk or Clinton Humane Society shall
maintain a record of the identifying numbers of all city license tags issued
and shall make this record available to the public.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.058  LICENSE FEE. 



   The Clinton City Clerk or Clinton Humane Society shall maintain a
record of the identifying numbers of all city license tags issued and shall
make this record available to the public.



 

License Type
 
Fee


Dog, cat, or ferret (male, female, altered, unaltered)
 
$10.00


Dangerous dog, cat or ferret
 
$50.00


Assistance animals
 
No Fee


Government/Police Service Animals
 
No Fee



 



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2520, passed 4-28-2015)



§ 91.059  DUPLICATE ANIMAL LICENSE. 



   A duplicate animal license may be obtained upon payment of a $2
replacement fee provided the license lost is still valid.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.060  NON-TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE. 



   No person may use any license for any animal other than the animal for
which it was issued.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.061  CHANGE OF ADDRESS. 



   The owner of a dog, cat or ferret shall notify the City Clerk of any
change of address within five days of changing place of residence within the
city of Clinton.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



IMPOUNDMENT; QUARANTINE; VACCINATION



§ 91.075  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Any impounded animal shall be housed, fed, and cared for in a
humane manner, at the Clinton Humane Society.  Impounded dogs shall be kept
for not less than four days and impounded cats shall be kept for not less
than three days.  If by license tag or other means the owner of the
impounded animal can be identified, the Animal Control Officer shall
immediately upon impoundment notify the owner by telephone, mail or written
notice left at the location believed to be the animal's place of residence.



   (B)   No animal need be kept for the period of notification or
impoundment if a licensed veterinarian or Animal Control Officer deems the
animal is so diseased or injured that it is unduly suffering or cannot
survive.  In such cases the animal may be humanely euthanized.



   (C)   Any ill or injured animal brought to the Clinton Humane
Society by the Animal Control Officer, or any animal which becomes ill or
injured while in the care and/or custody of the Clinton Humane Society or an
Animal Control Officer shall not be returned to the owner until evaluated and
treated. The ill or injured animal shall be taken to a licensed veterinarian
by either Clinton Humane Society personnel or the Animal Control Officer for
evaluation and treatment prior to release.



   (D)   Any animal declared dangerous under § 91.126 shall be
impounded pending court adjudication, except as provided in § 91.127. Any
animal declared dangerous shall be kept for no less than 15 days following
final court order. Any case appealed shall not be deemed final for purposes
of this section. Any animal not reclaimed within 15 days shall be considered
relinquished, and may be disposed of in accordance with § 91.077.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2571, passed 4-10-2018)



§ 91.076  RECLAIMING IMPOUNDED ANIMAL.



   (A)   An impounded animal may be reclaimed by the owner provided the
owner obtains or provides written proof of current city license and current
rabies vaccination, if applicable, to the Animal Control Officer at the
Clinton Police Department.  The owner shall provide the Clinton Humane
Society with the signed release form from the Animal Control Officer and
shall pay to the Clinton Humane Society the daily boarding fees as
established by contract between the city and the Clinton Humane Society for
each day during which the animal has been kept within the Clinton Humane
Society, veterinarian expenses, together with an impoundment fee, based upon
impoundments previously assessed against the owner, as follows:



 

IMPOUNDMENT
 
FEE


First impoundment
 
$15.00


Second impoundment
 
$30.00


Third impoundment
 
$45.00


Fourth impoundment
 
$60.00


Fifth and each subsequent impoundment
 
$75.00


These fees apply for any and all animals impounded in the previous 24 months
with the same owner.



 



   (B)   The impoundment fees collected are the property of the City of
Clinton and shall be forwarded to the City Clerk on a monthly basis.  All
fees shall be paid by credit card, debit card or in cash.



   (C)   The refusal to reclaim any impounded animal shall not relieve
the owner of the duty to pay the impoundment fees, boarding fees,
veterinarian expenses, or any other costs incurred in the care of the animal.



   (D)   If an Animal Control Officer impounds an animal without a
microchip, the Animal Control Officer or the Clinton Humane Society shall
microchip the animal. If reclaimed by the owner, the costs of microchipping
shall be charged to the owner.



   (E)   If an unaltered animal has been impounded two times with the
same owner, upon a third impoundment against the same owner, the animal shall
be spayed or neutered, with the charges of spaying or neutering to be charged
to the owner.



   (F)   For an animal declared dangerous under § 91.126:



      (1)   If the court finds the owner not guilty, the owner may
reclaim the animal by providing a copy of the court order. The owner shall
not be charged any fees for boarding or impoundment.



      (2)   If the court finds the owner guilty and allows the owner
to reclaim the animal, the owner may only reclaim the animal by providing a
copy of the court order and paying all fees within 15 days following
adjudication or appeal resolution.



      (3)   If the court finds the owner guilty and requires the
animal to be rehomed or euthanized, the owner may not reclaim the animal. The
owner shall be responsible for all fees incurred through adjudication or
appeal, if applicable, and any fees associated with euthanasia, if applicable.



      (4)   At any time, the owner may relinquish the animal to
Clinton Humane Society. In such event, the owner shall be responsible for all
fees incurred until relinquishment.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2571, passed 4-10-2018)



§ 91.077  DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS NOT RECLAIMED. 



   Any dog not reclaimed by its owner within four days, or any cat not
reclaimed by its owner within three days after impoundment or in the event
notice was given to the owner, within four days or three days, whichever is
applicable, shall be placed for adoption in a suitable home, or humanely
euthanized.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.078  ADOPTION TO ORIGINAL OWNER. 



   No animal shall be adopted back to the owner of the animal to avoid
paying reclaim fees and citations issued.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.079  REPORT OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS. 



   The Clinton Humane Society shall provide the Animal Control Officer
with a report which details the disposition of all animals brought to the
Clinton Humane Society by the Animal Control Officer which were not reclaimed
by the owner of the animal.  This disposition report shall be provided to
the Animal Control Officer by the tenth day of each month for the preceding
month.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.080  PENALTY IN LIEU OF IMPOUNDMENT. 



   In addition to or in lieu of impounding an animal, the Animal Control
Officer may issue to the known owner of such animal a civil citation for
violations of this chapter.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.081  STERILIZATION. 



   No unclaimed dog, cat or ferret shall be released for adoption or
rescue facility without first being sterilized.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.082  PRESENTATION OF COPY OF REGULATIONS.



   Upon request of a person adopting out an animal or when returning an
animal to an owner reclaiming a previously impounded animal, the Clinton City
Clerk or the Clinton Humane Society shall provide a copy of these
regulations.  The obligations of this section may be satisfied by e-mailing
a copy of the ordinance or directing the person to the on-line Code of
Ordinances of the City of Clinton. 



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.083  RABIES VACCINATION. 



   Every owner of a dog, cat or ferret shall obtain a rabies vaccination
for such animal.  It is unlawful for any person to own or harbor a dog, cat
or ferret in the person's possession, six months of age or over, which has
not been vaccinated against rabies.  Rabies vaccination shall not be
required if the owner of the dog, cat or ferret provides a written exemption
from a licensed veterinarian.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2571, passed 4-10-2018)  Penalty, see §
10.99



Statutory reference:



   For similar provisions under state law, see Iowa Code § 351.33



§ 91.084  RABIES VACCINATION CERTIFICATE AND TAG. 



   (A)   Every dog, cat or ferret over six months of age shall wear a
collar with a valid rabies vaccination tag attached to the collar when off
the owner's premises.  The owner shall display the rabies vaccination
certificate, or veterinarian's exemption statement, to the Animal Control
Officer on demand.



   (B)   The owner shall notify the veterinarian who most recently
vaccinated their dog, cat or ferret for rabies of any change of address
within five days of moving.



   (C)   When permanent ownership of a dog, cat or ferret is
transferred, the original owner must notify the veterinarian who most
recently vaccinated their dog, cat or ferret for rabies that they are
transferring ownership and the new owner's name, address and telephone number
within five days after the transfer.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2571, passed 4-10-2018)  Penalty, see §
10.99



Statutory reference:



   For similar provisions under state law, see Iowa Code § 351.33



§ 91.085  VETERINARIAN REPORTING REQUIREMENTS. 



   Each veterinarian within the City of Clinton shall forward to the
Clinton City Finance Department by the tenth day of each month a copy of each
certificate of rabies vaccination issued by the veterinarian during the
preceding month.  Each certificate of vaccination shall be typed or printed
as to be clearly legible.  Every veterinarian shall report to the Clinton
Police Department the name and address of the owner of any animals treated
for bites inflicted by another animal.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.086  REPORT OF BITE REQUIRED. 



   Any person having knowledge of any dog, cat, ferret or other animal
bite upon any person or other animal which bite occurred within the City of
Clinton, shall immediately report such fact to the Clinton Police
Department.  It is the duty of health care professionals and veterinarians
to report to the Clinton Police Department the existence of any animal known
or suspected to be suffering from rabies.  This section shall not apply if
the bite occurred while the animal was being treated, confined, or housed
within a veterinary hospital or clinic and that facility has actual knowledge
that the animal is currently inoculated for rabies and has a certification to
prove such inoculation.  In such cases reporting of a bite shall be
discretionary with the veterinary hospital or clinic.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.087  ANIMAL BITE QUARANTINE REQUIREMENTS. 



   The owner of any animal that has caused a bite upon a person or other
animal, or is suspected of having rabies or other diseases communicable to
humans, shall immediately place the animal in quarantine for ten days as
provided in this section.



   (A)   If the owner of the animal cannot provide written proof of
current rabies vaccination, or the animal has previously bitten, the animal
shall be quarantined at the Clinton Humane Society for ten days from the date
of the bite.  All costs of such quarantine shall be paid by the owner.



   (B)   If the owner can provide written proof of current rabies
vaccination, the owner of the animal may quarantine the animal at the
premises of the owner for ten days from the date of the bite.  The owner of
the animal shall sign that the animal will be quarantined in the manner
directed, and the animal shall be confined to one room or kennel inside the
owner's residence and shall not be exposed to any other animals or persons
except the one adult person who will be caring for the animal during the
quarantine period.  The animal shall not be allowed outside unless it is on
a leash of sufficient strength to hold the animal and the one adult person
who is caring for the animal shall be holding the leash at all times while
the animal goes outside long enough to eliminate, then it shall go
immediately back into the room or kennel inside the owner's residence.  If
the animal is found to be outside the quarantine area or outside the owner's
residence without the owner present, the animal shall be impounded and the
remainder of the quarantine shall be at the Clinton Humane Society.  Any
costs incurred while the animal is in quarantine at the Clinton Humane
Society shall be paid by the owner.



   (C)   The owner of an animal that has been reported as having
inflicted a bite upon a person or other animal shall, on demand, produce the
animal for quarantine to the Animal Control Officer.  It is unlawful to fail
to or refuse to produce such an animal.  Failure to produce an animal
demanded shall subject the owner or custodian to arrest if probable cause
exists to believe the animal inflicted a bite or skin abrasion upon a person
or other animal.



   (D)   In the event the rabies suspect animal is stray and dangerous
for the Clinton Humane Society personnel to handle, the animal may be
euthanized and a specimen shall be sent to a qualified facility for rabies
testing.



   (E)   In the event a rabies suspect animal becomes ill, dies or is
euthanized before the ten-day quarantine has expired, a specimen shall be
sent to a qualified facility for rabies testing.  Any costs incurred in the
testing shall be paid by the owner, if the owner is known.



   (F)   No vaccination for rabies shall be given to an animal during a
quarantine period.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.088  RECLAIMING ANIMAL AFTER QUARANTINE. 



   The owner of an animal that has been quarantined may reclaim the animal
after the owner has arranged for a veterinarian of their choice to come to
the Clinton Humane Society and give the animal a current rabies vaccination,
purchased the required city license for such animal, and pays all costs by
credit card, debit card or in cash.  The following are the costs that shall
be paid prior to the animal being released from quarantine:



   (A)   Animal Control fee;



   (B)   Spay/neuter deposit;



   (C)   Per day boarding;



   (D)   City license as required;



   (E)   Veterinarian expenses; and



   (F)   Rabies testing (if required).



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



ANIMAL SHELTER PERMITS



§ 91.100  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a commercial animal establishment or animal
shelter without first obtaining a permit in compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.101  ISSUANCE OF REGULATIONS.



   The Council shall promulgate regulations for the issuance of permits
and shall include requirements for the humane care of all animals and for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable
provisions of this Code of Ordinances, city zoning requirements and state
law.  The Council may amend such regulations from time to time as deemed
desirable for public health and welfare and for the protection of animals. 
Upon a showing by an applicant for a permit that said person is willing and
able to comply with the regulations promulgated by the Council, a permit
shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fee.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.102  PERMIT TERM. 



   The permit term shall begin with the calendar year and shall run for
one year.  Renewal applications for permits shall be made 30 days prior to
and up to 30 days after the start of the calendar year without $50 penalty. 
Application for a permit to establish a new commercial animal establishment
under the provisions of this chapter may be made at any time.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.103 TRANSFER OF COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. 



   If there is a change in ownership of a commercial animal establishment,
the new owner shall have the current permit transferred to the new owner's
name upon payment of a $50 transfer fee.  The new owner shall notify the
Clerk within five days after the transfer.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.104  FEES. 



   Permits shall be issued upon payment of the applicable fees, as shown
in the following table:



 

Permit
 
Fee




For each kennel authorized to house fewer than 10 dogs, cats or ferrets
 
$150.00


For each kennel authorized to house 10 or more but fewer than 50 dogs, cats
and ferrets
 
$200.00


For each kennel authorized to house 50 or more dogs, cats or ferrets
 
$300.00


For each pet shop
 
$75.00


For each riding stable
 
$75.00


For each auction
 
$50.00


For each zoological park
 
$100.00


For each circus, carnival or performing animal exhibition
 
$50.00


For each grooming shop
 
$50.00


For each breeding permit (below § 91.111)
 
$25.00




 



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.105  SEPARATE PERMITS FOR SEPARATE FACILITIES. 



   Every facility regulated by this chapter shall be considered a separate
enterprise and requires an individual permit.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.106  KENNEL ANIMALS TO BE LICENSED. 



   A kennel permit shall not be issued unless all dogs, cats or ferrets
within the kennel qualify for an individual license.  Along with the kennel
permit, there shall be issued an individual license for each dog, cat or
ferret within the kennel at no extra charge.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.107  EXEMPTIONS FROM FEES.



   No fee is required of any veterinary hospital, animal shelter or
government operated zoological park.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.108  RECLASSIFICATION. 



   Any person who has a change in the category under which a permit was
issued is subject to reclassification, and appropriate adjustment of the
permit fee shall be made.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.109  REVOCATION OF PERMIT. 



   The council may revoke any permit if the person holding the permit
refuses or fails to comply with the animal control provisions of this Code of
Ordinances, the regulations promulgated by the Council or any law governing
the protection and keeping of animals.  Any person whose permit is revoked
shall, within ten days thereafter, humanely dispose of all animals owned,
kept or harbored and no part of the permit fee shall be refunded.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.110  DENIAL OF ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. 



   If the applicant has withheld or falsified any information on the
application, the Clerk shall refuse to issue a permit.  No person who has
been convicted of an Animal Welfare violation per this chapter or State Code
shall be issued a permit to operate a commercial animal establishment.  Any
person having been denied a permit may not reapply for a period of one year.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)



§ 91.111  BREEDING PERMIT.



   (A)   No kennel, commercial breeder, or pet store shall cause or
allow any dog, cat or ferret owned or harbored to breed without first
obtaining a breeding permit.  The City Clerk shall administer a permit
program to allow the breeding of dogs, cats or ferrets consistent with the
criteria and according to procedures contained in this chapter and all other
standards of care governing such activities.



   (B)   Each applicant who is issued a permit to breed dogs, cats or
ferrets under this section shall pay a breeding permit fee of $25 per litter.



   (C)   No kennel, commercial breeder, or pet store shall cause or
allow the breeding of a male or female dog, cat or ferret without first
obtaining a breeding permit issued by the City Clerk.  Breeding permits
shall be valid for 12 months, renewable on an annual basis.  All breeding
permits shall contain the following terms and conditions and be subject to
all of the following requirements:



      (1)   No offspring may be sold or adopted and permanently
placed until reaching an age of at least eight weeks and having received age
appropriate health testing.



      (2)   No offspring may be sold or adopted until they have
begun a course of disease prevention and immunization against common diseases
under the direction of a licensed veterinarian;



      (3)   Any permit holder advertising to the public the
availability of any animal for adoption or sale must prominently display the
permit numbers in any publications in which they advertise.  Further, the
permit number must be provided to any person adopting or purchasing an animal
bred by the permit holder.



      (4)   The breeding permit holder shall adhere to minimum
standards regarding the care and keeping of animals and all other standards
of care governing such activities.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



DANGEROUS ANIMALS



§ 91.125  DANGEROUS ANIMAL. 



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor, be in
control of, or be in possession of a dangerous animal within the city, except
as provided in § 91.128.



   (B)   A violation of this section shall be a municipal infraction
under § 10.99 and violators shall be subject to a civil penalty. The city
may also seek alternative relief, including but not limited to, removal of
the dangerous animal from the city, relinquishment of ownership, or
euthanasia of the dangerous animal.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2571, passed 4-10-2018)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 91.126  DANGEROUS ANIMAL DECLARATION.



   (A)   The Animal Control Officer, in his or her discretion or upon
receipt of a complaint and conducting an investigation alleging that an
animal is a dangerous animal as defined in this chapter, may declare such
animal a dangerous animal by issuing a civil citation for dangerous animal
and a notice of dangerous animal to the owner.



   (B)   Any animal declared dangerous by the Animal Control Officer
shall immediately be confined pursuant to this chapter pending court
adjudication.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 91.127  DANGEROUS ANIMAL CONFINEMENT.



   (A)   If, at the time of the issuance of a civil citation for
dangerous animal, the owner agrees to confine the animal pursuant to this
chapter and submits to the Animal Control Officer written proof of current
rabies shot and city license, and the Animal Control Officer does not believe
the public is at risk, the animal may remain in the custody of the owner.



      (1)   An animal declared dangerous shall be securely confined
within an occupied house or residence; or



      (2)   An animal declared dangerous shall be confined within a
securely enclosed and locked pen, kennel or structure which contains an
adequate shelter.  Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and
a secure top attached to the sides or walls at least six feet in height and
at least six feet taller than any internal adequate shelter and a secure
bottom, floor or foundation attached to the sides of the pen, kennel or
structure, or the sides of the pen, kennel or structure must be embedded in
the ground no less than two feet so as to prevent digging under the walls by
the confined animal.



      (3)   No person shall permit an animal declared dangerous to
go outside unless such animal is secured with a leash no longer than four
feet in length and wearing a muzzle. No person shall permit an animal
declared dangerous to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside
its kennel or pen unless both the animal and the leash are under the physical
control of a person 18 years of age or older.



      (4)   No animal declared dangerous shall be leashed to
inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, or any other object or
structure.



      (5)   An animal declared dangerous which is found, at any
time, not to be confined as required by this article shall be seized and
transported to the Clinton Humane Society until such time adjudicated by the
court or not contested as a dangerous animal by the owner.



      (6)   An owner of an animal alleged to be dangerous or found
to be dangerous, as a condition of keeping the dangerous animal, shall
provide the City Clerk a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance
company licensed to do business in this state, providing personal liability
insurance coverage as in a homeowner's policy, with a minimum liability
amount of $100,000 for the injury or death of any person or for damage to
property of others and for acts of negligence by the owner or his or her
agents, in keeping or owning the dangerous animal.  The certificate shall
require notice to the city, in conformity with general city standards for
certificates of insurance, if the underlying policy of insurance is cancelled
for any reason.  In lieu of a certificate, a copy of a current homeowners'
policy designating these requirements shall be sufficient proof of insurance
for purposes of this division.  If a certificate of insurance or policy is
not immediately available, a binder indicating the coverage may be accepted
for up to 30 days subsequent to the determination that a dog is dangerous;
however, if after 30 days a certificate of insurance or a policy has not been
submitted, the animal shall be impounded.



   (B)   If, at the time of the issuance of a civil citation for
dangerous animal, the animal has caused serious injury to a human or other
domestic animal, the owner does not agree to confine the animal pursuant to
this chapter, or the animal is not licensed per this chapter, the animal
shall be seized and transported to the Clinton Humane Society until such time
as the animal is adjudicated by the court as a dangerous animal or not
contested as a dangerous animal by the owner. If at any time prior to court
proceedings, the animal deemed dangerous is in violation of this chapter, the
animal may be seized and transported to the Clinton Humane Society until such
time adjudicated by the court or not contested as a dangerous animal by the
owner.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012; Ord. 2571, passed 4-10-2018)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 91.128  ADJUDICATED OR NON-CONTESTED DANGEROUS ANIMAL.



   (A)   If an animal has been adjudicated by the courts or is not
contested as a dangerous animal by the owner as being a dangerous animal, the
owner of the dangerous animal shall immediately have a microchip implanted in
the animal.  The owner of the dangerous animal shall obtain a dangerous
animal license by paying the established fee.  The dangerous animal tag and
the annual city license tag shall be attached to the animal’s collar at all
times.



   (B)   An animal adjudicated or not contested as a dangerous animal
by the owner as being dangerous shall be sterilized within 30 days or provide
written proof that such sterilization has previously taken place.



   (C)   An owner of an animal adjudicated to be dangerous by the
courts or not contested as a dangerous animal, as a condition of keeping the
dangerous animal, shall provide the City Clerk a certificate of insurance
issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in this state,
providing personal liability insurance coverage as in a homeowner's policy,
with a minimum liability amount of $100,000 for the injury or death of any
person or for damage to property of others and for acts of negligence by the
owner or his or her agents, in keeping or owning the dangerous animal.  The
certificate shall require notice to the city, in conformity with general city
standards for certificates of insurance, if the underlying policy of
insurance is cancelled for any reason.  In lieu of a certificate, a copy of
a current homeowners' policy designating these requirements shall be
sufficient proof of insurance for purposes of this division.  If a
certificate of insurance or policy is not immediately available, a binder
indicating the coverage may be accepted for up to 30 days subsequent to the
determination that a dog is dangerous; however, if after 30 days a
certificate of insurance or a policy has not been submitted, the animal shall
be impounded.



   (D)   A dangerous animal shall be confined in an occupied house or
residence or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, kennel or structure which
contains an adequate shelter, except when leashed as provided in this
section.  Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure
top attached to the sides or, in lieu of a top, walls at least six feet in
height and at least six feet taller than any internal adequate shelter.



   (E)   All pens, kennels or structures designed, constructed or used
to confine dangerous animals shall be locked with a key or combination lock
when such animals are within the pen, kennel or structure.  Such pen, kennel
or structure must have a secure bottom, floor or foundation attached to the
sides of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground, no
less than two feet, so as to prevent digging under the walls by the confined
animal.



   (F)   All pens, kennels or structures erected to house dangerous
animals shall comply with all city zoning and building regulations.  All
such pens, kennels, or structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated
and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.  No dangerous animal may be kept
on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the
animal to exit such building on its own volition.



   (G)   No person shall permit a dangerous animal to go outside its
pen, kennel or structure unless such animal is securely leashed with a leash
no longer than four feet in length.  No person shall permit a dangerous
animal to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel
or pen unless both the animal and the leash are under the actual physical
control of a person 18 years of age or older and the dangerous animal is
wearing a muzzle.



   (H)   Such animals shall not be leashed to inanimate objects such as
trees, posts, buildings, or any other object or structure.



   (I)   A dangerous animal which is found, at any time, not to be
confined as required by this chapter may be seized and impounded as per the
provisions of this chapter. 



   (J)   All expenses incurred while the animal is impounded or
quarantined shall be paid in cash by the owner of the animal regardless of
whether the animal is adjudicated a dangerous animal.



(Ord. 2485, passed 11-27-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 92:  AIR AND NOISE POLLUTION



Section



   92.01   Purpose



   92.02   Definitions



   92.03   Emission of objectionable odors



   92.04   Emission of objectionable noise



   92.05   Fugitive dust



   92.06   Excessive emissions declared to be nuisances



   92.07   Notice to abate



   92.08   Action to enjoin



§ 92.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to control air pollution in the city by
suspended particulates, odors, noise and fugitive dust.



(1999 Code, § 52.01)



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIR POLLUTION.  The presence in the atmosphere of one or more air
contaminants in sufficient quantities and of the characteristic and duration
which is injurious or tends to be injurious to the public health, safety or
welfare or injurious to animal or plant life or property or which interferes
with the reasonable enjoyment of life or property or the conduct of business.



   EMISSION.  A release of one or more air contaminants into the outdoor
atmosphere.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.  The person designated by the Council who is
responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.



   FUGITIVE DUST.  Solid airborne particulate matter emitted from any
source other than a flue or stack.



   ODOR.  That which produces a response of the human sense of smell to
an odorous substance.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, co-partnership, cooperative,
firm, company, public or private corporation, political subdivision, agency
of the state, trust, estate, joint stock company or any other legal entity or
any legal representative, agent or assigns.



   POLLUTION ALERT.  Receipt by the Pollution Hotline of ten total
complaint calls or six calls identifying the same pollution problem, either
in a six-hour period.



   POLLUTION HOTLINE.  Telephone number 242-7770, which is responded to
by an answering service retained by the city.



(1999 Code, § 52.02)



§ 92.03  EMISSION OF OBJECTIONABLE ODORS.



   No person shall cause or permit the emission of any objectionable odor
into the ambient air. Upon receipt of a pollution alert concerning odor, the
enforcement official shall make an investigation. An odor will be deemed to
be objectionable when it has been substantiated by the enforcement official
that the odor existed and it was a nuisance. If a violation is determined to
exist, the enforcement official shall, by an appropriate order, require the
elimination of the objectionable odor.



(1999 Code, § 52.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.04  EMISSION OF OBJECTIONABLE NOISE.



   No person shall cause or permit the emission or release of any
objectionable noise into the ambient air. Upon receipt of a pollution alert
concerning noise, the enforcement official shall make an investigation. A
noise will be deemed to be objectionable when it has been substantiated by
the enforcement official that the noise existed and it was a nuisance. If a
violation is determined to exist, the enforcement official shall, by an
appropriate order, require the elimination of the objectionable noise.



(1999 Code, § 52.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.05  FUGITIVE DUST.



   No person shall allow, cause or permit any materials to be handled,
transported or stored or a building, its appurtenances or a construction haul
road to be used, constructed, altered, repaired or demolished with the
exception of farming operations or dust generated by ordinary travel on
unpaved public roads without taking reasonable precautions to minimize
atmospheric pollution. All persons shall take reasonable precautions to
prevent the discharge of visible emissions of fugitive dusts beyond the lot
line of the property on which the emissions originate. Reasonable precautions
may include, but are not limited to, the following procedures:



   (A)   Use, where practical, of water or chemicals for control of
dusts in the demolition of existing buildings or structures, construction
operations, the grading of roads or the clearing of land;



   (B)   Application of suitable materials such as, but not limited to,
asphalt, oil, water or chemicals on unpaved roads, material stockpiles, race
tracks and other surfaces which can give rise to airborne dusts;



   (C)   Installation and use of containment or control equipment to
enclose or otherwise limit the emissions resulting from the handling and
transfer of dusty materials such as, but not limited to, grain, fertilizer or
limestone;



   (D)   Covering, at all times when in motion, open-bodied vehicles
transporting material likely to give rise to airborne dusts; and



   (E)   Prompt removal of earth or other material from paved streets
onto which earth or other material has been transported by trucking or
earth-moving equipment, erosion by water or other means.



(1999 Code, § 52.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.06  EXCESSIVE EMISSIONS DECLARED TO BE NUISANCES.



   It is unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit the escape of
quantities of gases or particulate matter from any source whatsoever in a
manner as to be detrimental to the public or to endanger the health, welfare
or safety of the public, or in a manner as to cause injury or damage to
property or business. The escape of the matter is declared to be a public
nuisance and may be ordered abated by the enforcement official.



(1999 Code, § 52.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.07  NOTICE TO ABATE.



   (A)   Whenever the enforcement official determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that the owner or operator of any equipment is
maintaining fuel-burning equipment, incinerator or refuse-burning process or
control equipment or other equipment in violation of any section of this
chapter, or that a violation of this chapter exists, the enforcement official
shall give notice of the alleged violation to the owner or operator of the
equipment or to the person who is violating this chapter.



   (B)   Notice shall be made as follows:



      (1)   The notice shall be made by telephone to the listed
telephone directory number or telephone number supplied by the owner or
operator of the offending equipment or property. If the telephone
notification is not successful after two attempts, no further immediate
notification will be made. Written notification will be made within five days;



      (2)   The notice shall state the specific violation alleged;



      (3)   The notice shall allow a reasonable time for the
performance of any correction the enforcement official may require to comply
with the provisions of this chapter. The reasonable time allowed shall be
determined by the enforcement official and shall be based on the nature of
the violation, the frequency of the violation, the estimated time necessary
to correct the violation and other relevant factors as determined by the
enforcement official. In the event the reasonable time allowed for correction
is more than 48 hours, the enforcement official shall report in writing to
the City Administrator the reasons for the correction time. In the event any
extensions of time are granted to correct a violation, the enforcement
official shall report in writing to the City Administrator the reasons for
the extension; and



      (4)   If deemed advisable by the enforcement official, the
notice shall contain an outline of corrective action which, if accomplished,
will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   In case the owner or operator or other responsible person
fails or refuses to comply with the notice, the city may order the
enforcement official to perform the required actions to abate the nuisance,
as specified in Chapter 90 of this code of ordinances.



(1999 Code, § 52.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.08  ACTION TO ENJOIN.



   In addition to any other penalties provided herein, when any structure,
device, premises or equipment is constructed, altered, operated or maintained
in violation of this chapter, or when a nuisance exists, or when there has
been any other violation of the provisions of this chapter, the enforcement
official may request the City Attorney to bring suit in a court of competent
jurisdiction to prevent the unlawful construction, alteration, operation or
maintenance, or to restrain, correct or abate the violation or nuisance.
Prior to the filing of any action to enjoin the creation, construction,
alteration, operation or maintenance of any condition that violates this
chapter or to enjoin the existence of a nuisance under this chapter, the City
Attorney shall notify the Council of the pending action.



(1999 Code, § 52.08)



CHAPTER 93:  NOISE CONTROL



Section



   93.01   Purpose



   93.02   Definitions



   93.03   Noise making prohibited



   93.04   Permitting use which causes noise prohibited



   93.05   Exemptions



   93.06   Motor vehicle noise levels



   93.07   Power equipment noise levels



   93.08   Compliance with zoning regulations



   93.09   Sound levels established



   93.10   Measuring noise levels



   93.11   Sounding of horn



   93.12   Recreational vehicle noise levels



   93.13   Variances



   93.14   Emission of noise declared to be a nuisance



   93.15   Impairment of action



   93.16   Disturbing the peace



 



   93.99   Penalty



§ 93.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish noise levels or standards
for the protection of the public health and welfare. Any person causing noise
in excess of the established level or standard is in violation of this
chapter.



(1999 Code, § 53.01)



§ 93.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Definitions of technical terms used in this chapter which are not defined in
this section are contained in the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) publication  SI.1.



   “A” SOUND LEVEL.  The total sound level of all noise as measured
with a sound level meter using the “A” weighing network. The unit of
measurement is the dB(A).



   AMBIENT NOISE.  The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near and
far.



   DECIBEL.  A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to the
logarithm of the ratio of the intensity of the sound to the intensity of an
arbitrarily chosen standard sound and is abbreviated dB.



   FLUCTUATING NOISE.  A noise whose sound pressure level varies
significantly but does not equal the ambient environmental level more than
once during the period of observation.



   IMPULSIVE NOISE.  Is characterized by brief excursions of sound
pressure (acoustic impulses) which significantly exceed the ambient
environmental sound pressure. The duration of a single impulse is usually
less than one second.



   INTERMITTENT NOISE.  A noise whose sound pressure level equals the
ambient environmental level two or more times during the period of
observation. The period of time during which the level of the noise remains
at an essentially constant value different from that of the ambient is on the
order of one second or more.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Any passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer
or semi-trailer or locomotive propelled or drawn by mechanical power.



   MOTORCYCLE.  Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for use by
the rider and designed to travel with not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, including every motor scooter, motor-driven cycle and
minibike, but excluding a tractor.



   NOISE.  Unwanted or annoying sound.



   SOUND LEVEL.  For airborne sound, is a weighted sound pressure level,
obtained by the use of metering characteristics and the “A” weighting as
specified in the reference standards. When the “A” weighting is employed,
it must be indicated.



   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  In decibels of a sound is 20 times the
logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to the
reference sound pressure. Unless otherwise specified, the effective (rms)
pressure is to be understood. The reference sound pressure is ten.



   STEADY NOISE.  A noise whose level remains essentially constant (i.e.,
fluctuations are negligibly small) during the period of observation.



   ZONING DISTRICT.  Those districts established by the zoning
regulations of the city.



(1999 Code, § 53.02)



§ 93.03  NOISE MAKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall use or operate a radio, television,
“boombox,” stereo, MP3 player, speaker, compact disc player, sound
amplifying device or similar device that produces or reproduces sound in a
manner that is plainly audible to any person other than the player(s) or
operator(s) of the device, and those who are voluntarily listening to the
sound, and which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort of
neighbors and passers-by, or is plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from
any person upon a public way. This division shall not apply to
loudspeakers/public address systems, emergency signaling devices, car alarms
and ice cream trucks.



   (B)   No person shall operate a vehicle as defined in Iowa Code §
321.1 in a manner, which unreasonably disturbs the peace, quiet and comfort
of neighbors and passerby, or is plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet
from any person upon a public way.



   (C)   No person shall make or cause, permit or allow to be made,
upon a public way, or in close proximity to a public way as to be distinctly
and loudly audible upon the public way, any noise of any kind by crying,
calling or shouting, or by means of any whistle, rattle, bell, hammer, drum,
horn, other musical instrument, wind instrument, mechanical device or other
similar device so as to destroy the peace of the neighborhood.



(1999 Code, § 53.03)  (Ord. 2370, passed 5-27-2008)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.04  PERMITTING USE WHICH CAUSES NOISE PROHIBITED.



   No person owning or in possession or control of any building or
premises shall use the same, permit the use of the same or rent the same to
be used for any business or employment or residential use, or for any purpose
of pleasure or recreation, if the use shall, by its boisterous nature,
disturb or destroy the peace of the neighborhood in which the building or
premises is situated, or be dangerous or detrimental to health.



(1999 Code, § 53.04)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.05  EXEMPTIONS.



   Notwithstanding the term "noise making prohibited", as used in this
chapter, the following emissions of sound shall be exempt from the provisions
of this chapter and shall not constitute a prohibited emission of sound or
noise:



   (A)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency.  This is to include the public address
systems.



   (B)   The emission of sounds made or caused to be made by law
enforcement officials in the performance of their official duties.



   (C)   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.



   (D)   Rail and air transportation and public mass transportation
vehicles.



   (E)   The emission of sound from church bells, carillons, or chimes.



   (F)   The emission of sounds from an ice cream truck between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.



   (G)   The emission of sounds made by students, employees or the
general public while in attendance at any school-sponsored event or
city-approved event.



   (H)   The emission of sounds made by participants and observers of
any parade that has been approved by the Council.



   (I)   The sound made or caused to be made by city, school or
state-owned or hired equipment or facilities for the conduct of city, school
or state operations.



   (J)   Lawn and garden equipment.  The sound emitted by
motor-powered muffler-equipped lawn and garden equipment operated between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.



   (K)   Chain saws.  The sound emitted by motor-powered tree-trimming
equipment operated between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.



   (L)   Snow removal equipment.  The sound emitted by motor-powered,
muffler-equipped snow removal equipment operated between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 12:00 midnight and the sound emitted by city-owned or hired snow
removal equipment regardless of hours of operation.



   (M)   Alarms.  The sound emitted by the intentional sounding
outdoors of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or
similar stationary emergency signaling device for emergency purpose or for
the essential testing of such device.  False alarms shall not be exempt
under this chapter but shall be considered a nuisance under § 93.14.



   (N)   Construction noise.  The sound emitted by construction work
(erection, demolition, excavation, drilling, sawing, hammering etc.) between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., which is being performed pursuant to a
proper and current building permit.



(1999 Code, § 53.05)  (Ord. 2481, passed 9-11-2012)   Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.06  MOTOR VEHICLE NOISE LEVELS.



   (A)   No person shall sell or offer for sale or use or operate a
motor vehicle or motorcycle at any time or under any condition of grade,
lead, acceleration or deceleration in a manner as to exceed the following
noise limits for its category, based on a distance of not less than 25 feet
from the centerline of travel or stationary location under test procedures
established by § 93.10 of this chapter.



 


Motor Vehicle

 

Noise Limit



Any motor vehicle with a manufacturer’s GVW rating of 8,000 pounds or more
and any combination of vehicles towed by the vehicles
 

86 dB(A)



Any motorcycle manufactured prior to January 1, 1978
 

82 dB(A)



Any motorcycle manufactured after January 1, 1978
 

78 dB(A)



Any other motor vehicle, including passenger cars and any combination of
motor vehicles towed by the motor vehicles
 

76 dB(A)




 



   (B)   This section applies to the total noise from a vehicle or
combination of vehicles and does not limit or preclude the enforcement of any
other ordinance relating to motor vehicle noise control. For the purpose of
this section, a motor truck, truck tractor or bus that is not equipped with
an identification plate or marking bearing the manufacturer’s name and
manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating shall be considered as having
manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of 8,000 pounds or more if the
unladen weight is more than 7,000 pounds. Any vehicle which is found not to
be in conformity with this chapter and which is manufactured prior to January
1, 1978, may be exempted from the noise levels specified herein, provided a
good and sufficient showing can be made that it is mechanically impossible
without major construction to modify the equipment so as to be in compliance
or that to comply would cause irreparable harm or injury to the engine of the
vehicle.



(1999 Code, § 53.06)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.07  POWER EQUIPMENT NOISE LEVELS.



   No person shall sell or lease or offer for sale or lease or use or
operate any powered equipment or powered hand tool that produces a maximum
noise level exceeding the following noise limits at a distance of 50 feet
under test procedures established by § 93.10:



 


Type of Equipment

 

Noise Limit



Agricultural tractors and equipment
 

86 dB(A)



Construction and industrial machinery, such as crawler-tractors, dozers,
rotary drills and augers, loaders, power shovels, cranes, derricks, motor
graders, paving machines, off-highway trucks, ditchers, trenchers,
compactors, scrapers, wagons, pavement breakers, compressors and pneumatic
powered equipment and the like, but not including pile drivers
 

86 dB(A)



Powered commercial equipment of 20 horsepower or less intended for infrequent
use in a residential area, such as chainsaws, pavement breakers, log
chippers, powered hand tools and the like
 

84 dB(A)



Powered equipment intended for repetitive use in residential areas, the
equipment includes lawnmowers, small lawn and garden tools, riding tractors,
snow removal equipment
 

80 dB(A)




 



(1999 Code, § 53.07)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.08  COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS.



   Any property use established in a zoning district as defined and
designated under the provisions of Chapter 159 of this code of ordinances
shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards governing
noise set forth therein for the district in which the use in located.



(1999 Code, § 53.08)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.09  SOUND LEVELS ESTABLISHED.



   At the boundary of any property, the maximum sound pressure level (dB)
shall not exceed a reading of 65 dB(A) as measured under test procedures
established by § 93.10 of this chapter. The maximum sound pressure level
readings shall be applied in every case at the boundaries of the property on
which the activities measured take place. The maximum sound pressure levels
established in this section to be applied to the boundaries of a lot shall
not apply to construction sites. Construction site noise level is regulated
by § 93.05 of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 53.09)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.10  MEASURING NOISE LEVELS.



   Sound level measurement shall be made in accordance with the following
procedures.



   (A)   All measurements shall be made with a sound level meter using
the “A” weighted scale in accordance with the standards promulgated by
the Society of Automotive Engineers and American National Standards
Institute. Whenever possible, the enforcing officials shall determine the
ambient noise level for the enforcement location. The ambient noise level for
each enforcement location shall be established by obtaining the noise level
reading for a period of five minutes before enforcement and a five-minute
period immediately following enforcement with a reading to be taken every 30
seconds during the five-minute period of time. The average of these readings
will constitute the ambient noise level at that location during the
enforcement period. The microphone shall be placed no nearer than three feet
from any reflective surface and must be located a minimum of four feet above
ground level.



   (B)   Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance
standards hereinafter prescribed, provided that equipment suitable for noise
measurement, as defined by this chapter, is used. Noises such as those of an
irregular and intermittent nature shall be restricted as provided for
hereinafter.



(1999 Code, § 53.10)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.11  SOUNDING OF HORN.



   No person shall sound any horn or audible signal device of any motor
vehicle of any kind while not in motion, nor shall the horn or signal device
be sounded under any circumstances except as required by law, nor shall it be
sounded for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.



(1999 Code, § 53.11)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.12  RECREATIONAL VEHICLE NOISE LEVELS.



   No person shall sell or offer for sale or use or operate a motor-driven
recreational or off-highway vehicle, including dune buggies, snowmobiles,
all-terrain vehicles, go-carts and minibikes, that produces a maximum noise
exceeding the following noise limit at a distance of 25 feet under test
procedures established by § 93.10.



 


Recreational Vehicle

 

Noise Limit



Any vehicle manufactured prior to January 1, 1978
 

82 dB(A)



For vehicles manufactured after January 1, 1978
 

78 dB(A)




 



(1999 Code, § 53.12)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.13  VARIANCES.



   (A)   The Council may grant an individual variance from the
limitations prescribed in this chapter whenever it is found, upon
presentation of adequate proof, that compliance with any part of this chapter
will result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property or will
impose an undue economic burden upon any lawful business, occupation or
activity and that the granting of the variance will not result in a condition
injurious to health or safety.



   (B)   Any variance, or renewal thereof, shall be granted within the
requirements of division (A) above and for time periods and under conditions
consistent with the reasons therefor and within the following limitations:



      (1)   If the variance is granted on the grounds that
compliance with the particular requirement will necessitate the taking of
measures which, because of their extent or cost, must be spread over a
considerable period of time, it shall be for a period not to exceed a
reasonable time as, in the view of the Council, is requisite for taking of
the necessary measures. A variance granted on the ground specified in this
division shall contain a timetable for taking of action in an expeditious
manner and shall be conditioned on adherence to the timetable; or



      (2)   If the variance is granted on the ground that it is
justified to relieve or prevent hardship of a kind other than that provided
for in division (B)(1) above, it shall be for not more than one year.



   (C)   Any person seeking a variance shall do so by filing a petition
for variance with the Council. The Council shall refer the petition to the
pollution control enforcement official, who shall make recommendations
thereon to the Council. The Council shall make the final determination as to
the disposition thereof.



(1999 Code, § 53.13)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.14  EMISSION OF NOISE DECLARED TO BE A NUISANCE.



   Any emission of noise from any source in excess of the limitations
established in or pursuant to this chapter is declared to be a public
nuisance and may be subject to abatement procedures specified in Chapter 50
of this code of ordinances. The abatement may be in addition to the
administrative proceedings, fines and penalties provided in this chapter. The
City Administrator is empowered to secure the institution of legal
proceedings through the City Attorney for the abatement or prosecution of
emissions of noise which cause injury, detriment, nuisance or annoyance to
the public or endanger the health, comfort, safety or welfare of the public,
or cause or have natural tendency to cause injury or damage to public or
property. The legal proceedings may be in addition to the administrative
proceedings, fines and penalties provided in this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 53.14)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.15  IMPAIRMENT OF ACTION.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impair any cause of
action or legal remedy therefor of any person or the public for injury or
damage arising from the emission or release into the atmosphere or ground
from any source whatever of noise in a place or manner or at levels so as to
constitute a common law nuisance.



(1999 Code, § 53.15)



§ 93.16  DISTURBING THE PEACE.



   Every person who unlawfully disturbs the public quiet of any street,
alley, public square or any religious or public assembly or building, public
or private or any neighborhood, private family or person within the city by
giving false alarms of fire, by loud or unusual noise, by loud music, by
squealing tires, by ringing bells, blowing horns or other instruments or by
quarreling, assaulting, fighting or by any other device or means whatever is
deemed to have committed a municipal infraction and in violation of this
chapter.



(1999 Code, § 53.16) (Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   Any person in violation of this chapter is subject to the standard
penalty as established in § 10.99 of this code of ordinances. A separate and
distinct offense is committed on each day on which the person continues or
permits any violation or failure to comply after notification thereof.



(1999 Code, § 53.17)



CHAPTER 94:  GRASS, WEEDS, VINES AND BRUSH



Section



   94.01   Purpose



   94.02   Definitions



   94.03   Maintenance of boulevard and residential property



   94.04   Exemptions



   94.05   Notice to owners; once per calendar year



   94.06   Appeals



   94.07   Failure to comply



§ 94.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to require owners of residential
property to cut their grass, weeds, vines and brush when it exceeds eight
inches in height.



(1999 Code, § 54.01)



§ 94.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOULEVARD.  The property outside a property owner’s lot and property
lines and inside the curb lines upon the public streets or, in the absence of
a curb, from the traveled portion of the public streets to the lot or
property.



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  A property located in an area occupied by
residential dwellings included but not limited to houses and apartments and
any property within 200 feet of the dwelling.



(1999 Code, § 54.02)



§ 94.03  MAINTENANCE OF BOULEVARD AND RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



   All owners of property abutting any road right-of-way shall maintain
their property and the abutting road right-of-way by cutting or destroying
all grasses, weeds, vines and brush when the growth exceeds eight inches in
height.



(1999 Code, § 54.03)  (Ord. 2591, passed 9-11-2018)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following areas are exempt from the requirements of § 94.03:



   (A)   Property parcel that is ten acres or larger unless the parcel
is commercially or industrially developed;



   (B)   Agricultural land;



   (C)   Garden plants, orchards, vineyards, farm crops;



   (D)   Arboretums, recognized areas for the growth of native grass,
flower prairie, prairie grass or similar growth, including but not limited to
Eagle Point Nature Society and Hess Cemetery, provided that the owner has
been granted an exemption by resolution of the Council, maintains the area
free of weeds and there is no safety, health or fire hazard created by
permitting the growth; and



   (E)   Hillsides exceeding a two to one slope unless the growth
creates a public health or safety hazard.



(1999 Code, § 54.04)  (Ord. 2093, passed 5-11-1999)



§ 94.05  NOTICE TO OWNERS; ONCE PER CALENDAR YEAR.



   Notice to the property owner shall be provided as follows: The Code
Official shall cause to be published prior to June 1 of each year in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice stating that
maintaining property as required under this chapter shall be done, and that
the property owner has until the growth reaches eight inches in height to
cause the work to be done. Further, the notice shall state that failure to
comply after publication of the notice will result in the city causing the
work to be done, and the costs incurred by the city shall be assessed against
the property in the manner provided by law and this Code of Ordinances. No
further notice shall be required, provided the Code Official may post notices
or provide such additional notice as the Code Official deems appropriate
under the circumstances.



(1999 Code, § 54.05)  (Ord. 2093, passed 5-11-1999; Ord. 2565, passed
2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.06  APPEALS.



   If the property owner objects to the notice of action required under
this chapter, the objection shall be filed by the property owner with the
Public Works office in writing within five days of the date of the notice.
The objection shall be heard by the Inspector without unnecessary delay and
the Inspector shall make a decision regarding the notice and shall
immediately notify the property owner of the decision in writing. Failure to
appeal within the time specified constitutes a waiver of all rights to a
hearing.



(1999 Code, § 54.06)



§ 94.07  FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   If the property owner fails to maintain the property as required under
this chapter after notice is given as provided in this chapter, the Inspector
shall order the work to be done by city employees or by a contractor. The
total cost of the expense of the work done, including any administrative
fees, shall be paid by the property owner. The total cost of the expense of
the work done, including any administrative fees, shall be paid by the
property owner. The city shall assess the offending property owner $200 to
offset administration fees and contractor costs for lots one-fourth acre or
less, with an assessed cost increase of $100 for every one-fourth acre
thereafter. Failure to pay shall result in the cost being assessed against
the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(1999 Code, § 54.07)  (Ord. 2565, passed 2-27-2018)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 95:  PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section



General Provisions



   95.01   Abandoned or unattended refrigerators



   95.02   Outdoor boilers/furnaces



Fireworks



   95.15   Definition



   95.16   Fireworks use regulations



   95.17   Fireworks sale regulations



   95.18   Exceptions



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 95.01  ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS.



   No person shall abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator,
ice box or similar container, with doors that may become locked, outside of
buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any person allow any
refrigerator, ice box or similar container, to remain outside of buildings on
premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and
so accessible to children.



(Iowa Code § 727.3)  (1999 Code, § 41.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.02 OUTDOOR BOILERS/FURNACES.



   The City Council fined the following regulations are needed for the
safety of the public:



   (A)   The outdoor boiler/furnace shall be installed only on a
property that is at least two acres in size.



   (B)   The outdoor boiler/furnace shall be installed at least 500
linear feet from the nearest property line that is not on the same property
as the wood-fired furnace and/or boiler unit.



   (C)   The outdoor boiler furnace shall be installed per
manufacturer’s instruction, as well as complying with all local and state
codes that pertain to installation.



   (D)   The outdoor boiler/furnace shall have a chimney that extends
to at least 15 feet above the ground surface or five feet higher than the
nearest roof.



   (E)   The only allowable material allowed to be burned in an outdoor
boiler/furnace is cleaned, dry hardwood.



   (F)   The owner of an outdoor boiler/furnace shall obtain a permit
from the Building and Neighborhood Services Division and the Fire Department.
A site plan detailing placement of the outdoor boiler/furnace shall be
submitted for review upon permit application.



(Ord. 2410, passed 3-9-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



FIREWORKS



§ 95.15  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FIREWORKS.  Includes any item or class of items defined in Iowa Code
§ 727.2(1)(a).



(Iowa Code § 727.2; 100.19)  (1999 Code, § 41.02)  (Ord. 2555, passed
5-23-2017)



§ 95.16  FIREWORKS USE REGULATIONS.



   It is unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell
at retail or use or explode any fireworks; provided the city may, upon
application in writing, grant a permit for the display of fireworks by a city
agency, fair associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups
of individuals approved by city authorities when the fireworks display will
be handled by a competent operator. No permit shall be granted hereunder
unless the operator or sponsoring organization has filed with the city
evidence of insurance in the following amounts:



 

Personal injury
 

$250,000 per person



Property damage
 

$50,000



Total exposure
 

$1,000,000




 



(Iowa Code § 727.2)  (1999 Code, § 41.02)  (Ord. 2555, passed
5-23-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.17  FIREWORKS SALE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The city hereby adopts all standards, rules, regulations, and
the like promulgated or that will be promulgated by the State Fire Marshall
regarding the sale of fireworks pursuant to Iowa Code §§ 100.1, 100.19, 
and 727.2. The city specifically adopts National Fire Protection Association
standard 1124 with respect to the requirements for the safe handling,
storage, transportation, display, and retail of fireworks. Sale of fireworks
may occur in the city only within areas zoned C-2, C-2M, M-1, M-2, and M-3.



   (B)   All other provisions of the city Code of Ordinances not in
conflict with this section or with the laws of the State of Iowa remain valid
and enforceable.



(Iowa Code §§ 100.1, 100.19, 727.2)  (1999 Code, § 41.02)  (Ord. 2555,
passed 5-23-2017; Ord. 2592, passed 9-25-2018)



§ 95.18  EXCEPTIONS.



   This subchapter does not prohibit the sale by a resident, dealer,
manufacturer or jobber of fireworks as are not prohibited; or the sale of any
kind of fireworks if they are to be shipped out of state; or the sale or use
of blank cartridges for a show or theatre, or for signal purposes in athletic
sports or by railroads or trucks for signal purposes, or by a recognized
military organization. This subchapter does not apply to any substance or
composition prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation purposes.



(Iowa Code § 727.2)  (1999 Code, § 41.02)  (Ord. 2555, passed 5-23-2017)



CHAPTER 96:  PARK REGULATIONS



Section



   96.01   Purpose



   96.02   Vehicle to stay on roadway



   96.03   Firearms and trapping prohibited



   96.04   Permit required for horse riding



   96.05   Prohibition of alcoholic beverages during certain hours



   96.06   Beer container size restriction; sale prohibited



   96.07   Exception for licensed and leased premises



   96.08   Park hours



   96.09   Overnight camping restricted in public parks



   96.10   Interference with improvements



   96.11   Obeying signs



   96.12   Rules to govern other city property



   96.13   Weight restrictions



   96.14   Riverview Park rules and regulations



§ 96.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations for
the use of Riverview Park, Riverview Drive, Eagle Point Park, Eagle Point
Park roadways and all other parks and park roadways in the city. The terms
“motor vehicle” and “motorcycle” include mopeds.



(1999 Code, § 47.01)



§ 96.02  VEHICLE TO STAY ON ROADWAY.



   All vehicles are restricted to stay on the roadways except in
designated parking areas in all parks. No person shall drive or operate a
vehicle except on roadways or designated parking areas in all parks.



(1999 Code, § 47.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.03  FIREARMS AND TRAPPING PROHIBITED.



   No person shall possess and/or discharge a firearm in any park or on
any park property. No person shall possess and/or use traps in any park or on
any park property.



(1999 Code, § 47.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.04  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR HORSE RIDING.



   No person shall ride or lead a horse in any park or on any park
property unless a special permit is issued therefor by the Recreation
Director or lease of the property by the city specifically provides for
horses to be ridden or led on designated trails.



(1999 Code, § 47.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.05  PROHIBITION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING CERTAIN HOURS.



   (A)   Eagle Point Park.  The possession, use and consumption of
alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, is hereby prohibited in Eagle
Point Park between the hours of sunset and 11:00 a.m. except as allowed by
special permit from the Parks and Recreation Department.  A person who
violates this section is subject to any and all penalties set forth in §
10.99 of this code.



   (B)   All other city parks and city-owned property.  The
possession, use and consumption of alcoholic beverages, including beer and
wine, is hereby prohibited in any other city parks including but not limited
to Chancy Park, Clinton Park, Hawthorne Park, DeWitt Park, Four Square Park,
Riverview Park, or any and all other city areas delineated as parks by
signage or other indicia, Joyce's Island and Willow Island and the land
between the islands in the city; and all other city property between the
hours of sunset and 11:00 a.m. except as allowed by special permit from the
Parks and Recreation Department or other duly authorized city official, and
except on licensed and leased premises as set forth in § 96.07 of this
chapter.



   (C)   General alcohol restrictions. Except where specifically
authorized by city permit for a particular event or pursuant to a validly
obtained alcohol service license in connection with such an event, no alcohol
other than beverages defined in state law as beer and wine may be consumed in
city parks, and only within the specified hours set forth in this chapter. 
Alcohol must be consumed in its original container. No beer or wine may be
consumed or distributed from containers larger than 32 ounces, except where
larger containers are specifically authorized by city permit for a particular
event.  Beverages shall not be consumed from glass containers in city
parks. 



(1999 Code, § 47.05) (Ord. 2490, passed 3-26-2013; Ord. 2600, passed
12-11-2018) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.06  BEER CONTAINER SIZE RESTRICTION; SALE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall possess beer in containers larger than 32 ounces in any
park or on any park property. The sale of beer in any park or on any park
property is prohibited unless a special permit is issued by the Recreation
Director.



(1999 Code, § 47.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.07  EXCEPTION FOR LICENSED AND LEASED PREMISES.



   The prohibition of the possession, use and consumption of alcoholic
beverages, including beer and wine, does not apply to park premises or any
other city property leased by the city to others where the lessee of the
premises has in full force and effect a license or permit from the state for
the sale of alcoholic beverages, including beer and wine, and the use and
consumption is confined to the licensed and leased premises. The prohibition
also does not apply to the Eagle Point Park Lodge between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 12:00 a.m. provided a special permit is issued by the Recreation
Director.



(1999 Code, § 47.07)



§ 96.08  PARK HOURS.



   (A)   Eagle Point Park. No person shall be in Eagle Point Park
between the hours of sunset to 6:30 a.m. except as allowed by special permit
from the Parks and Recreation Department for use of the lodge and its parking
lot or some other special permit. Under such circumstances permitted users of
the lodge must exit the park immediately following activities related to the
permitted use.  A person who violates this section is subject to any and all
penalties set forth in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   All other city parks. No person shall be in any other city
parks including but not limited to Chancy Park, Clinton Park, Hawthorne Park,
Four Square Park, DeWitt Park, Riverview Park, or any and all other city
areas delineated as parks by signage or other indicia, between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., except as allowed by special permit from the Parks
and Recreation Department. A person who violates this section is subject to
any and all penalties set forth in § 10.99 of this code.



   (C)   Riverfront Drive. Riverfront Drive is part and parcel of
Riverview Park for purposes of this section. No person shall loiter, gather
with others, or physically idle or remain on Riverfront Drive between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.  A person who violates this section is
subject to any and all penalties set forth in § 10.99 of this code. 



(1999 Code, § 47.08)  (Ord. 2109, passed 1-11-2000; Ord. 2490, passed
3-26-2013; Ord. 2600, passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.09  OVERNIGHT CAMPING RESTRICTED IN PUBLIC PARKS.



   (A)   Generally.  No person shall camp overnight in a city park.
This provision does not apply to the city recreational vehicle park or to
special events authorized by the City Council allowing overnight camping in
city parks.



   (B)   Camping.



      (1)   Willow Island.  No person shall camp on Willow Island
for a period of more than five days in any 15-consecutive-day period. No
person shall camp within 100 feet of the discovery trail.



      (2)   Joyce’s Island.  No person shall camp on Joyce’s
Island.



(Ord. 2372, passed 5-27-2008; Ord. 2385, passed 8-26-2008; Ord. 2490, passed
3-26-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.10  INTERFERENCE WITH IMPROVEMENTS.



   No person shall disturb or interfere with any improvements made in or
about the parks or disturb or interfere with birds, animals, fish, flowers,
trees or plants kept or found therein. This provision shall not apply to city
authorized projects or city authorized deer culling activity.



(Ord. 2460, passed 8-23-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.11  OBEYING SIGNS.



   No person shall enter upon portions of the ground in disregard of signs
or posted notices forbidding same.



(Ord. 2460, passed 8-23-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.12  RULES TO GOVERN OTHER CITY PROPERTY.



   Insofar as applicable, the rules set forth in this chapter shall
control and govern the use and conduct of the other city property, trails and
green spaces.



(Ord. 2460, passed 8-23-2011)



§ 96.13  WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.



   Vehicles in excess of six tons shall be restricted and prohibited from
use of the Serpentine Drive through Eagle Point Park with the exception of
the use of the main drive from the entrance gate directly to the Lodge.



(Ord. 2464, passed 9-13-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.14  RIVERVIEW PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   General rules.



      (1)   Campers must register before parking.  Registration
shall be at the registration booth and campers may choose their own site. 
Reservations are not accepted.  Registration shall be complete after
providing the necessary information on the registration form envelope and
depositing the envelope with payment in the slot of the deposit vault located
next to the registration booth.



      (2)   Camping permits expire at 4:00 p.m. on the last day of
the permit period.



      (3)   The registration stub must be displayed in plain view on
the dashboard of the vehicle or on the campsite post.



      (4)   Camping in the pull through pads numbered 19, 21 and 23
shall be reserved for R/V's of a minimum 35 foot length.



      (5)   Only one vehicle in addition to the R/V shall be allowed
at each camping unit.  Visitors may park in the overflow lot located to the
north of the park.



      (6)   Quiet time in the park starts at 10:00 p.m. and
continues until 8:00 a.m.



      (7)   Only registered campers are permitted in the R/V Park
after 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m.



      (8)   Fires are permitted in charcoal grills, gas grills,
commercial fire pits and fire rings.  Permitted times for open burning shall
be from 8:00 a.m. until 12:00 midnight.



      (9)   Campsites must be cleaned daily and waste deposited in
the provided containers.  Any remains from the cleaning of fish must first
be wrapped in paper or placed in a plastic bag before placing in containers.



      (10)   Dogs and cats must be on a leash at all times and the
leash may not exceed ten feet in length.



      (11)   Only one picnic table per unit is allowed.



      (12)   Speed limit in the R/V Park is 5 m.p.h.



      (13)   When the campground is being mowed, on or about
Wednesday afternoon, all items shall be removed from the grass areas.



      (14)   R/V waste or grey water shall only be dumped at the
dumping station located to the north of the R/V Park.



      (15)   The garbage or solid waste containers are only for the
use of registered campers and are only for garbage or trash generated or
accumulated while on the premises of the park.



      (16)   The outside use and consumption of alcoholic beverages,
including beer and wine, is hereby prohibited in the R/V Park between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 11:00 a.m.  Alcoholic beverages may only be
consumed in the R/V Park by the registered camper and their guests and no
person shall possess beer in containers larger than 32 ounces.



   (B)   Violations. 



      (1)   Violations of any of the rules and regulations as set
forth in this section may lead to the immediate termination of the camping
permit and eviction from the park.



      (2)   Violation of any of the rules and regulations as set
forth in this section may subject the violator to the standard penalty as
established in § 10.99 of this Code of Ordinances.  A separate and distinct
offense is committed on each day on which the person continues or permits any
violation or failure to comply after notification thereof.



(Ord. 2490, passed 3-26-2013; Ord. 2600, passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 97:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



Street Use and Maintenance



   97.001   Removal of warning devices



   97.002   Obstructing or defacing



   97.003   Placing debris on



   97.004   Playing in



   97.005   Traveling on barricaded street or alley



   97.006   Use for business purposes



   97.007   Washing vehicles



   97.008   Maintenance of parking or terrace



   97.009   Failure to maintain parking or terrace



   97.010   Dumping of snow



   97.011   Driveway culverts



Sidewalk Regulations



   97.025   Purpose



   97.026   Definitions



   97.027   Sidewalk snow removal responsibility



   97.028   Responsibility for maintenance



   97.029   City may order repairs



   97.030   Sidewalk construction ordered



   97.031   Sidewalk standards



   97.032   Barricades and warning lights



   97.033   Failure to repair or barricade



   97.034   Interference with sidewalk improvements



   97.035   Encroaching steps



   97.036   Openings and enclosures



   97.037   Fires or fuel on sidewalks



   97.038   Defacing



   97.039   Debris on sidewalks



   97.040   Merchandise display



   97.041   Sales stands



   97.042   Sidewalk cafés



Vacation and Disposal of Streets



   97.055   Power to vacate



   97.056   Plan Commission



   97.057   Notice of vacation hearing



   97.058   Findings required



   97.059   Disposal of vacated streets or alleys



   97.060   Disposal by gift limited



Street Grades



   97.075   Established grades



   97.076   Record maintained



Naming of Streets



   97.090   Naming new streets



   97.091   Changing name of street



   97.092   Recording street names



   97.093   Official street name map



   97.094   Revision of street name map



Street Excavations and Driveway Curb Cuts



   97.105   Permit required for excavation



   97.106   Conditions for issuance



   97.107   Annual fee



   97.108   Permit fees and deposit required



   97.109   Permit issued



   97.110   Additional deposit may be required



   97.111   Approval required



   97.112   Refunds and exemptions



   97.113   Procedural regulations



   97.114   Curb and driveway construction permits



   97.115   Obstruction in right-of-way



STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE



§ 97.001  REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES.



   It is unlawful for a person to willfully remove, throw down, destroy or
carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction, guard or other
article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed
thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places
in the street or alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.



(Iowa Code § 716.1)  (1999 Code, § 135.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.002  OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING.



   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, deface or injure any street
or alley in any manner.



(Iowa Code § 716.1)  (1999 Code, § 135.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.003  PLACING DEBRIS ON.



   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any street or
alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage,
rubbish, litter, offal, leaves, grass or any other debris likely to be washed
into the storm sewer and clog the storm sewer, or any substance likely to
injure any person, animal or vehicle.



(Iowa Code § 321.369)  (1999 Code, § 135.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.004  PLAYING IN.



   It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled or play games on streets
or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the city for those purposes.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(2))  (1999 Code, § 135.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.005  TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY.



   It is unlawful for any person to travel or operate any vehicle on any
street or alley temporarily closed by barricades, lights, signs or flares
placed thereon by the authority or permission of any city official, police
officer or member of the Fire Department.



(1999 Code, § 135.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.006  USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES.



   It is unlawful to park, store or place, temporarily or permanently, any
machinery or junk or any other goods, wares and merchandise of any kind upon
any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale or offering
same for sale, without permission of the Council.



(1999 Code, § 135.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.007  WASHING VEHICLES.



   It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk, street or
alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment
or any vehicle of any kind when the work is done for hire or as a business.
This does not prevent any person from washing or cleaning his or her own
vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully parked in the street or alley.



(1999 Code, § 135.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.008  MAINTENANCE OF PARKING OR TERRACE.



   It shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner to
maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb
lines upon the public streets, except that the abutting property owner shall
not be required to remove diseased trees or dead wood on the publicly owned
property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes timely mowing, trimming trees
and shrubs and picking up litter.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(1)(c))  (1999 Code, § 135.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.009  FAILURE TO MAINTAIN PARKING OR TERRACE.



   If the abutting property owner does not perform an action required
under the above section within a reasonable time, the city may perform the
required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(2)(e))  (1999 Code, § 135.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.010  DUMPING OF SNOW.



   It is unlawful for any person to throw, push or place or cause to be
thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct
gutters, or impede the passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to
create a hazardous condition therein; except where, in the cleaning of large
commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely necessary to move
the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, the accumulation shall be
removed promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt
removal of the accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(2))  (1999 Code, § 135.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.011  DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.



   The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense, install any culvert
deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s
property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained
from the city. In the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to
culverts, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to make the
repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the city shall have the
right to make the repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the city
for the cost of the repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County
Treasurer and specially assessed against the property as by law provided.



(1999 Code, § 135.11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



SIDEWALK REGULATIONS



§ 97.025  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens
on sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair,
replacement or reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner
and to minimize the liability of the city.



(1999 Code, § 136.01)



§ 97.026  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BROOM FINISH.  A sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the sidewalk
with an approved broom when it is hardening.



   DEFECTIVE SIDEWALK.  Any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more of the
following characteristics:



      (1)   Sidewalks with damage that could cause pedestrians to
fall, or which prohibits safe pedestrian travel;



      (2)   Sidewalks with damage that could impede the safe travel
of wheelchair users or other disabled pedestrians;



      (3)   Sidewalks with common defects, such as uneven cracks,
settled slabs, or heaved sections;



      (4)   Spalling over 50% of a single square of the sidewalk
with one or more depressions equal to one-half inch or more;



      (5)   Spalling over less than 50% of a single square of the
sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths inch or more;



      (6)   A single square of sidewalk cracked in a manner that no
part thereof has a piece greater than one square foot;



      (7)   A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full
depth; and



      (8)   A change from the design or construction grade equal to
or greater than three-fourths inch per foot.



   ESTABLISHED GRADE.  The grade established by the city for the
particular area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.



   ONE-COURSE CONSTRUCTION.  The full thickness of the concrete is placed
at one time, using the same mixture throughout.



   OWNER.  The person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification
required herein. For all other purposes, OWNER includes the lessee, if any.



   PORTLAND CEMENT.  Cement meeting the requirements of AASHTO M85, Type
I.



   SIDEWALK.  All permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.



   SIDEWALK CAFÉ. A non-enclosed area, as defined in § 159.046(P)(1),
located on a sidewalk, and consisting of patios or outdoor dining areas where
food and/or alcoholic beverages from the associated establishment are
consumed by patrons seated at tables within that area.



   SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.   The construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling
or depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith.



(1999 Code, § 136.02)  (Ord. 2451, passed 5-24-2011; Ord. 2508, passed
6-24-2014)



§ 97.027  SIDEWALK SNOW REMOVAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Generally.  The abutting property owner is responsible for
the removal of the natural accumulations of snow and ice from the sidewalks
within a reasonable amount of time.



   (B)   Business district sidewalks.



      (1)   Sidewalks on the following streets are hereby defined as
business district sidewalks:



         (a)   Main Avenue between Harding and Third Streets;



         (b)   North Second Street between Twenty-Third Avenue
and Main Avenue;



         (c)   Fourth Avenue South between First and Third
Streets;



         (d)   Fifth Avenue South between First and Fourth
Streets;



         (e)   Sixth Avenue South between First and Fourth
Streets;



         (f)   Seventh Avenue South between Second and Fourth
Streets;



         (g)   Eighth Avenue South between Second and Fourth
Streets;



         (h)   First Street between Fourth and Seventh Avenues
South;



         (i)   Second Street between Third and Eighth Avenues
South; and



         (j)   Third Street between Fourth and Eighth Avenues
South.



      (2)   In the event snow and/or ice remains on a business
district sidewalk for more than 12 hours after the snow stops falling, or
after ice forms, the city may remove the snow or ice from the sidewalk. The
cost of the actual removal, plus a filing fee, will be assessed against the
property for collection the same manner as a property tax.



   (C)   Sidewalks other than business district sidewalks.  This
division applies to all sidewalks not defined as business district sidewalks
in division (B) above. In the event snow and/or ice remains on the sidewalk
for more than 48 hours after the snow stops falling, or after ice forms, the
city may remove the snow or ice from the sidewalk. The costs of actual
removal, plus a filing fee, will be assessed against the property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(1999 Code, § 136.03)  (Ord. 2399, passed 2-24-2009)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.028  RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.



   It is the responsibility of the abutting property owners to repair,
replace or reconstruct, or cause to be repaired, replaced or reconstructed,
all broken or defective sidewalks and to maintain in a safe and hazard-free
condition any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb
lines or traveled portion of the public street. The owner of any lot or
parcel who fails to maintain the sidewalk shall be liable to any person
injured as a result of the failure to maintain the sidewalk and shall further
save, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city from and against any claim
arising out of the failure to maintain the sidewalk.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(2)(c))  (1999 Code, § 136.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.029  CITY MAY ORDER REPAIRS.



   If the abutting property owner does not maintain sidewalks as required,
the Council may serve notice on the owner, by certified mail, requiring the
owner to repair, replace or reconstruct sidewalks within a reasonable time
and if the action is not completed within the time stated in the notice, the
Council may require the work to be done and assess the costs against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council may, from time to time as
fiscal resources are available, allocate funding for the repair, maintenance
and reconstruction of sidewalks to cover whatever proportion of the repair
costs it deems affordable and appropriate in a given fiscal year, and said
funds shall be allocated by priority set forth by the City Engineer.
Regardless of the availability or unavailability of said funds, nothing in
this section shall shift the legal responsibility of abutting owners for the
present or future maintenance and care of sidewalks or for legal liability
arising out of the same, as set forth in § 97.028.



(Iowa Code §§ 364.12(2)(d), 364.12(2)(e))  (1999 Code, § 136.05)  (Ord.
2582, passed 5-22-2018) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.030  SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION ORDERED.



   The Council may order the construction of permanent sidewalks upon any
street or court in the city and may specially assess the cost of the
improvement to abutting property owners in accordance with the provisions of
the Iowa Code Chapter 384. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council
may, from time to time as fiscal resources are available, allocate funding
for the initial construction of permanent sidewalks to cover whatever
proportion of the repair costs it deems affordable and appropriate in a given
fiscal year, and said funds shall be allocated by priority set forth by the
City Engineer. Regardless of the availability or unavailability of said
funds, nothing in this section shall shift the legal responsibility of
abutting owners for the construction, or for the present or future
maintenance and care of sidewalks as set forth in § 97.028, whether or not
funds are allocated by the city.



(Iowa Code § 384.38)  (1999 Code, § 136.06) (Ord. 2582, passed
5-22-2018)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.031  SIDEWALK STANDARDS.



   Sidewalks repaired, replaced or constructed under the provisions of
this chapter shall be of the following construction and meet the following
standards.



   (A)   Cement.  Portland cement concrete shall be the only cement
used in the construction and repair of sidewalks.



   (B)   Construction.  Sidewalks shall be of one-course construction,
using State Department of Transportation Class C portland cement concrete.



   (C)   Sidewalk base.  Concrete may be placed directly on compact
and well-drained soil. Where soil is not well drained, a four-inch sub-base
of compact, clean, coarse gravel, sand or cinders shall be laid. The adequacy
of the soil drainage is to be determined by the city.



   (D)   Sidewalk bed.  The sidewalk bed shall be so graded that the
constructed sidewalk will be at established grade.



   (E)   Length, width and depth.  Length, width and depth
requirements are as follows:



      (1)   Residential sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide
and four inches thick, and each section shall be no more than four feet in
length;



      (2)   Business district sidewalks shall extend from the
property line to the curb. Each section shall be four inches thick and no
more than six feet in length and width unless the City Engineer so directs;
and



      (3)   Driveway areas shall be not less than six inches in
thickness.



   (F)   Grade.  The City Engineer shall establish the sidewalk grade.



   (G)   Elevations.  The street edge of a sidewalk shall be at an
elevation even with the curb at the curb or not less than one-half  inch
above the curb for each foot between the curb and the sidewalk.



   (H)   Slope.  All sidewalks shall have a maximum slope of 2%
towards the curb.



   (I)   Finish.  All sidewalks shall be finished with a broom finish.
All walks must be true to grade.



   (J)   Ramps for persons with disabilities.  There shall be not less
than two curb cuts or ramps per lineal block which shall be located on or
near the crosswalks at intersections. Each curb cut or ramp shall be at least
48 inches wide, shall be sloped at not greater than one inch of rise per 12
inches lineal distance, with a maximum cross slope of 2%. Each curb ramp
shall include installation of detectable warning panels with truncated domes.
All curb ramp installations should comply with the Iowa SUDAS Standard
Specifications, Division 7, Section 7030.



(Iowa Code § 216C.9)  (1999 Code, § 136.07)  (Ord. 2451, passed
5-24-2011) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.032  BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.



   Whenever any material of any kind is deposited on any street, avenue,
highway, passageway or alley when sidewalk improvements are being made or
when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it shall be the duty of all
persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner,
agent or lessee of the property in front of or along which the material may
be deposited, or a dangerous condition exists, to put in conspicuous places
at each end of the sidewalk and at each end of any pile of material deposited
in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights, and to keep
them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades both
at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using
the street for any of the purposes specified in this subchapter shall be
liable for all injuries or damage to persons or property arising from any
wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties or their agents or
employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by this subchapter or
of any failure to comply with provisions hereof.



(1999 Code, § 136.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.033  FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE.



   It is the duty of the owner of the property abutting the sidewalk, or
the owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the city immediately in the
event of failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or to
install or erect necessary barricades as required by this subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 136.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.034  INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS.



   No person shall knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any
portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto while in the process of being
improved or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or approach thereto,
or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach
thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar or deface any sidewalk at any time or
destroy, mar, remove or deface any notice provided by this subchapter.



(1999 Code, § 136.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.035  ENCROACHING STEPS.



   It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any stairs or steps to
any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution
of the Council.



(1999 Code, § 136.11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.036  OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES.



   It is unlawful for a person to:



   (A)   Stairs and railings.  Construct or build a stairway or
passageway to any cellar or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk,
or to enclose any portion of a sidewalk with a railing without permission by
resolution of the Council, unless authorized with respect to a sidewalk café
pursuant to § 97.042;



   (B)   Openings.  Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any
vault on any sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to
protect the public; and/or



   (C)   Protect openings.  Neglect to properly protect or barricade
all openings on or within six feet of any sidewalk.



(1999 Code, § 136.12) (Ord. 2508, passed 6-24-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.037  FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS.



   It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of any kind on any sidewalk
or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.



(1999 Code, § 136.13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.038  DEFACING.



   It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or
writing on any sidewalk.



(Iowa Code § 716.1)  (1999 Code, § 136.14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.039  DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.



   It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any sidewalk any
glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish,
litter, offal or any other debris or any substance likely to injure any
person, animal or vehicle.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(2))  (1999 Code, § 136.15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.040  MERCHANDISE DISPLAY.



   It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above any sidewalk, any
goods or merchandise for sale or for display in a manner as to interfere with
the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case
shall more than three feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied
for the purposes.



(1999 Code, § 136.16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.041  SALES STANDS.



   It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine or
stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on
any sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.



(1999 Code, § 136.17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.042  SIDEWALK CAFÉS.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to provide for the
establishment, administration, and regulation of sidewalk cafés.



   (B)   Leases and permits.



      (1)   Sidewalk cafés may be authorized by lease (if the
establishment will serve alcohol) or permit (if the establishment will not
serve alcohol) pursuant to the provisions of this § 97.042.



      (2)   Sidewalk cafés authorized by lease or permit shall be
permitted to operate upon public sidewalks located within the city's
commercial zoning districts.



      (3)   The city shall retain ownership of all areas utilized
for sidewalk cafés.



      (4)   Sidewalk café leases and permits shall expire one year
following issuance unless renewed in accordance with this section.



      (5)   All sidewalk cafés shall be adjacent to such building
or storefront. Adjacent storefront areas may be utilized upon obtaining
written consent from the adjacent owner and proof of insurance coverage.



      (6)   All sidewalk cafés shall provide for safe and adequate
pedestrian walkway in accordance with relevant laws and regulations and must
further provide for adequate space for parking meters, if any, passage to and
from parked vehicles, and ingress and egress to and from parked vehicles, and
shall at a minimum provide a 48-inch walkway.



      (7)   Furniture must be affixed in a manner that is
non-permanent and that does not pose a safety hazard, but that also is not
permanently affixed.



      (8)   The City of Clinton Building and Neighborhood Services
Department (“Clinton BNS”) shall be responsible for the administration of
this section, including preparation and distribution of permit applications,
review of permit or lease materials, issuance of permits, and all other
functions necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section.



   (C)   Applications.



      (1)   Fees for annual sidewalk café leases and permits shall
be $25. Fees will be waived for the 2018 start-up season.



      (2)   Application materials and submittal requirements
necessary to effectuate annual leases and permits for sidewalk cafés, in
accordance with this § 97.042, shall be prepared and supplied by Clinton
BNS, and shall include, without limitation, lease and permit agreements
(containing indemnity provisions), site plans, floor plans, retainer details,
and insurance certificates (including dram shop insurance for leased sidewalk
cafés serving alcohol beverages).



      (3)   Leases.



         (a)   Upon receipt of all required application materials
and submissions for a new sidewalk café lease for an establishment that will
serve alcohol on the premises, and completion and approval of any required
fire and building inspections, Clinton BNS will issue a decision on the
application in writing within seven days of submission of an application and
all appropriate attachments.



         (b)   Applications for the renewal of unexpired sidewalk
café leases issued during the prior calendar year may be issued by Clinton
BNS within five business days of receipt of a complete application. No
comment period shall be required for lease renewal applications.



      (4)   Permits.



         (a)   Sidewalk café permits for establishments that
will not serve alcohol shall be issued by Clinton BNS within five business
days of receipt of a complete application.



         (b)   Any applicant or adjacent property owner or tenant
who feels aggrieved by a determination of city staff regarding the issuance
or non-issuance of a sidewalk café permit may appeal that determination to
City Council. Appeals must be made in writing within 30 days of the
determination complained of, and shall clearly state the determination being
appealed, and the nature of the appeal. The appeal shall be scheduled for
hearing at the next available City Council meeting.



   (D)   Delineation of café area. Sidewalk café areas must be
clearly delineated. Delineation can be accomplished by temporary fencing,
planters, furniture placement, roping or similar means. Items used for
delineation must be properly weighted in a manner that does not pose a safety
hazard and that is not permanently affixed to the sidewalk or any adjacent
structure.



   (E)   Hours of operation. Hours of operation of sidewalk cafés
shall be as follows:



      (1)   Except within the Main Avenue Overlay and the Central
Business District Overlay areas, a sidewalk café may operate between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.



      (2)   Within the Main Avenue Overlay and the Central Business
District Overlay areas, a sidewalk café may operate between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight) Friday and Saturday.



   (F)   Sidewalk cafés where alcoholic beverages are served.  No
alcoholic beverages shall be served in any sidewalk café which is not
authorized pursuant to a lease and designated and licensed as an outdoor
service area pursuant to § 159.046(P).  All regulations generally
applicable to outdoor service areas pursuant to § 159.046(P) shall be
specifically applicable to sidewalk cafés so designated and licensed.  In
the event of a conflict between the provisions of § 159.046(P) and this §
97.042, the more restrictive provision shall control.



   (G)   Sidewalk cafés where food is served. Sidewalk cafés engaged
in food service shall follow all applicable federal, state, and local
standards for a retail food establishment, including but not limited to
satisfying applicable health and safety requirements and inspections, and
shall operate in accordance with all applicable sections of this Code of
Ordinances.



   (H)   Miscellaneous provisions.



      (1)   No amplified music or loudspeakers shall be used in
connection with a sidewalk café in violation of the city's noise regulations.



      (2)   In compliance with the Iowa Smokefree Air Act of 2008,
smoking shall be prohibited in any sidewalk café.



      (3)   Adequate toilet facilities must be available to
accommodate added seating within a sidewalk café.



      (4)   Exits shall be provided in accordance with applicable
laws and regulations.



      (5)   Lessees shall promptly remove snow and ice from their
respective sidewalk cafés, and shall further promptly abate any additional
snow and ice removal burden imposed upon neighboring properties by
improvements constructed for the sidewalk café.



      (6)   No lessee or permittee shall operate a sidewalk café at
any time without adequate supervision of patrons.



   (I)   Penalty.  Any person violating any provision of this section,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to temporary
revocation of permit or lease until the infraction is determined corrected by
inspection from designated city staff and/or subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



(Ord. 2508, passed 6-24-2014; Ord. 2581, passed 5-8-2018)



VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS



§ 97.055  POWER TO VACATE.



   When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the best interest
of the city to vacate a street or alley or portion thereof, the Council may
do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(2)(a))  (1999 Code, § 137.01)



§ 97.056  PLAN COMMISSION.



   Any proposal to vacate a street or alley shall be referred by the
Council to the Plan Commission for its study and recommendation prior to
further consideration by the Council. The Commission shall submit a written
report including recommendations to the Council within 30 days after the date
the proposed vacation is referred to the Commission.



(Iowa Code § 392.1)  (1999 Code, § 137.02)



§ 97.057  NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING.



   The Council shall cause to be published a notice of public hearing of
the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.



(1999 Code, § 137.03)



§ 97.058  FINDINGS REQUIRED.



   No street or alley, or portion thereof, shall be vacated unless the
Council finds that:



   (A)   Public use.  The street or alley proposed to be vacated is
not needed for the use of the public, and therefore, its maintenance at
public expense is no longer justified; or



   (B)   Abutting property.  The proposed vacation will not deny
owners of property abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their
property.



(Iowa Code § 364.15)  (1999 Code, § 137.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.059  DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS.



   When in the judgment of the Council it would be in the best interest of
the city to dispose of a vacated street or alley, or portion thereof, the
Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of the Iowa Code § 364.7.



(Iowa Code § 364.7)  (1999 Code, § 137.05)



§ 97.060  DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED.



   The city may not dispose of a vacated street or alley, or portion
thereof, by gift except to a governmental body for a public purpose.



(Iowa Code § 364.7(3))  (1999 Code, § 137.06)



Cross-reference:



   Vacations, see Table of Special Ordinances, Table IV



STREET GRADES



§ 97.075  ESTABLISHED GRADES.



   The grades of all streets, alleys and sidewalks, which have been
heretofore established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified and
established as official grades.



(1999 Code, § 138.01)



§ 97.076  RECORD MAINTAINED.



   The Clerk shall maintain a record of all established grades and furnish
information concerning the grades upon request.



(1999 Code, § 138.02)



Cross-reference:



   Street grades, see Tables of Special Ordinances, Table II



NAMING OF STREETS



§ 97.090  NAMING NEW STREETS.



   New streets shall be assigned names in accordance with the following.



   (A)   Extension of existing street.  Streets added to the city that
are natural extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the
existing street.



   (B)   Resolution.  All street names, except streets named as a part
of a subdivision or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.



   (C)   Plan Commission.  Proposed street names shall be referred to
the Plan Commission for review and recommendation.



(1999 Code, § 139.01)



§ 97.091  CHANGING NAME OF STREET.



   The Council may, by resolution, change the name of a street.



(1999 Code, § 139.02)



§ 97.092  RECORDING STREET NAMES.



   Following official action naming or changing the name of a street, the
Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County Auditor and
City Assessor.



(Iowa Code § 354.26)  (1999 Code, § 139.03)



§ 97.093  OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP.



   Streets within the city are named as shown on the official street name
map which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
subchapter. The official street name map shall be identified by the signature
of the Mayor, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words:



      This is to certify that this is the official street name map
referred to in § 97.093 of the code of ordinances of Clinton, Iowa.



(1999 Code, § 139.04)



§ 97.094  REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP.



   (A)   If in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes
are made in street names, the changes shall be entered on the official street
name map promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an
entry on the official street name map as follows:



      On (date), by official action of the City Council, the following
changes were made in the official street name map:  (brief description).



   (B)   The entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the
Clerk.



(1999 Code, § 139.05)



STREET EXCAVATIONS AND DRIVEWAY CURB CUTS



§ 97.105  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EXCAVATION.



   It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation in or to obstruct
any public right-of-way in the city without having first obtained a permit
from the City Engineering Department. Utilities operating under a franchise
granted by the city are required to obtain a permit.



(1999 Code, § 141.01)  (Ord. 2553, passed 1-25-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.106  CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE.



   The City Engineering Department shall not issue any permit for the
blocking or closing of any public right-of-way for a longer period of time
than 30 days without specific authorization from the Council.  All
excavations in the public right-of-way shall be backfilled and fully restored
within 60 days of initial excavation.  Permits for work within a street
shall only be issued to licensed contractors meeting the requirements of this
ordinance.  Permits for driveway or sidewalk construction may be issued
directly to the abutting property owner.



(1999 Code, § 141.02)  (Ord. 2553, passed 1-25-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.107  ANNUAL FEE.



   Contractors working within the public right-of-way must be pre-approved
by the City Engineering Department.  All contractors who wish to work within
public right-of-way shall pay an annual licensing fee of $100, and shall
carry a current two million dollar liability insurance policy.



(1999 Code, § 141.03)  (Ord. 2271, passed 11-11-2003; Ord. 2553, passed
1-25-2017)



§ 97.108  PERMIT FEES AND DEPOSIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any application for a permit for a right-of-way excavation in
the traveled portion of the roadway between the curbs or edges of the roadway
shall be accompanied by a cash deposit, which includes permit fees.



   (B)   The total cash deposit shall be in the amount of $500 for
excavations in streets with improved surfaces, which includes a $150 permit
fee.  The cash deposit shall also be $150 for excavations in any unimproved
portion of the right-of-way, which includes a $75 permit fee. The cash
deposit shall be $150 for any obstruction of the public right-of-way without
excavation, which includes a $75 permit fee.



   (C)   The permit fee for driveway approaches shall be set at $50
with no deposit necessary, between the curb and the sidewalk.  The permit
fee for a sidewalk shall be $10 per every 15 lineal feet of sidewalk
replaced, with no deposit necessary.  No fees shall be charged for driveway
replacement behind the city sidewalk.



   (D)   The cash deposit for a project spanning more than one city
block shall be the cumulative of $150 per city block including a $75 fee,
$500 per street crossing including a $150 fee, and $500 per improved surface
excavation including a $150 fee.



   (E)   All cash deposits will be held by the city binding the holder
of the permit until the time as the public right-of-way is restored to the
satisfaction of the Engineering Department. In case the restoration work does
not meet with the approval of the Engineering Department, the holder of the
permit shall proceed at once to reconstruct the work, and if the work is not
completed within 60 days, the cash deposit shall be forfeited to the city
without further notice.



(1999 Code, § 141.04)  (Ord. 2553, passed 1-25-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.109  PERMIT ISSUED.



   The application for the permit shall remain on file in the Engineering
Department. The original of the permit shall be kept at the work site and
exhibited to the City Engineer or to any city officer asking for the same.
Upon completion of the work, it shall be returned to the Engineering
Department endorsed with the name of the permit holder performing the work
and the time at which the work has been completed.



(1999 Code, § 141.05)  (Ord. 2553, passed 1-25-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.110  ADDITIONAL DEPOSIT MAY BE REQUIRED.



   The deposit of a larger sum may be required if the estimated cost of
the replacement as determined by the City Engineer is greater than the
minimum cash deposit. The deposit shall guarantee the cost of maintenance of
the street surface in a condition suitable and safe for traffic, placing
barricades and flashing lights when necessary, for the entire period of time
from the date of the issuance of the permit up to the date of the release of
the cash deposit. The Engineering Department shall file at the time of the
release a statement of all costs, if any, incurred by the city by reason of
the failure of the party holding the permit to comply with any of the
regulations specified in this subchapter. The costs shall be deducted from
the deposit made at the time of the issuance of the permit. In case the
deposit is not sufficient to cover the charges, the Clerk shall render a
statement to the holder of the permit of the amount due the city for
additional costs and expenses. No further permits shall be issued to the
party until the costs have been paid in full. The cash deposit shall in no
way be construed to release the party holding the permit from penalties or
liabilities for or on account of failure to provide for the public safety or
for damage to sewers, utilities or other structures during the progress of
the work.  If the permittee finishes the paving and restoration of a street
patch without an inspection by the city, the entire cash deposit will be
forfeited and the city shall reserve the right to reject the work.



(1999 Code, § 141.06)  (Ord. 2553, passed 1-25-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.111  APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   All work done under the authority of a permit for an excavation must be
approved by the Engineering Department.



(1999 Code, § 141.07)  (Ord. 2553, passed 1-25-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.112  REFUNDS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   After final inspection by the Engineering Department showing
satisfactory completion of the work required, the workmanship guarantee
deposit shall be refunded in the amount of $350 for permits with a $500 cash
deposit, or $75 for permits with a $150 cash deposit. Utilities operating
under a municipal franchise are exempt from workmanship guarantee deposits;
however, the required inspections shall be made for each excavation and
itemized monthly statements shall be issued to each utility by the
Engineering Department at the prescribed rate per each excavation. Multiple
excavations within the same general area may be considered as one excavation
for the purposes of inspection, as determined by the Engineering Department.



(1999 Code, § 141.08)  (Ord. 2553, passed 1-25-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.113  PROCEDURAL REGULATIONS.



   Parties taking out permits for excavations or obstructing any portion
of the streets, alleys or the public right-of-ways must comply with the
following regulations.



   (A)   The area to be excavated or opened or blocked shall be
properly barricaded, guarded and equipped with flashing lights. Barricades
are to be constructed and equipped according to Part VI of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways 2009 Edition as
adopted by the Federal Highway Administrator as a national standard for
application on all highways open to public travel in accordance with 23
U.S.C. §§ 109(b), 109(d) and 402(a) and any amendments or additions
thereto. In addition, barricades shall bear the identification of the party
responsible for the excavation. In the case of blocking a sidewalk, a
suitable temporary sidewalk must be provided by the permit holder.



   (B)   On improved streets, the holder of the permit shall neatly saw
cut the pavement, sidewalk or curb in a square or rectangular shape and to a
width of 12 inches greater on all sides than the actual earth excavation, and
shall remove all the excavated material and dispose of the same at a site
designated by the city and to backfill the excavation with an approved soil.
After thoroughly compacting the soil in eight-inch lifts, the permittee shall
place and compact six inches of crushed stone base, replace the permanent
pavement to meet city specifications, and shall barricade and protect the
replaced pavement for the proper curing time.



   (C)   On unimproved streets, the work shall be done in all respects
in the same manner as on improved streets. The top six inches of backfill
shall consist of crushed stone.



   (D)   When a street opening is made between November 1 and April 1
of the next year, the permanent replacement of the pavement shall not be made
until weather conditions permit the work to be done in a first-class
workmanlike manner, unless other permission is granted by the Engineering
Department.



   (E)   When the excavation is left over winter due to inclement
weather, a temporary surface consisting of six inches of crushed stone base
and a two-inch cold mix compacted asphalt patch shall be placed over the
excavation area. The temporary patch shall be maintained in a smooth and
level condition by the permit holder until weather conditions permit the
replacing with the permanent paving.



   (F)   As soon as weather conditions are suitable, the holder of the
permit shall replace the pavement. The parties holding the permit must notify
the Engineering Department at least 48 hours in advance of commencing the
replacement work. The Engineering Department may then inspect the opening to
determine that the backfill is properly settled and weather conditions are
suitable for the replacement of the permanent pavement. The replacement shall
not be done without approval by the Engineering Department of the personnel,
equipment and materials which are to be used. The temporary surfacing shall
then be removed and disposed of. The subgrade shall be re-compacted and
graded. The pavement shall then be replaced according to city specifications.
The work shall then be protected from traffic and the elements by barricades
and flashing lights until properly cured. Concrete pavement surfaces must be
protected for a minimum of three days from drying or from frost action by
placing earth or burlap or curing compound over the exposed surfaces. A final
inspection shall be made by the Engineering Department upon completion.



   (G)   If, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the permit holder
does not have the equipment, materials or personnel to replace the permanent
pavement in a proper workmanlike manner, the City Engineer may order the
permit holder to employ, at the permit holder's expense, approved persons who
are properly equipped to make the necessary replacement of the pavement.



   (H)   Each portland cement concrete pavement patch shall be stamped
with letters which will identify the contractor responsible and shall be
stamped with the date of the work. In the case of restored brick or asphaltic
cement concrete pavements, each utility or contractor shall notify the
Engineering Department of the location and date the work was done. All
portland cement concrete patches must be constructed with State Department of
Transportation Class C mix, or Class M portland cement concrete if it is
determined the road shall be opened to traffic within 48 hours after
completion. All excavation restoration patches shall have a minimum thickness
equal to the thickness of the surrounding pavement section.  All restoration
patches shall be constructed with like materials with respect to the
surrounding pavement section.  Restoration patches constructed in areas
where pavement sections include both concrete and asphalt shall be
constructed with a full depth concrete pavement section.  For chip sealed
streets, the restoration patch shall have a minimum surface of three inches
of asphalt.



   (I)   The minimum restoration patch size for any street excavation
shall be a five foot square.  The minimum distance from a pavement patch to
an existing pavement joint shall also be five feet.  Dowel bars and
reinforcing steel shall be placed according to current Iowa Department of
Transportation Standards.  For certain concrete streets, the minimum
excavation size shall be the entire concrete panel. On these concrete
streets, no portion of any concrete panel may be excavated without excavating
the entire panel.  The City Engineering Department maintains a list of
applicable concrete streets to these requirements. 



   (J)   If within four years after the replacement, the pavement
and/or subgrade should fail and cause a traffic hazard, it will be the
responsibility of the person who constructed the same to re-compact the
subgrade and replace the pavement at the person's own expense.



   (K)   No person or his or her agent shall remove any stone or other
mark made or set by the authority of the Engineering Department to designate
any established corner, line or benchmark of the city. When it becomes
necessary to have the same relocated for the purpose of opening any street or
alley, a person shall request the Engineering Department to remove and
replace the same. Upon receipt of the application, the Engineering Department
shall remove and replace the stone, mark or other device as soon as
practicable.



(1999 Code, § 141.09)  (Ord. 2553, passed 1-25-2017) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.114  CURB AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.



   The Engineering Department is authorized to grant permits for the
cutting of curbs within the city.



   (A)   Fee.  The total cash deposit required for curb & gutter
replacements shall be $500.  The cash deposit shall be refunded upon final
inspection and approval by the City Engineering Department, minus the $150
inspection fee.  The total cash deposit required for curb cuts by
saw-cutting shall be $150, including the $75 permit fee.



   (B)   Inspections.  An inspection shall be made under the direction
of the Engineering Department to determine and approve the location and width
of the curb cut prior to the issuance of a permit. Another inspection shall
be made after the work has been completed to approve workmanship and the
location of the curb cut.



   (C)   Width and location standards.  The width and location of curb
cuts shall not exceed the current standards of the State Department of
Transportation.  Only one curb cut shall be allowed per residential lot,
except two curb cuts shall be permitted on a corner lot.  Maximum curb cut
widths shall be 24 feet for a residential lot and 45 feet for a commercial or
industrial lot.  The beginning of a curb cut shall be no closer than 15 feet
from the beginning of a curb radius at an intersecting street.  No portion
of a curb cut shall extend beyond the property line as extended or into a
crosswalk.  In certain cases where deemed appropriate, the City Engineer may
require lengthier curb cut offsets from radius points at intersections.



(1999 Code, § 141.10)  (Ord. 2271, passed 11-11-2003; Ord. 2553, passed
1-25-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.115  OBSTRUCTION IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   Construction of any fence, landscaping, decorative mailbox or handicap
ramp within the public right-of-way shall be subject to the permitting
requirements of this section. No fence, landscaping, decorative mailbox, or
handicap ramp shall be placed in the public right-of-way unless there is
sufficient excess right-of-way such that vehicle or pedestrian travel is not
impeded by the fence, landscaping, decorative mailbox or handicap ramp. All
fences shall be constructed consistent with descriptions contained in the
city zoning ordinances applicable to the abutting private property and shall
be approved by the City Engineering Department prior to construction. Fences,
landscaping, decorative mailboxes or handicap ramps shall not be rooted in
the ground in any manner making it impracticable or unduly difficult to
remove in case it is necessary for right-of-way maintenance, utility
installation, or other public activities. The City Engineering Department
shall enforce this section on a case by case basis based upon a policy
drafted by the City Engineer.



(Ord. 2559, passed 11-28-2017)



CHAPTER 98:  TREES



Section



   98.01   Purpose



   98.02   Definitions



   98.03   Tree Commission



   98.04   Permit required



   98.05   Arboricultural specifications and standards of practice



   98.06   Duty to trim trees



   98.07   Disease control



   98.08   Inspection and removal



   98.09   Removal of stumps



   98.10   Abuse or mutilation of trees



   98.11   Arborist bond



   98.12   Emergencies



   98.13   Residential developments



   98.14   Commercial and industrial developments



   98.15   Tree planting required



   98.16   Tree preservation required



   98.17   Replacement or removal of damaged tree



 



   98.99   Penalty



§ 98.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the planting and preservation
of trees on city parkways and within residential, commercial and industrial
developments in the city. Trees provide shade, reduce heat island effects in
paved areas, and create an attractive living environment which protect and
enhance property values within the community. This chapter also establishes a
Tree Commission to develop a tree planning program and establish regulations
for the planting and preservation of trees within the city.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)



§ 98.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL and INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT. Properties containing a
commercial or industrial business, facility or operation.



   PARKWAY. That part of the street, avenue, or highway in the city not
covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the curb line; or, on
unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or highway lying between
the lot line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular
traffic.



   PROPERTY OWNER. A person owning private property in the city, as shown
by the County Auditor’s plats of the city.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any and all property located within the confines of
the city and owned by the city or held in the name of the city by any of the
departments, commissions, or agencies within the city government.



   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any property having a single-family,
two-family or multi-family residential dwelling unit(s).



   STREET. The entire width between property lines of avenues or highways.



   STREET TREE. Any tree planted in a city parkway; such trees become the
property of the city.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)



§ 98.03  TREE COMMISSION.



   There is hereby established a Tree Commission for the city, which
consists of five residents of the city, appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of the Council, for staggered terms of three years.  Members of the
Commission serve without compensation.  In the event a vacancy occurs during
the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed for the unexpired
portion of the term.  The Tree Commission shall provide leadership in the
development and  understanding of the objectives of the tree program and
assist in the development and maintenance of technical specifications and
guidelines.  The Tree Commission shall produce and maintain a list of kinds
and species of trees suitable and desirable for planting and the areas and
conditions under which such trees should be planted.  This list, to be known
as the “Master Tree List” shall be adopted by resolution of the
Council.  The Tree Commission shall also review subdivisions plats and plans
for new developments and recommend tree preservation and tree plantings
therein.  The Council may require the implementation of any recommendation
by the Tree Commission.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)



§ 98.04  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall plant, remove, or trim, other than routine
trimming, or in any way affect the general health or structure of a parkway
tree without first obtaining a permit.  There is no charge for this
permit.  Violation of the terms of a permit, or this chapter shall be
grounds for suspension or revocation of such permit, in addition to any
penalty provided in this chapter.  Upon completion of the work the holder of
the permit shall restore the parkway or median to a condition similar to that
which existed prior to the work.



   (B)   Any person desiring a permit to plant, remove, or trim, other
than routine trimming, any tree in any parkway shall submit a written
application to the City of Clinton setting forth:



      (1)   A drawing of the area showing pavement, streets,
sidewalks, curbs and gutters with a definite indicated scale.



      (2)   The number, location, and variety of trees to be
planted, trimmed, other than routine trimming, or removed.



      (3)   The number, location, and variety of trees already
existing in the area.



      (4)   Such other information as the City of Clinton shall find
reasonably necessary to make a fair determination of whether a permit should
be issued.



   (C)   The City of Clinton shall issue a permit under this section
provided the application meets the requirements of §98.05 and the intended
planting does not create a nuisance, hazard, or misuse of city property. A
permit issued hereunder shall expire 60 days from the date of issuance.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.05  ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE.



   (A)   Spacing. All trees planted in the parkway shall be planted
midway between the outer line of the curb and sidewalk.  In the event a curb
line is not established, trees shall be planted on a line established by the
authorized representative of the City of Clinton.



   (B)   Size. All trees planted on the parkway shall be of sufficient
size to warrant satisfactory results and stand abuse common to street
trees.  Trees to be planted will be selected from the master tree list
established by Council resolution and subject to the restrictions therein.



   (C)   Grade. Unless otherwise allowed for substantial reasons, all
standard-sized trees shall have comparatively straight trunks, well developed
leaders and top and root characteristics of the species or variety showing
evidence of proper nursery pruning.  At the time of planting all trees must
be free of insects, disease, mechanical injuries and other objectionable
features.  To compensate for any serious loss of roots the top of the tree
should be reduced by thinning or cutting back as determined by the growth
characteristics of the tree species.  The leader shall not be cut off in
such trimming.



   (D)   Planting. Trees shall not be planted on the parkway if it is
less than five feet in width or contains less than 60 square feet of exposed
soil surface.  Trees shall not be planted closer than 20 feet to the street
intersections (property lines extended) and ten feet to driveways.



   (E)   Method of support. Trees may be guyed or supported in an
upright position according to accepted arboricultural practices.  The guys
or supports shall be fastened in such a way that they will not girdle or
cause serious injury to the trees or endanger public safety.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.06  DUTY TO TRIM TREES.



   The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep the trees in or
overhanging the street trimmed so that all branches will be at least 13 feet
above the surface of the street and nine feet above the sidewalks.  If the
abutting property owner fails to trim the trees, the city may serve notice on
the abutting property owner requiring that such action be taken within five
days.  If such action is not taken within that time, the city may perform
the required action and assess the costs against the abutting property for
collection in the same manner as a property tax.  Except as allowed in this
section, it is unlawful for any person to trim or cut any tree in a street or
public place without first obtaining authorization from the city.  The
Building and Neighborhood Services Official or his or her designee shall have
the power to enforce this section.



(Iowa Code §§ 364.12(2)(c), 364.12(2)(d), 364.12(2)(e), 364.12(3)(b)) 
(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.07  DISEASE CONTROL.



   Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub which may harbor serious
insects or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to be a
nuisance.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)



§ 98.08  INSPECTION AND REMOVAL.



   The Department of Public Works or their designee, shall inspect or
cause to be inspected any trees or shrubs in the city reported or suspected
to be dead, diseased, or damaged, and such trees and shrubs shall be subject
to the following:



   (A)   City property. If it is determined that any such condition
exists on public property, including the strip between the curb and the lot
line of private property, the Council may cause such condition to be
corrected by treatment or removal.  The Council may also order the removal
of any trees in the streets of the city which interfere with the making of
improvements or with travel thereon.  Damaged or dying parkway trees may be
removed by the city.



   (B)   Private property. If it is determined with reasonable
certainty that any such condition exists on private property and that danger
to other trees or to adjoining property or passing motorists or pedestrians
is imminent, the Council shall notify by certified mail the owner, occupant,
or person in charge of such property to correct such condition by treatment
or removal within 14 days of said notification.  If such owner, occupant, or
person in charge of said property fails to comply within 14 days of receipt
of notice, the Council may cause the condition to be corrected and the costs
assessed against the property.



(Iowa Code §§364.12(3)(b), 364.12(3)(h))  (Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010) 
Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.09  REMOVAL OF STUMPS.



   All stumps of street trees shall be removed to at least six inches
below the surface of the ground.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.10  ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF TREES.



   No person shall:



   (A)   Break, tear, paint, deface, damage, cut, carve, transplant, or
injure the bark of street trees.



   (B)   Remove any healthy street tree without approval of the Tree
Commission.



   (C)   Secure, hang, fasten or attach any rope, wire, sign, nails,
screws, staples or other contrivance to any street tree.  The hanging of
ornamental lights shall be exempt from this division (C) provided that said
lights are placed in such a way as to not harm or damage the tree and are
removed within 90 days of the end of the specific holiday or event for which
they were placed.



   (D)   Dig in or otherwise disturb, injure or impair the root system
of street trees.



   (E)   Cause or permit any wire charged with electricity to come in
contact with street trees or plants or allow any gaseous liquid or solid
substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them.  This
section shall not apply to the salting or de-icing of streets by the Public
Works Department for the purpose of melting snow and ice.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 98.10



§ 98.11  ARBORIST BOND.



   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of trimming,
pruning, spraying or otherwise treating trees or shrubs within the city
without first filing evidence of possession of liability insurance
indemnifying the city or any person injured or damaged resulting from the
pursuit of such endeavor as herein described.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.12  EMERGENCIES.



   The city shall declare a state of emergency in the event of storm,
disaster, tree disease, or other cause and may order the removal by the
property owner of trees, fallen limbs, or debris.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)



§ 98.13  RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS.



   Whenever a principal structure is constructed, reconstructed or
structurally altered by one or more additions, the total of which increases
the floor area by more than 10%, the residential development shall have a
minimum of four trees per lot or a ratio of one tree per 5,000 square feet of
lot size per lot, whichever is greater.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.14  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENTS.



   Whenever a principal structure is constructed, reconstructed or
structurally altered by one or more additions, the total of which increases
the floor area by more than 10%, the commercial or industrial developments
shall include a minimum of four trees per lot or a ratio of one tree per
10,000 square feet of lot size per lot, whichever is greater.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.15  TREE PLANTING REQUIRED.



   (A)   All plantings required by this section must be installed prior
to receiving a certificate of occupancy unless they cannot be installed at
the time due to seasonal conditions.  In the event the trees cannot be
installed, the Building Official may issue a temporary certificate of
occupancy and grant a delay of installation until the seasonal calendar dates
of June 1 or November 1, whichever occurs first.  If the property owner
fails to plant the trees as required by this section a civil citation may
issue.



   (B)   Tree size shall be a minimum one and one-fourth inches caliper
and a minimum of four feet tall.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.16  TREE PRESERVATION REQUIRED.



   With respect to existing trees in new developments, all trees on the
site shall remain unless they require removal for the placement of streets,
buildings, utilities, drainage or public recreational purposes.  Trees over
six inches in diameter that are to remain shall be marked with a red band and
be protected with snow fences or other suitable enclosure prior to excavation.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 98.99



§ 98.17  REPLACEMENT OR REMOVAL OF DAMAGED TREE.



   If as a result of the violation of any provision of this chapter, the
injury, mutilation or death of a public tree is caused, the costs of repair,
removal or replacement of such tree shall be borne by the party in violation.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)



§ 98.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who is responsible for the violation of the provisions of
this chapter shall be issued a civil citation.  Each violation is committed
is a separate offence, and shall be punishable as such.  A violation of this
chapter shall be fined $100 plus applicable court costs.



(Ord. 2437, passed 12-14-2010)



CHAPTER 99:  JUNKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



Abandoned Vehicles



   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Authority to take possession of abandoned vehicles



   99.03   Notice by mail



   99.04   Notification in newspaper



   99.05   Extension of time



   99.06   Fees for impoundment



   99.07   Disposal of abandoned vehicles



   99.08   Disposal of totally inoperable vehicles



   99.09   Proceeds from sales



   99.10   Duties of demolisher



 



   99.99   Penalty



ABANDONED VEHICLES



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE.  Any of the following:



      (1)   A vehicle that has been left unattended on public
property for more than 24 hours and lacks current registration plates or two
or more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable;



      (2)   A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property
for more than 24 hours;



      (3)   A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on
private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the
property for more than 24 hours;



      (4)   A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a
police authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten days.
However, a police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the
ten-day period by commencing the notification process;



      (5)   Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police
authority to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic; and/or



      (6)   A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to the Iowa
Code § 321J.4B by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the
impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for
carrying out the impoundment order.



(Iowa Code § 321.89(1)(b))



   DEMOLISHER.  Any city or public agency organized for the disposal of
solid waste, or any person whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk,
processed scrap or scrap metal or otherwise to wreck or dismantle vehicles.



   POLICE AUTHORITY.  The Iowa state patrol or any law enforcement agency
of a county or city.



(Iowa Code § 321.89(1)(a))



(1999 Code, § 80.01)



§ 99.02  AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   A police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the
request of any other authority having the duties of control of highways or
traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned vehicle on public property and
may take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private property. A police
authority taking into custody an abandoned vehicle which has been determined
to create a traffic hazard shall report the reasons constituting the hazard
in writing to the appropriate authority having duties of control of the
highway. The police authority may employ its own personnel, equipment and
facilities or hire a private entity, equipment and facilities for the purpose
of removing, preserving, storing or disposing of abandoned vehicles. If a
police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned vehicles,
the police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and
addresses of the registered owners, all lienholders of record and any other
known claimant to the vehicle or the personal property found in the vehicle.



(Iowa Code § 321.89(2))  (1999 Code, § 80.02)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.03  NOTICE BY MAIL.



   The police authority or private entity which takes into custody an
abandoned vehicle shall notify, within 20 days, by certified mail, the last
known registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record and any
other known claimant to the vehicle or to personal property found in the
vehicle, addressed to their last known addresses of record, that the
abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be deemed given
when mailed. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and serial
number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the vehicle,
set forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held and
inform the persons receiving the notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle
and personal property within ten days after the effective date of the notice
upon payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from
placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of the notice.
The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lienholders or
claimants to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders
and claimants of all right, title, claim and interest in the vehicle or
personal property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal
property is deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or
disposal of the vehicle to a demolisher and to disposal of the personal
property by sale or destruction. The notice shall state that any person
claiming rightful possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes
the planned disposition of the vehicle or property by the police authority or
private entity or of the assessment of fees and charges provided by this
section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority to
contest those matters. If the persons receiving the notice do not ask for a
hearing or exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property
within the ten-day reclaiming period, the owner, lienholders or claimants
shall no longer have any right, title, claim or interest in or to the vehicle
or the personal property. A court in any case in law or equity shall not
recognize any right, title, claim or interest of the owner, lienholders or
claimants after the expiration of the ten-day reclaiming period.



(Iowa Code § 321.89(3)(a))  (1999 Code, § 80.03)



§ 99.04  NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER.



   If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, or
if the registration contains no address for the owner, or if it is impossible
to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all
lienholders, notice by one publication in one newspaper of general
circulation in the area where the vehicle was abandoned shall be sufficient
to meet all requirements of notice under § 99.03. The published notice may
contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles and personal property but
shall be published within the same time requirements and contain the same
information as prescribed for mailed notice in § 99.03.



(Iowa Code § 321.89(3)(b))  (1999 Code, § 80.04)



§ 99.05  EXTENSION OF TIME.



   The owner, lienholders or claimants may, by written request delivered
to the police authority or private entity prior to the expiration of the
ten-day reclaiming period, obtain an additional five days within which the
motor vehicle or personal property may be reclaimed.



(Iowa Code § 321.89(3)(c))  (1999 Code, § 80.05)



§ 99.06  FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.



   The owner or lienholder shall pay impounding fees in an amount set by
resolution of the Council plus towing charges if stored by the city, or
towing and storage fees, if stored in a public garage, whereupon the vehicle
shall be released. The amount of towing charges, and the rate of storage
charges by privately owned garages, shall be established by resolution of the
Council.



(Iowa Code § 321.89(3)(a))  (1999 Code, § 80.06)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.07  DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES.



   If an abandoned vehicle has not been reclaimed as provided herein, the
police authority or private entity shall make a determination as to whether
or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall
dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with state law.



(Iowa Code § 321.89(4))  (1999 Code, § 80.07)



§ 99.08  DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES.



   The city or any person upon whose property or in whose possession is
found any abandoned motor vehicle, or any person being the owner of a motor
vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed, may dispose of
the motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without
notification procedures, if the motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
The police authority shall give the applicant a certificate of authority. The
applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for a junking certificate
and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate
of title.



(Iowa Code § 321.90(2)(e))  (1999 Code, § 80.08)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.09  PROCEEDS FROM SALES.



   Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall be applied to the
expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing and notification
required, in accordance with state law. Any balance shall be held for the
owner of the motor vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then shall
be deposited in the State Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle
fails to realize the amount necessary to meet costs the police authority
shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of Transportation.



(Iowa Code § 321.89(4))  (1999 Code, § 80.09)



§ 99.10  DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER.



   Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires an abandoned motor
vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or otherwise demolish
the motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle or
demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate
issued for the vehicle.



(Iowa Code § 321.90(3)(a))  (1999 Code, § 80.10)  Penalty, see § 99.99



§ 99.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of § 10.99.



CHAPTER 100:  GRAFFITI



Section



   100.01   Definitions



   100.02   Graffiti prohibited



   100.03   Graffiti declared a nuisance



   100.04   Implements of graffiti; restrictions



 



   100.99   Penalty



§ 100.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GRAFFITI.  Any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word,
diagram, sketch, picture or letter placed upon the real or personal property
of an owner without the owner’s express consent; provided, however, consent
of the owner shall not be an exception where the graffiti is visible from
public property or right-of-way and tends to incite violence or disorderly
conduct or is obscene under state law. After a prima facie showing that an
inscription or marking is graffiti, the burden of proving the owner’s
express consent is upon the defendant.



   HEARING OFFICER.  The City Administrator or his or her designee.



   IMPLEMENT OF GRAFFITI.  A spray paint container, paint, ink, marking
pens containing non-water-soluble fluid, brushes or other  materials used
for painting, marking, scratching or etching in a non-temporary way.



   MINOR.  Any person under the age of 18 years.



(Ord. 2376, passed 6-24-2008)



§ 100.02  GRAFFITI PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon the
real or personal property of another.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to have graffiti, visible
from public property or right-of-way, upon his or her real or personal
property for more than a reasonable time period not to exceed ten days.



(Ord. 2376, passed 6-24-2008)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.03  GRAFFITI DECLARED A NUISANCE.



   Graffiti, visible from public property or right-of-way, is hereby
declared a nuisance and must be removed by the property owner within a
reasonable time period not to exceed ten days after notification by the city.
The notice shall be delivered personally or telephonically to the property
owner followed by written notice through the regular U.S. mail. The property
owner shall be informed in the notice as to the deadline by which he or she
must act. If the property owner wishes to appeal the notice, he or she may do
so by filing a written notice of appeal with the neighborhood enhancement
office of the city and paying an appeal fee of $25 within ten days of the
date of the notice. The appeal shall be heard by the hearing officer. Upon
hearing, the hearing officer shall make a determination if graffiti is
present. If graffiti is found to be present, the hearing officer shall
specify a time by which the graffiti shall be removed. If the graffiti
remains after the deadline provided by the initial notice, or in the case of
an appeal the deadline specified by the hearing officer, the city may remove
the graffiti and assess the cost of abatement against the property.



(Ord. 2376, passed 6-24-2008)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.04  IMPLEMENTS OF GRAFFITI; RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any spray paint in
cans larger than three fluid ounces to a minor.



   (B)   No minor shall, at the time of purchase of any spray paint
container, furnish fraudulent evidence of majority.



   (C)   No minor shall possess a spray paint container in cans larger
than three fluid ounces on any private property, except with the express
permission of the lawful owner or manager of the private property.



   (D)   No minor shall possess an implement of graffiti upon public
property after 9:00 p.m. when not in the company of his or her parent or
legal guardian.



   (E)   No person shall, absent express permission of the property
owner, possess an implement of graffiti in any public building, or upon any
public property or private property with the intent to use the same to deface
the building or any property thereon.



   (F)   Any person whose business includes the sale of any spray paint
container shall have posted in a conspicuous place a sign which clearly
states that:



      It is unlawful to sell spray paint in cans larger than three
fluid ounces to any person under the age of 18 years.



(Ord. 2376, passed 6-24-2008)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a municipal
infraction. A municipal infraction violation under this chapter shall be
punished by a fine up to the maximum amount allowed under state law and/or
any other equitable relief deemed just by the court.



(Ord. 2376, passed 6-24-2008; Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)



CHAPTER 101:  DEER MANAGEMENT



Section



   101.01   Purpose



   101.02   Deer management program



   101.03   Deer management zone



§ 101.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter in the code of ordinances is to reduce or
stabilize an urban deer population within the city limits.



(Ord. 2330, passed 8-8-2006)



§ 101.02  DEER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.



   Pursuant to Iowa Code § 461C.8, the city adopts regulations
authorizing trained, volunteer hunters to hunt deer with a bow and arrow
within the municipality, without charge, for the purpose of urban deer
control. The City Deer Management Committee has determined that deer
management within the corporate limits is a necessary duty of the city to
ensure that the health of the herd is maintained, that plant and animal life
which make up the ecosystems of the natural areas of the city are not
irreparably damaged or destroyed, and to ensure the safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the city and prevent major damage to their property by deer.
The Committee has developed a deer management program, which is attached
hereto, and hereby adopted in full and made a part hereof by reference. A
copy of the program is on file in the office of the City Clerk.



(Ord. 2330, passed 8-8-2006; Ord. 2358, passed 8-28-2007; Ord. 2386, passed
9-9-2008; Ord. 2407, passed 9-8-2009)



§ 101.03  DEER MANAGEMENT ZONE.



   (A)   The City of Clinton Deer Management Committee has determined
that the deer management zone is defined as the area inside the following
boundaries:



      Starting at the intersection of U.S. Highway 30 and Mill Creek
Parkway. Proceeding north on Mill Creek Parkway to Sixteenth Street North
West. North on Sixteenth Street North West to Main Avenue. East on Main
Avenue to West Stockwell Lane.



      North on West Stockwell Lane, then East on North Stockwell Lane
to U.S. Highway 67. North on U.S. Highway 67 to Deer Creek Road. East on East
Deer Creek Road to the Mississippi River. Proceeding south along the
riverbank to Thirty-Sixth Avenue North. West on Thirty-Sixth Avenue North to
North Third Street. South on North Third Street to Seventeenth Avenue North.
West on Seventeenth Avenue North to North Fourth Street. South on North
Fourth Street to Seventh Avenue North. West on Seventh Avenue North then
proceeding along Bluff Boulevard to South Fourteenth Street. South on South
Fourteenth Street to U.S. Highway 30. Then west on U.S. Highway 30 to the
intersection of Mill Creek Parkway.



   (B)   The described area is represented by a map appended to
Ordinance 2330, on file in the office of the City Clerk, and made a part
hereof by reference.



(Ord. 2330, passed 8-8-2006; Ord. 2358, passed 8-28-2007)



CHAPTER 102:  WELLS



Section



   102.01   Wells; permit required



   102.02   Permit issuance



   102.03   Appeal of decision



 



   102.99   Penalty



§ 102.01  WELLS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall drill or construct a well for purposes other
than a public water supply system after May 1, 2006 or own or use a well for
purposes other than a public water supply system drilled or constructed after
May 1, 2006, within the following described area of the city, unless a permit
has been issued for the well by the city:



      Commencing at the intersection of U.S. Highway 30 and Mill Creek
Parkway, thence extending along centerline of rights-of-way north on the Mill
Creek Parkway to Sixteenth Street northwest, thence north on Sixteenth Street
northwest to Main Avenue, thence east on Main Avenue to the intersection of
Eighth Street northwest, thence north on Eighth Street northwest extended
northerly to North Stockwell Lane, then east on North Stockwell Lane to Eagle
Point Park, thence east through Eagle Point Park to the east city limits,
thence south on the east city limits along the Mississippi River to the north
line of Beaver Slough, then southwesterly along the northerly line of Beaver
Slough to the south city limits, thence westerly on the south city limits to
South Thirtieth Street, thence north on South Thirtieth Street to the
intersection of U.S. Highway 30 and Mill Creek Parkway.



   (B)   A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM is defined herein as defined in
the Iowa Code § 455B.171.



(Ord. 2265, passed 4-22-2003; Ord. 2300, passed 8-23-2005; Ord. 2324, passed
5-23-2006)  Penalty, see § 102.99



§ 102.02  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   (1)   The permit application for construction and use of a
well for purposes other than a public water supply system shall be made with
the office of the City Engineer on forms provided by the city. The permit
application shall include attachments that provide the City Engineer’s
office with drawings and specifications for any proposed work and data
concerning the soil and groundwater contamination in the particularly
described application site, availability of public water source, estimated
proposed flow requirements and distances from existing wells.



      (2)   For demand requirements exceeding 100 gallons per
minute, the permit application shall also include:



         (a)   A hydrogeological study including a draw down
analysis and an analysis of the impact of the proposed wells on any public
water supply system in terms of quantity; and



         (b)   A water quality monitoring plan.



      (3)   An application fee of $50 shall accompany the
application.



   (B)   In determining whether a permit should be issued or not, the
City Engineer shall consider the availability of public water to serve the
facility, the estimated amount of water to be used, the impact of the
proposed wells on the public water supply system, in terms of both quantity
and quality, and any other available information provided by the applicant.
The City Engineer shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources and
the operator of the public water supply system of any application. A permit
for the well from the County Sanitarian must also be obtained after the
issuance of a city permit. The City Engineer shall make a recommendation to
the City Council to either grant or deny the permit within 30 days of
receiving the completed application. The City Engineer shall send
notification to the applicant regarding what the recommendation is and the
date and time the City Council is scheduled to decide whether to issue a
permit or not no less than ten days before the City Council is scheduled to
make the decision. The City Council shall either grant or deny the permit at
the meeting.



   (C)   It is recognized that the quantity and quality of the
community’s drinking water could be impacted by the operation of wells
permitted and constructed under this chapter. Therefore, certain monitoring,
testing and reporting is required as a condition of the permit for any
permittee with demand requirements exceeding 100 gallons per minute. The
permittee is required to monitor water levels at permittee’s well site(s)
and conduct daily monitoring submitted to the city on a quarterly basis
including pumping rate, monthly withdrawal amounts, static levels and draw
down levels. The permittee also will be required to follow the water quality
monitoring plan submitted with the permit application, subject to
modifications agreed to during the application review process. In the event
the public water supply experiences detrimental water quality or quantity
changes, the City Administrator and City Engineer may call a meeting with
well operators in the city, whether permitted or not, for the purpose of
discussing the potential causes of detrimental changes and to identify
possible solutions. If in the opinion of the City Engineer, a permit should
be revoked to help protect the quality or quantity of the public water
supply, the City Engineer shall make the recommendation to the City Council.
The City Engineer shall send notification to the permittee regarding the
reasons for the recommendation to revoke and the date and time the City
Council is scheduled to decide whether to revoke the permit no less than ten
days before the City Council is scheduled to make the decision. The City
Council shall vote on the recommendation at the next practicable City Council
meeting. This chapter does not limit in any way, the legal remedies the city
may pursue in the event harm is caused to the public water supply.



(Ord. 2300, passed 8-23-2005; Ord. 2324, passed 5-23-2006)  Penalty, see §
102.99



§ 102.03  APPEAL OF DECISION.



   If a permit application is denied, the applicant may appeal the City
Engineer’s decision to the City Council. The appeal shall be made by
written notice delivered to the City Clerk within 30 days from the date of
the City Engineer’s denial. The City Council shall schedule a hearing on
the appeal within 30 days from the date of the appeal with notice of the
hearing to the applicant. If there is no appeal, the decision of the City
Engineer is final. Where appeal is taken, the decision of the City Council is
final.



(Ord. 2300, passed 8-23-2005)



§ 102.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
municipal infraction.



(Ord. 2300, passed 8-23-2005)



CHAPTER 103:  OPEN BURNING



Section



   103.01   Purpose



   103.02   Definitions



   103.03   Prohibitions



   103.04   Exemptions



   103.05   Permits



   103.06   General conditions for open burning



   103.07   Limitations



   103.08   Authority to extinguish



   103.09   Collection of burn barrels



 



   103.99   Penalty



§ 103.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to set and establish regulations for 
burning within the City of Clinton, Iowa and to bring the ordinances of the
City of Clinton into conformity with the Iowa Administrative Code and with
the International Fire Code as previously adopted.



(Ord. 2429, passed 10-26-2010)



§ 103.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BACKYARD BURNING.  The disposal of residential waste by open burning
on the premises of the property where such waste is generated.



   BURN BARREL.  Any barrel, drum, trash container, approved or
non-approved container specifically or not specifically designed to house a
fire.  Use of a BURN BARREL for any type of burning, cooking or recreational
fires shall be prohibited.



   CLEAN DRY WOOD.  Tree limbs, bark, or branches that have been allowed
to dry to a point where it is easily combustible without creating undue
amounts of smoke plus other untreated wood products free of glue, paint,
varnish, stain, and preservatives.



   COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL.  Any material that will take fire and burn
including, rubbish, trash, or discarded materials from commercial,
industrial, domestic or agricultural operations or other normal community
activities.  COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL for the purpose of this chapter shall not
include yard wastes.



   DISASTER RUBBISH. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape
waste, for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an
officially declared emergency condition exists.



   GARBAGE.  All solid and semisolid putrescible and nonputrescible
animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking,
storing, and serving of food or of material intended for use as food, but
excluding recognized industrial byproducts.



   LANDSCAPE WASTE.  Any organic, vegetable or plant wastes except
garbage.  The term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush,
weeds, leaves, grass, shrubbery and yard trimmings.



   OPEN BURNING.  The burning of materials wherein products of combustion
are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or
chimney from an enclosed chamber.  OPEN BURNING does not include road
flares, smudgepots and similar devices associated with safety or occupational
uses typically considered open flames.  For the purposes of this definition,
a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion
occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide
combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gases are open.



   OUTDOOR COOKING FIRES.  The burning of materials where fuel being
burned is contained in manufactured outdoor fireplaces or grills used for
food preparation and in accordance with this chapter. 



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, trust, or any
other organized group.



   RECREATIONAL FIRES.  An outdoor fire burning only clean dry untreated
lumber, dry seasoned wood, or charcoal where the fuel being burned is
contained within a fire ring, outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque
pit, commercial fire unit or other approved container, and has a total fuel
area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height for
pleasure, warmth or similar purpose.  The burning of leaves, grass, rubbish,
garbage, tires, trade waste or locally recyclable goods or plastics is not
allowed.



   REFUSE.  Garbage, rubbish and all other putrescible and nonputrescible
wastes, except sewage and water-carried trade wastes.



   RELIGIOUS AND CEREMONIAL FIRES.  Open burning of materials on the
ground and not in a manufactured container for religious, ceremonial, or
similar purposes and in accordance with this chapter.



   RESIDENTIAL WASTE.  Waste generated on the premises as a result of
residential activities.  The term includes landscape waste grown on the
premises or deposited thereon by the elements, but excludes garbage, tires,
trade waste, and any locally recyclable goods or plastics.



   RUBBISH.  All waste materials of nonputrescible nature.



   TRADE WASTE.  Any refuse resulting from the prosecution of any trade,
business, industry, commercial venture (including farming and ranching), or
utility or service activity, and any governmental or institutional activity,
whether or not for profit.



   TRAINING FIRE.  Fires set for the purpose of bona fide instruction and
training of public and industrial employees in the methods of fire fighting.



   VARIANCE.  A temporary waiver from the rules or standards governing
the quality, nature, duration or extent of emissions granted by the
Commission for a specified period of time.



(Ord. 2429, passed 10-26-2010)



§ 103.03  PROHIBITIONS.



   No person shall allow, cause, or permit open burning of combustible
materials, residential waste, trade waste, rubbish, disaster rubbish, refuse,
or garbage, except as provided in the exemptions contained in this chapter.



(Ord. 2429, passed 10-26-2010)  Penalty, see § 103.99



§ 103.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following open burning of combustible materials and yard wastes
shall be permitted:



   (A)   Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet of a
structure or combustible material and conditions which could cause a fire to
spread within 25 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
Clearance from structures and other combustible material may be reduced to 15
feet when the recreational fire is contained in a commercial outdoor fire
unit such as a Chiminea and used in conjunction with a non-combustible base
and fire screen, or to a distance as established by commercial manufacturers'
minimum clearance recommendations.  The manufacturer’s safe operating
recommendations shall be available to the Clinton Police Department, Clinton
Fire Department, Building and Neighborhood Services and Clinton Public Works
in the event minimum clearances are in question. Fuel shall be limited to
clean dry untreated lumber, dry seasoned logs, or charcoal.  The times for
allowable recreational burning shall be established as from 10:00 a.m. to
2:00 a.m.



   (B)   Religious or ceremonial fires shall be allowed only after the
Fire Department is notified and a permit is obtained.  Fuel shall be limited
to clean dry untreated lumber, dry seasoned logs, or charcoal.  The size and
location of these fires may be modified with the approval of the Fire Chief
or his or her designee.  The time period of the religious or ceremonial fire
shall be approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designee and shall be
clearly stated on the permit.



   (C)   Outdoor cooking fires shall be allowed.  Charcoal burners and
other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible
balconies or within ten feet of combustible construction, unless the
building, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler system
or the dwelling is a one- or two-family dwelling.  In all cases outdoor
cooking fires shall be conducted within safe distances from buildings,
structures and combustible materials and per the manufacturer’s minimum
clearance recommendations.  The manufacturer’s safe operating
recommendations shall be available to the Clinton Police Department, Clinton
Fire Department, Building and Neighborhood Services and Clinton Public Works
in the event minimum clearances are determined to be unsafe. Fuel shall be
limited to clean dry untreated lumber, dry seasoned wood, propane, natural
gas or charcoal.  No permit shall be required for outdoor cooking fires.



   (D)   Training fires shall be allowed only after the Clinton Fire
Department is notified and a permit is obtained.  Structure fires set for
the purpose of bona fide training by Fire Department personnel in
firefighting methods must comply with all applicable sections of the Iowa
Administrative Code Chapter 23 Emissions Standards For Contaminants-Open
Burning.  All asphalt roofing and asbestos containing materials shall be
removed prior to the training fire.  The time period for the training fire
shall be approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designee and shall be
clearly stated in the permit.



   (E)   The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste, for
the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially
declared emergency condition exists.  Burning of any structures or
demolished structures shall be conducted in accordance with 40 CFR Section
61.145 as amended through January 16, 1991, which is the “Standard for
Demolition and Renovation” of the asbestos National Emission Standard for
Hazardous Air Pollutants.  The time period for the disaster rubbish fire
shall be approved by the Fire Chief or his or her designee.



   (F)   Residential waste fires and/or open burning shall only be
allowed at dwellings of four-family units or less and shall only be permitted
on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday between 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., April 1
through May 15 and October 1 through November 15 .  The April 1 through May
15 and October 1 through November 15 restriction dates are stricken until the
City of Clinton establishes automated landscape waste removal.  The Fire
Chief, with approval of the City Administrator, may alter burn dates in the
event of an early and/or late spring and/or fall season.  In the event that
the City of Clinton establishes an automated collection system for the
collection of landscape waste, this division (F) shall automatically be
repealed and eliminated.  Council shall memorialize said date of repeal by
resolution.  The repeal of this division shall not apply to agricultural
zoned land or to lots of one acre or more in size.



   (G)   Prescription burns of native grasses shall be allowed only
after the Clinton Fire Department is notified and a permit obtained.  The
time period for the prescription burn shall be approved by the Fire Chief or
his or her designee and shall be clearly stated on the permit.  Prior to
commencement of prescription burn, the property owner shall notify the proper
authorities and neighboring property owners to ensure that they are aware of
the prescription burn of native grasses.



   (H)   Open burning or flaring of waste gases shall be allowed
provided such open burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with the
applicable provisions of the Iowa Administrative Code.



   (I)   Open burning of paper or plastic pesticide containers and seed
corn bags resulting from farming activities occurring on the premises may be
burned when the burn is conducted a minimum of 500 linear feet from the
nearest property line in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
Iowa Administrative Code.



   (J)   Variances from rules. Any person wishing to conduct open
burning of materials not exempted, of a burn pile of a dimension larger than
three feet in diameter and two feet in height or time of burning shall make
written application delivered to the City Administrator for variance to allow
burning of materials.  Variance may be granted by the City Administrator
only upon a finding of special or emergency circumstances.  If variance is
granted, a permit shall be issued specifying the time and manner in which the
burning shall be allowed.



(Ord. 2429, passed 10-26-2010)



§ 103.05  PERMITS.



   (A)   Applications for burn permits shall be available at the
Clinton Fire Department.  Copies of all permits shall be provided to the
Police Department and the Building and Neighborhood Services Department. 
Three types of permits shall be available:



      (1)   Permits are authorized for religious and ceremonial
fires.



      (2)   Permits are authorized for training fires.



      (3)   Permits are authorized for prescription burns of native
grasses.



   (B)   The fees for permits shall be established by resolution of the
City Council. 



   (C)   Appeal from administrative denial of a burn permit shall be to
the City Council.



(Ord. 2429, passed 10-26-2010)



§ 103.06  GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   Hazardous conditions or nuisance.  The Fire Chief, county or
state may prohibit any or all open burning when atmospheric conditions or
local circumstances make such fires hazardous or a nuisance.



   (B)   Attendance of open fires.  Open fires, open burning, bonfires
or recreational fires shall be constantly attended by an adult person until
such fire is extinguished.  A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher with
a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire extinguishing equipment,
such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be
available for immediate utilization.



   (C)   Authority to investigate.  The city shall have authority to
enter onto private property to investigate and determine if violations of
this chapter exist, or to extinguish fires as provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 2429, passed 10-26-2010)  Penalty, see § 103.99



§ 103.07  LIMITATIONS.



   Open burning of materials within the city shall be limited as follows:



   (A)   Open burning of materials shall not cause a nuisance as
defined in Iowa Code Chapter 455B.



   (B)   Open burning of materials shall not cause a nuisance as
defined at Chapter 3 Section 307 Open Burning and Recreational Fires of the
2006 edition of the International Fire Code as adopted by the City of
Clinton, Iowa.



   (C)   Open burning that will be offensive or objectionable due to
smoke or odor emissions when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances
make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited.  No fire may be kindled when
wind speed exceeds 15 miles per hour.



   (D)   Where and when required by federal, state or local law or
regulations, open burning shall only be permitted with prior approval from
the federal, state or local air and water quality management authority,
provided that all conditions specified in the authorization are followed.



   (E)   Open burning shall not be conducted within 50 feet of any
structure or other combustible material.  Conditions which could cause the
fire to spread to within 50 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to
ignition.  Clearance from structures and other combustible material may be
reduced to not less than 25 feet when the pile size is three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height. 



   (F)   The Fire Chief or his or her designee is authorized to require
that open fires be immediately discontinued if determined that smoke
emissions are offensive to occupants of surrounding property or if the open
burning is determined to constitute a hazardous condition.



   (G)   Open burning permits may be denied or revoked based on a
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 2429, passed 10-26-2010)  Penalty, see § 103.99



§ 103.08  AUTHORITY TO EXTINGUISH.



   The City of Clinton through its Public Works Department, Fire
Department or Police Department is authorized to prohibit or immediately
extinguish any open burning occurring within the city that is deemed by city
officials to violate prohibitions of this chapter or to constitute an
emergency or a danger to the safety of persons or property within the city.



(Ord. 2429, passed 10-26-2010)



§ 103.09  COLLECTION OF BURN BARRELS.



   Burn barrels shall be collected free of charge from City of Clinton
residences at the time of the 2010 fall large item pickup and at the 2011
spring large item pickup.



(Ord. 2429, passed 10-26-2010)



§ 103.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of this chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction
subjecting violators to appropriate civil penalties.



(Ord. 2429, passed 10-26-2010; Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)



CHAPTER 104:  REGISTRATION OF ABANDONED BUILDINGS



Section



   104.01   Definitions



   104.02   Requirement to register abandoned building



   104.03   Registration



   104.04   Fee for registration



   104.05   Terms of registration



   104.06   Inspections



   104.07   Renewal of registration



   104.08   Penalty for failure to register and/or renew registration



   104.09   Revocation; reinstatement measures



   104.10   Relationship of registration to other codes



§ 104.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, certain terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as
specified in the building code or the housing code. Where terms are not
defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context
in which they are used. Unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
context clearly indicates a different intent, the following terms shall, for
the purpose of this chapter, have the following meanings.



   ABANDONED BUILDING.



      (1)   Any building or portion thereof which meets the criteria
set forth in Iowa Code § 657A.10A.



      (2)   Mere vacancy alone shall not cause a building to be
considered abandoned. However, a “vacant building” which meets the
definition herein will be considered “abandoned” upon notice and due
process to the owner stating that the building is vacant and that, in
addition to being vacant, possesses one or more of the additional criteria
contained in the definition herein of “vacant building” or one or more of
the criteria listed in Iowa Code § 657A.10A. Owners shall be afforded 30
days to correct any identified criteria prior to the building being added to
the abandoned building list. Further, vacant buildings shall be removed from
the abandoned building list upon notice from the owner, confirmed by the
Building and Neighborhood Services Department, that the additional criteria
have been corrected.



   BUILDING CODE. The International Residential Code promulgated by the
International Code Council, as adopted by the city.



   BUILDING AND NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES DIVISION. Under the Clinton Fire
Department, the division that enforces and inspects all adopted building and
housing codes as adopted by the city.



   DANGEROUS BUILDING. Any building or structure which meets the
definition of this term specified in § 150.02.



   FIRE CODE. International Fire Code, as adopted by the city.



   HOUSING CODE. The city residential housing code, as adopted by the city.



   NUISANCE. Each of the following shall be defined as a NUISANCE:



      (1)   Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity
jurisprudence.



      (2)   Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to
persons whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an
unoccupied lot.



      (3)   Whatever is dangerous to human life or is a menace to
the public health, welfare or safety as determined by the City Manager.



      (4)   A building that is structurally unsafe, unsanitary or
not provided with adequate safe egress, or that constitutes a fire hazard, or
otherwise constitutes a hazard by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation or obsolescence or abandonment.



      (5)   Uncleanliness to the risk of unhealthiness, as
determined by the Building and Neighborhood Services Division.



      (6)   Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or
detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the Building and
Neighborhood Services Division.



      (7)   Any condition falling under the definition set forth in
§ 90.01.



   VACANT BUILDING. Any building or portion thereof which has been
unoccupied for a continuous period of time over 12 months and which meets one
or more of the following criteria:



      (1)   Unsecured;



      (2)   Secured by means other than those used in the design of
the building, or in a manner that is unsafe, ineffective in keeping
unauthorized persons from gaining entry;



      (3)   Declared a “dangerous building” as defined in this
section, and/or having had a fire or other such catastrophe that requires
rehabilitation before occupancy is allowed;



      (4)   Unfit for occupancy as determined by the Building and
Neighborhood Services Division;



      (5)   Noncompliant with the current property management codes
adopted by the city;



      (6)   Has housing, building, fire, health or zoning code
violations;



      (7)   Open to vagrants, vandals, children or the unwary; or



      (8)   Not receiving service by public utilities.



(Ord. 2545, passed 10-25-2016)



§ 104.02  REQUIREMENT TO REGISTER ABANDONED BUILDING.



   No person or business shall own or maintain an abandoned building as
defined by this chapter, in the city unless such person or business holds a
current unrevoked abandoned building registration certificate, issued by the
Building and Neighborhood Services Division, in the name of the owner, for
the specific named building.



(Ord. 2545, passed 10-25-2016)



§ 104.03  REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Registration required. The owner shall register an abandoned
building with the Building and Neighborhood Services Division not later than
30 calendar days after any building in the city becomes abandoned or vacant
as defined in this chapter. Failure to register an abandoned or vacant
building or providing false information to the city shall be a violation of
this chapter.



   (B)   Information. The registration shall include the following
information:



      (1)   A description of the premises, including address;



      (2)   The names and addresses and current phone numbers of the
owner or owners;



      (3)   The names and addresses of all known lien holders and
all other parties with an ownership interest in the building;



      (4)   The name of the agent designated to act on the behalf of
an out-of-town property owner to accept legal processes and notices, and to
authorize repairs as required; and



      (5)   The period of time the building is expected to remain
vacant and/or a plan and timetable to comply with applicable city codes.



(Ord. 2545, passed 10-25-2016)



§ 104.04  FEE FOR REGISTRATION.



   The owner of an abandoned building shall pay an annual fee of $40,
which sum shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of any permits or
acceptance of the registration form for the subject property.



(Ord. 2545, passed 10-25-2016)



§ 104.05  TERMS OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Registration term. Every license issued under this chapter
shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued and shall become
delinquent on March 31 of the year due.



   (B)   Application for renewal. Upon application, a registration may
be renewed and remain effective for successive periods of one calendar year
unless sooner revoked at any time by the Building and Neighborhood Services
Division for noncompliance with any applicable provisions of this code.



   (C)   Transfer to new owner. Registrations may be transferred from
one person or business to another, provided notice of the transfer is given
in writing within five working days of the transfer, to the Building and
Neighborhood Services Division.



   (D)   Nontransferable. Registrations shall not be transferable from
one building to another.



   (E)   Notification of city of transfer or disposal.  Every person
or business holding a registration shall give notice in writing to the
Building and Neighborhood Services Division within five working days after
having transferred or otherwise disposed of the legal control of the
registered building. Such notice shall include the name and address and
current phone numbers of the persons or businesses succeeding to the
ownership or control of such registered building.



(Ord. 2545, passed 10-25-2016)



§ 104.06  INSPECTIONS.



   The owner shall allow inspection of the building by the Building and
Neighborhood Services Division upon request and shall allow annual inspection
of the interior and exterior of the premises for the purpose of enforcing and
assuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the housing,
building and fire codes. The owner shall pay a fee of $40 in the event an
administrative search warrant is needed to obtain access to any building
subject to this chapter.



(Ord. 2545, passed 10-25-2016)



§ 104.07  RENEWAL OF REGISTRATION.



   The Building and Neighborhood Services Division is authorized to issue
and renew abandoned building registrations for specific buildings, in the
names of the applicant owners, provided the following criteria are met:



   (A)   Building in compliance with regulations. The building for
which the registration is sought is warranted by the owner or operator to
substantially comply with applicable provisions of this code.



   (B)   Application by owner. The owner or operator legally authorized
and responsible for maintenance of the building for which a vacant or
abandoned building registration is sought shall first make application
therefor on an application provided by the Building and Neighborhood Services
Division.



   (C)   Payment of fees. All fees required by this code pursuant to
the issuance of a vacant or abandoned building registration are paid in full
to the city.



   (D)   Agent of owner/operator. The applicant shall designate a
responsible agent to represent the owner/operator whenever the applicant is
not available for maintenance of the building for which a registration is
sought. The agent shall have full authority and responsibility, the same as
the owner/operator, for maintaining the building.



(Ord. 2545, passed 10-25-2016)



§ 104.08  PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO REGISTER AND/OR RENEW REGISTRATION.



   An application for renewal of an abandoned building registration may be
made within 60 days prior to the expiration of an existing operating
registration. Application for renewal of abandoned building registrations
shall be due on January 1. Application may be made and registration fees paid
until March 31 without penalty. Each day that the owner fails to renew such
registration as required by this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation for which a municipal infraction citation may be issued.



(Ord. 2545, passed 10-25-2016)



§ 104.09  REVOCATION; REINSTATEMENT MEASURES.



   If an abandoned building registration is revoked by the Building and
Neighborhood Services Division for noncompliance with any applicable
provisions of this code, the owner/operator of the building shall be given 30
days to comply with the provisions of this code. Extensions of such 30-day
period may be granted at the discretion of the Building and Neighborhood
Services Division. Upon expiration of the 30-day period, or any extension
thereof, if the building continues to be noncompliant, a municipal infraction
action may be filed against the owner by the city.



(Ord. 2545, passed 10-25-2016)



§ 104.10  RELATIONSHIP OF REGISTRATION TO OTHER CODES.



   The issuance of any registration for any abandoned building shall not
in any way signify or imply that the building conforms with the Iowa State
Building Code or the housing, building, zoning, fire ordinances or other
codes and ordinances adopted by the city. The issuance of a registration
shall not relieve the owner or operator of the responsibility for compliance
with said applicable housing, building, zoning, fire or other applicable
codes and ordinances.



(Ord. 2545, passed 10-25-2016)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



   Chapter



      110.   LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS



      111.   CIGARETTE PERMITS



      112.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



      113.   HOUSE MOVERS AND WRECKERS



      114.   LICENSING OF TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE



      115.   MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENTS



      116.   PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS AND OTHER BUSINESSES



      117.   PAWNBROKERS



      118.   SEWER AND DRAIN LAYERS



      119.   EXCURSION GAMBLING BOATS



      120.   CABLE TELEVISION



      121.   RAGBRAI - MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS



CHAPTER 110:  LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS



Section



   110.01   License or permit required



   110.02   General prohibition



   110.03   Investigation



   110.04   Action by Council



   110.05   Persons under 21 in licensed premises



   110.06   Allowed areas of consumption



 



   110.99   Penalty



§ 110.01  LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall manufacture for sale, import, sell or offer or keep for
sale, alcoholic liquor, wine or beer without first securing a liquor control
license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of the
Iowa Code Chapter 123. All applications for new licenses or permits or
renewal of licenses or permits must be filed in the City Clerk’s office at
least 30 days prior to the intended opening date or expiration date. In the
event the application is filed less than 30 days prior to the intended
opening date or expiration date, the license or permit may not be approved by
the City Council prior to the date and the licensee will not be able to serve
alcoholic beverages.



(1999 Code, § 120.01)  (Ord. 2312, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 2340, passed
11-28-2006)



§ 110.02  GENERAL PROHIBITION.



   It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or keep for sale,
possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in the Iowa Code Chapter
123, and a license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty
may be imposed for a violation thereof.



(Iowa Code §§ 123.2, 123.39, 123.50)  (1999 Code, § 120.02)  Penalty,
see § 110.99



§ 110.03  INVESTIGATION.



   Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or beer
permit, the Clerk shall forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then
conduct an investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the
facts averred in the application. The Fire Chief shall also inspect the
premises to determine if they conform to the requirements of the city. After
completion of the investigation by the Police Chief and Fire Chief, their
report shall be referred to the Regulations and Enforcement Committee for all
applications. However, applications that are timely submitted per this
chapter, that are in accordance with all regulations and ordinances, and do
not have any resistance from the Fire Department or Police Department shall
be referred directly to the City Council for the unanimous consent calendar.
The Council shall not approve an application for a license or permit for any
premises which does not conform to the applicable law and ordinances,
resolutions and regulations of the city. The Police Chief and Fire Chief
shall report to the City Council any violation of the state code or city
ordinances that occur on the licensed premises of any licensee.



(Iowa Code § 123.30)  (1999 Code, § 120.03)  (Ord. 2271, passed
11-11-2003; Ord. 2312, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 2340, passed 11-28-2006; Ord.
2341, passed 1-9-2007)



§ 110.04  ACTION BY COUNCIL.



   The Council shall either approve or disapprove the issuance of the
liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its
approval or disapproval on each application. Thereafter, the application,
necessary fee and bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic
Beverages Division of the State Department of Commerce for further action as
is provided by law.



(Iowa Code § 123.32(2))  (1999 Code, § 120.04)  (Ord. 2312, passed
12-20-2005; Ord. 2321, passed 3-28-2006)



§ 110.05  PERSONS UNDER 21 IN LICENSED PREMISES.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to prohibit the
presence of persons under the age of 21 in establishments serving alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises unless the sale of alcoholic
beverages is merely incidental to the business conducted at the establishment
or the licensee has received a letter of exemption.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Any beverage containing more than one-half
of 1% of alcohol by volume, including alcoholic liquor, wine and beer.



      CLASS I EXEMPTION.   An exemption pursuant to division (E) below
for a licensee whose sales of goods and services other than alcoholic
beverages exceed 50% or more of gross sales.



      CLASS II EXEMPTION.   An exemption pursuant to division (F)
below for a licensee whose sale of goods and services other than alcoholic
beverages are less than 50% of gross sales.



      GROSS SALES.  The licensee’s sales from goods and services on
the licensed premises but does not include cover charges, entertainment fees
or coin operated amusement machines. This means cover charges or any other
type of fees to gain entrance onto the premises are not included.
Entertainment fees are not included. The fees include, but are not limited
to, ticket sales which require patrons to purchase tickets in order to enter
the business for live or other types of entertainment and entry fees for pool
or other types of tournaments. Coin operated machines including, but not
limited to, non-food vending machines, pool tables, dart machines, pinball
machines, video games and shuffleboard machines are not included as part of
gross sales receipts.



      LICENSED PREMISES.  All rooms, enclosures, contiguous areas or
places susceptible  of precise description where alcoholic beverages are
sold for consumption on the premises under authority of a liquor control
license, wine permit or beer permit.



      VALID FORM OF IDENTIFICATION.  Any state-issued drivers license,
state-issued identification card or a military identification card on which a
photograph, name and date of birth are affixed.



   (C)   Persons under 21 years of age prohibited on licensed premises.



      (1)   It is unlawful for the holder of a license or permit
issued pursuant to the Iowa Alcoholic Beverage Control Act to knowingly
permit, or fail to take reasonable measures to prevent, the entry onto the
licensed premises of any and all persons who have not yet attained the age of
21 unless the sale of goods and services other than alcoholic beverages
constitutes 50% or more of gross sales of the licensed premises unless the
licensee has a letter of exemption as provided in this section or the person
under age is excluded pursuant to division (D) below of this section.



      (2)   It is unlawful for any person employed with respect to a
licensed premises to knowingly permit, or fail to take reasonable measures to
prevent, the entry onto the licensed premises of any and all persons under
the age of 21 unless the sale of goods and services other than alcoholic
beverages constitutes 50% or more of gross sales of the licensed premises
unless the licensee has a letter of exemption as provided in this section or
the person under age is excluded pursuant to division (D) below of this
section.



      (3)   It is the duty of the licensee where persons under the
age of 21 are prohibited and of the person or persons managing the premises
to cause to be posted, maintained and prominently displayed at all times
within the licensed premises, and at each entrance thereto, an easily
readable notice in the English language stating that persons less than 21
years of age are prohibited from entering the premises.



   (D)   Persons under 21 years of age who are permitted on licensed
premises.  The provisions of division (C) above shall not apply to persons
under 21 years of age when: 



      (1)   The underage person is an employee of the license
holder, or performing a contracted service with respect to the premises and
is on the premises during the person’s scheduled work hours;



      (2)   The underage person is accompanied by a parent, legal
guardian or spouse who is of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages;



      (3)   The licensee’s gross sales from the sale of goods and
services other than alcoholic beverages constitute 50% or more of the gross
sales of the licensed premises as defined in division (B) above and the
licensee has received a letter of exemption so stating; and



      (4)   The licensee has received a letter of exemption based on
a written plan to prevent persons under the age of 21 from obtaining
alcoholic beverages from the licensed premises or patrons thereof during the
hours the exemption applies pursuant to division (E)(4) below.



   (E)   Letter of exemption to licensee whose sales of goods and
services other than alcoholic beverages exceed 50% or more of gross sales.



      (1)   A licensee whose sale of goods and services other than
alcoholic beverages, constitutes 50% or more of gross sales and the sale of
alcoholic beverages is merely incidental to the licensee’s business shall
obtain a letter of exemption prior to allowing persons under 21 years of age
on the premises. A letter of exemption may be obtained by submitting to the
City Clerk’s office the appropriate forms and a certified statement from an
accountant verifying that 50% or more of the licensee’s gross sales is from
goods and services other than alcoholic beverages. The letter of exemption,
if granted, shall be effective for the duration of the license or permit and
renewed annually with the license or permit. A current certified statement
from an accountant shall be submitted each time the license or permit is
renewed or upon demand of the City Clerk’s office. The City Clerk shall
forward the application to the Regulations and Enforcement Committee. If
approved by the Rules and Regulations Committee, the application shall be
placed on the City Council agenda for consideration. After City Council
approval, the letter of exemption shall be signed by the City Clerk.



      (2)   In the event the Rules and Regulations Committee denies
the licensee’s application for a letter of exemption, the licensee shall
have the right to appeal the denial to the Council by submitting a written
letter of appeal to the City Clerk within seven days after receipt of the
letter of exemption denial by the Rules and Regulations Committee. The
Council shall schedule a hearing for the licensee within 30 days of receipt
of the appeal to determine whether the letter of exemption should have been
denied and issue its decision thereafter.



   (F)   Letter of exemption to licensee whose sales of goods and
services other than alcoholic beverages are less than 50% of gross sales.



      (1)   A letter of exemption which will permit persons under
the age of 21 to be on licensed premises where sales of goods and services
other than alcoholic beverages are less than 50% of gross sales may be
obtained by submitting to the Regulations and Enforcement Committee, for
approval, a written plan detailing specific measures to be employed by the
licensee to prevent persons under the age of 21 from obtaining alcoholic
beverages from the licensed premises or patrons thereof. The plan shall
include a system by which persons under the age of 21 are readily
distinguishable from persons who are not, and shall include safeguards to
minimize subversion of the system.



      (2)   Applicants must also provide some social activity,
(excluding bands, DJs and karokee), for the 18 through 20 year old patrons,
during all hours of operation. Pool tables and dart games qualify as social
activity. Once a letter of exemption is granted, it shall be required of the
licensee, and all agents and employees thereof, to ensure the system is
operational at all times. Failure of the system to be operational during
business hours shall be deemed a violation of this section.



      (3)   Where there is a letter of exemption under this section,
all bar/wait staff and security employees of the licensee must be at least 21
years of age.



      (4)   The letter of exemption for licensees whose sales of
goods and services other than alcoholic beverages are less than 50% of gross
sales shall permit persons under the age of 21 on the premises until 10:00
p.m. As of 10:00 p.m., no person under 21 years of age shall be on the
licensed premises.



      (5)   The letter of exemption, if granted, shall be effective
for the duration of the license or permit and renewed annually with the
license or permit. All new applications and renewal applications for an
exemption under this section will require review and approval from the Rules
and Regulations Committee. If approved by the Rules and Regulations
Committee, the application shall be placed on the City Council agenda for
consideration. After City Council approval, the letter of exemption shall be
signed by the City Clerk.



      (6)   In the event the Rules and Regulations Committee denies
the licensee’s application for a letter of exemption under this section,
the licensee shall have the right to appeal the denial to the Council by
submitting a letter of appeal to the City Clerk within seven days after
receipt of the letter of exemption denial by the Rules and Regulations
Committee. The Council shall then schedule a hearing for the licensee within
30 days of receipt of the appeal to determine whether the letter of exemption
should have been denied and issue its decision thereafter. Approval by the
City Council of the letter of exemption under this section shall require six
affirmative votes.



   (G)   Valid form of identification required on licensed premises.



      (1)   (a)   It shall be required of all persons who enter
licensed premises which are required to have a letter of exemption pursuant
to division (F) above to have on their persons a valid form of
identification, in the form of:



            1.   Pictured state driver’s license;



            2.   Pictured state identification card; or



            3.   Pictured military identification card with a
date of birth, and to produce the identification upon demand of the license
or permit holder, any employee or agent thereof, or a police officer, at any
time.



         (b)   Persons from whom identification is demanded but
who cannot produce a valid form of identification shall not be allowed entry
onto the licensed premises; or, if on the premises, must leave immediately.



      (2)   Persons under the age of 21 who fraudulently cause
themselves to be identified as age 21 or older shall be guilty of a violation
of this section. Persons who aid or abet any person under the age of 21 to be
identified as age 21 or older shall be guilty of a violation of this section.



   (H)   Suspension of exemption, liquor license, wine permit or beer
permit for violation of this section.



      (1)   A licensee shall be subject to lose its exemption for up
to 60 days for any violation of the Iowa Code Chapter 123, city ordinances,
any conditions of their letter of exemption or for failing to employ the
specific measures proposed to and approved by the Rules and Regulations
Committee.



      (2)   Prior to the re-issuance of a letter of exemption under
division (F) above that has been revoked, all bar/wait staff and security
employees of the licensee must complete, pass and continue to be certified by
T.I.P.S. training.



      (3)   The Council Regulations and Enforcement Committee shall
hold a hearing for the licensee or permit holder to show cause as to why the
city should not suspend the licensee’s exemption, liquor license, wine
permit or beer permit. The Regulations and Enforcement Committee shall
forward a recommendation on whether the licensee’s exemption, license or
permit should be suspended to the Council. The Council may, pursuant to the
Iowa Code § 123.39, suspend the exemption, license or permit for a period of
up to one year.



      (4)   The City Clerk shall notify the license or permit holder
at least seven days prior to the time the Council will consider the
recommendation of the Rules and Regulations Committee. The license or permit
holder shall be given the opportunity to address the Council and state why
the recommendation of the Rules and Regulations Committee should not be
approved. The Council may accept or modify the recommendation of the
Regulations and Enforcement Committee. The decision of the Council can be
appealed to the administrator of the State Alcoholic Beverages Division of
the Department of Commerce except for any decision regarding the suspension,
revocation or denial of the licensee’s exemption.



(1999 Code, § 120.05)  (Ord. 2312, passed 12-20-2005; Ord. 2504, passed
4-8-2014)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.06  ALLOWED AREAS OF CONSUMPTION.



   No licensee shall allow or permit patrons’ consumption of beer, wine,
spirits or other alcoholic beverages in any area outside of the interior of a
licensed premises or outside of a licensed outdoor service area unless the
licensee has applied for and been granted a special event/use permit.



(Ord. 2432, passed 11-9-2010)  Penalty, see § 110.99



§ 110.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Persons under 21 in licensed premises.  Persons that are
found guilty under § 110.05(G)(2) above, shall be guilty of a municipal
infraction and shall be subject to a $250 fine for the first offense, and
$500 for any subsequent offense.



(1999 Code, § 120.05)  (Ord. 2312, passed 12-20-2005)



CHAPTER 111:  CIGARETTE PERMITS



Section



   111.01   Definitions



   111.02   Permit required



   111.03   Application



   111.04   Fees



   111.05   Issuance and expiration



   111.06   Refunds



   111.07   Persons under legal age



   111.08   Self-service sales prohibited



   111.09   Permit revocation



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CARTON.  A box or container of any kind in which ten or more packages
or packs of cigarettes or tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or
otherwise distributed to consumers.



   CIGARETTE.  Any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or
any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of
tobacco or any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed
with any other ingredient, where the roll has a wrapper or cover made of
paper or any other material. However, this definition is not to be construed
to include cigars.



   PACKAGE or PACK.  A container of any kind in which cigarettes or
tobacco products are offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to
consumers.



   PLACE OF BUSINESS.  Any place where cigarettes are sold, stored or
kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.



   RETAILER.  Every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for
consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption,
cigarettes, irrespective of the quantity or amount or the number of sales.



   SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY.  Any manner of product display, placement or
storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the
product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee
of the retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location.



   TOBACCO PRODUCTS.  The following:  cigars; little cigars; cheroots;
stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other
smoking tobacco; snuff; snuff flour; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco;
fine-cut and other chewing tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings,
cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and other kinds and forms of tobacco
prepared in a manner as to be suitable for chewing or smoking in a pipe or
otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but does not mean cigarettes.



(Iowa Code § 453A.1)  (1999 Code, § 121.01)



§ 111.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of a retail permit,
to sell cigarettes at retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell or
solicit the sale of any cigarettes within the city without a valid permit for
each place of business. The permit shall be displayed publicly in the place
of business so that it can be seen easily by the public. No permit shall be
issued to a minor.



(Iowa Code § 453A.13)  (1999 Code, § 121.02)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.03  APPLICATION.



   A completed application on forms provided by the State Department of
Revenue and Finance and accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with
the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be filed at least five days prior to
the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal application is
not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the
application, the costs of the special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.



(Iowa Code § 453A.13)  (1999 Code, § 121.03)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.04  FEES.



   The fee for a retail cigarette permit shall be as follows: 



 


For Permits Granted During

 

Fee



July, August or September
 

$100



October, November or December
 

$75



January, February or March
 

$50



April, May or June
 

$25




 



(Iowa Code § 453A.13)  (1999 Code, § 121.04)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.05  ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION.



   Upon proper application and payment of the required fee, a permit shall
be issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of business
for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June
30 of each year.



(1999 Code, § 121.05)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.06  REFUNDS.



   A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from
the city, except during April, May or June, in accordance with the schedule
of refunds as provided in the Iowa Code § 453A.13.



(Iowa Code § 453A.13)  (1999 Code, § 121.06)



§ 111.07  PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.



   No person shall sell, give or otherwise supply any tobacco, tobacco
products or cigarettes to any person under 18 years of age. The provision of
this section includes prohibiting a minor from purchasing cigarettes or
tobacco products from a vending machine.



(Iowa Code §§ 453A.2, 453A.22, 453A.36(6))  (1999 Code, § 121.07) 
Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.08  SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED.



   Beginning January 1, 1999, except for the sale of cigarettes through a
cigarette vending machine as provided in the Iowa Code § 453A.36(6), a
retailer shall not sell or offer for sale cigarettes or tobacco products, in
a quantity of less than a carton, through the use of a self-service display.



(Iowa Code § 453A.36A)  (1999 Code, § 121.08)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.09  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   Following a written notice and an opportunity for a hearing, as
provided by the Iowa Code, the Council may revoke a permit issued pursuant to
this chapter for a violation of the Iowa Code Chapter 453A, Division I or any
rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, no new permit shall be
issued to the retailer or for the place of business for one year after the
date of revocation unless good cause to the contrary is shown to the Council.



(Iowa Code § 453A.22)  (1999 Code, § 121.09)  Penalty, see § 111.99



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Persons under legal age.



      (1)   If a retailer or employee of a retailer violates the
provisions of § 111.07, the Council shall, after written notice and hearing,
and in addition to the standard penalty, assess the following:



         (a)   For a first violation, the violator shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $300. Failure to pay the civil
penalty as ordered under this division shall result in automatic suspension
of the permit for a period of 14 days;



         (b)   For a second violation within a period of two
years, the violator’s permit shall be suspended for a period of 30 days;



         (c)   For a third violation within a period of five
years, the violator’s permit shall be suspended for a period of 60 days; and



         (d)   For a fourth violation within a period of five
years, the violator’s permit shall be revoked.



      (2)   The Clerk shall give ten-days’ written notice to the
retailer by mailing a copy of the notice to the place of business as it
appears on the application for a permit. The notice shall state the reason
for the contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may
appear and be heard.



(Iowa Code § 453A.2, 453A.22, 453A.36(6))  (1999 Code, § 121.07)



CHAPTER 112:  PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS



Section



   112.01   Purpose



   112.02   Definitions



   112.03   License required



   112.04   Application for license



   112.05   License fee



   112.06   Bond required



   112.07   License issued



   112.08   Display of license



   112.09   License not transferable



   112.10   Time restriction



   112.11   Revocation of license



   112.12   Notice



   112.13   Hearing



   112.14   Record and determination



   112.15   Appeal



   112.16   Effect of revocation



   112.17   License exemptions



   112.18   Charitable and nonprofit organizations



§ 112.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the city against
fraud, unfair competition and intrusion into the privacy of their homes by
licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants.



(1999 Code, § 122.01)



§ 112.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PEDDLER.  Any person carrying goods, merchandise or services who sells
or offers for sale such goods or merchandise from house to house or upon the
public street including any person who takes orders house to house for good,
merchandise or services for later delivery.



   PEDDLING.  The selling or offering for sale goods, merchandise or
services which are carried by a person from house to house or upon the public
streets and including the taking of orders house to house for goods,
merchandise or services for later delivery.



   SOLICITING.  Any person or organization, unless exempted by another
provision of this chapter, who shall solicit contributions of funds
personally or through an authorized employee, agent, or representative by the
direct solicitation of money or by the sale of buttons, tokens, candies or
other items of nominal value intending that all or a substantial portion of
such funds be used for the procurement of necessaries for one or more
individuals or for medical, educational, religious or other purposes toward
the benefit of the community.



   TRANSIENT MERCHANT.  A person principal or agent who engages in a
merchandising business from a temporary location or structure in the city and
who for the purpose of carrying on such business hires, leases or occupies
any land, structure, trailer or truck for the exhibition and sale of such
goods, wares, or merchandise and including the sale of any article, food,
beverage, fruit, vegetable or farm product unless otherwise exempted by
another provision of this chapter.  Temporary association with a local
merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of such transient business
in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local merchant,
dealer, trader or auctioneer does not exempt any person from being considered
a TRANSIENT MERCHANT.



(1999 Code, § 122.02) (Ord. 2413, passed 6-8-2010; Ord. 2424, passed
9-14-2010)



§ 112.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting or in the business of a
transient merchant in the city without first obtaining a license as herein
provided is in violation of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 122.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.04  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   An application in writing shall be filed with the City Clerk for a
license under this chapter.  The application shall provide the following
information upon a form to be provided by the City Clerk.  An application
and license fee, as per § 112.05 shall be paid at the time of filing of such
application to cover the costs of investigating the facts and issuance of the
license:



   (A)   The full name, age, permanent and local address,
telephone/cell number, e-mail address of the applicant.



   (B)   A description of the applicant including date of birth, race,
height, color of hair and eyes, place of birth, social security number and
driver's license number.



   (C)   A description of the merchandise or service to be sold.



   (D)   The business name, address, telephone number and e-mail
address.



   (E)   The starting date and duration of the proposed solicitation or
sale, and the specific hours, for the solicitation or sale in compliance with
§ 112.10.



   (F)   The period of time the applicant has been engaged in the same
or similar business, and the jurisdictions in which the applicant has
previously conducted business in the last year.



   (G)   Whether the applicant has ever had a license or similar
license from the city or any other jurisdiction suspended or revoked.



   (H)   A list of all felony and misdemeanor convictions including
traffic violations for the last ten years.  Further, the applicant shall
provide the Clerk with a certified copy of the applicants driving and
criminal records and shall sign a release to authorize the city, Chief of
Police or his or her designee, to finger print and photograph the applicant.



   (I)   If the license sought is for a transient merchant, the address
of the private property where the sale will be held, the name and address of
the property owner or person in control of that property and a written
statement from the property owner or person in control of the property that
the applicant is authorized to use the property for a sale on the proposed
date.  Each transient merchant shall also include a description of the
structure, tent, trailer or other configuration from which the sale will be
conducted.



   (J)   The application must be accompanied by a copy of all required
permits and licenses, including but not limited to retail sales tax permit
issued by the Iowa Department of Revenue and if appropriate a food
establishment license issued by the Iowa Department of Inspection and Appeals
or I.A.C. § 481-31.7 if a pushcart or mobile food unit.



(1999 Code, § 122.04)  (Ord. 2271, passed 11-11-2003; Ord. 2424, passed
9-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.05  LICENSE FEE.



   An application and license fee in the following amount shall be paid to
the City Clerk prior to the issuance of a license:



 

 
One Day
 
One Year


Peddlers
 
N/A
 
$200


Solicitors
 
N/A
 
$200


Transient Merchants
 
$15
 
$200



 



(1999 Code, § 122.05)  (Ord. 2271, passed 11-11-2003; Ord. 2424, passed
9-14-2010; Ord. 2502, passed 12-10-2013)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.06  BOND REQUIRED.



   Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient merchant,
an applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed
a bond with the Secretary of State in accordance with the Iowa Code Chapter
9C.



(1999 Code, § 122.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.07  LICENSE ISSUED.



   The City Clerk upon satisfaction that the information provided in the
application is true and correct and that the requirements of this chapter for
issuance of the license have been satisfied, and upon payment of the bond and
license fee required shall issue a license.  The following shall be reasons
for denial of the issuance of a license under this chapter.



   (A)   The character and reputation, as a law abiding citizen of the
applicant and if the applicant has a history of behavior or shows a lack of
character, evidenced by misdemeanor and/or felony convictions.



   (B)   Giving incomplete, false, or misleading information on the
application.



   (C)   Whether the applicant has ever had a similar license from this
or any other jurisdiction suspended or revoked.



(1999 Code, § 122.07) (Ord. 2424, passed 9-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.08  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   Each peddler, solicitor or transient merchant shall keep the license in
possession at all times while doing business in the city and shall exhibit
the license by attaching to a lanyard worn around the neck of the license
holder.  The visible exhibition of the license shall serve as evidence of
compliance with all requirements of this chapter



(1999 Code, § 122.08) (Ord. 2424, passed 9-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.09  LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter are not
transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person
filing the application.



(1999 Code, § 122.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.10  TIME RESTRICTION.



   All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that the
licenses are in force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m.



(1999 Code, § 122.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.11  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   After notice and hearing, the Clerk may revoke any license issued under
this chapter for the following reasons.



   (A)   Fraudulent statements.  The licensee has made fraudulent
statements in the application for the license or in the conduct of the
business.



   (B)   Violation of law.  The licensee has violated this chapter or
has otherwise conducted the business in an unlawful manner.



   (C)   Endangered public welfare, health or safety.  The licensee
has conducted the business in a manner as to endanger the public welfare,
safety, order or morals.



(1999 Code, § 122.11)



§ 112.12  NOTICE.



   The Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local
address, not less than ten days before the date set for a hearing on the
possible revocation of a license. The notice shall contain particulars of the
complaints against the licensee, the ordinance provisions or state statutes
allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for hearing on the matter.



(1999 Code, § 122.12)



§ 112.13  HEARING.



   The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in
the complaint and notice. Should the licensee or authorized representative
fail to appear without good cause, the Clerk may proceed to a determination
of the complaint.



(1999 Code, § 122.13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.14  RECORD AND DETERMINATION.



   The Clerk shall make and record findings of fact and conclusions of
law, and shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire record
the Clerk finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of
this chapter or state law.



(1999 Code, § 122.14)



§ 112.15  APPEAL.



   If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall
make a part of the record the reasons therefor. The licensee or the applicant
shall have a right to a hearing before the Council at its next regular
meeting. The Council may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the Clerk
by a majority vote of the Council members present and the Clerk shall carry
out the decision of the Council.



(1999 Code, § 122.15)



§ 112.16  EFFECT OF REVOCATION.



   Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee from being eligible
for any license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of
the revocation.



(1999 Code, § 122.16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.17  LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.



   The following are excluded from the application of this chapter.



   (A)   Newspapers.  Persons delivering, collecting for or selling
subscriptions to newspapers.



   (B)   Club members.  Members of local civic or service
organizations and clubs including but not limited to, Boy Scouts, Girl
Scouts, 4-H, children's sports groups ( Little League, Pop Warner, etc.)
Rotary, Jaycees, Kiwanis, Knights of Columbus and similar organizations.



   (C)   Local residents and farmers.  The sale of raw fruits and
vegetables or similar wares at a farmers market or like gathering by persons
who have their residences or places of business in the city or by local
farmers or gardeners.  This section shall not exempt local resident
businesses who shall be required to comply with the provision of this chapter
if they wish to engage in sales off the grounds of their established
storefront or physical place of business.



   (D)   Students.  Students representing local school districts
conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.



   (E)   Route sales.  Persons delivering and selling goods or
merchandise to established customers who only incidentally solicit additional
business or make special sales.



   (F)   Resale or institutional use.  Persons customarily calling on
businesses or institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or
institutional use.



   (G)   Yard sales.  The casual and occasional sales of used
household goods by the owner thereof to the public, on a non receiving basis,
if the seller, at the time of the sale, is not engaged for profit in the
business of selling goods of that or similar nature, so long as such sales
are not conducted in excess of four consecutive days and no more than four
times annually.



   (H)   Emergency response sites.  Sales of food and beverages at the
site of an emergency or disaster with the permission of the Police Chief,
Fire Chief or Public Works Director.



(1999 Code, § 122.17)  (Ord. 2424, passed 9-14-2010)



§ 112.18  CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.



   Authorized representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations
operating under the provisions of the Iowa Code Chapter 504, Revised Iowa
Nonprofit Corporation Act, desiring to solicit money or to distribute
literature are exempt from the operation of §§ 112.04 and 112.05. All
organizations are required to submit in writing to the Clerk the name and
purpose of the cause for which the activities are sought, names and addresses
of the officers and directors of the organization, the name and address of
each person actually soliciting or distributing for the organization, the
period during which the activities are to be carried on, and whether any
commissions, fees or wages are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount
thereof. If the Clerk finds that the organization is a bona fide charity or
nonprofit organization the Clerk shall issue, free of charge, a license
containing the above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk
denies the exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may
appeal the decision to the Council, as provided in § 112.15.



(1999 Code, § 122.18)  (Ord. 2424, passed 9-14-2010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 113:  HOUSE MOVERS AND WRECKERS



Section



   113.01   Required application fee



   113.02   Revocation



   113.03   Wrecking procedure designated



   113.04   Removal of debris; filling excavation



   113.05   Sidewalk safety measures



   113.06   Approval of moving route required



   113.07   Route designation and period of moving



   113.08   Safety procedures



   113.09   Insurance required; coverage specified



   113.10   Capping sewer and water pipes



   113.11   Overhead wires



§ 113.01  REQUIRED APPLICATION FEE.



   Before any building is wrecked or moved, the contractor or individual
doing the wrecking or moving shall file an application with the Public Works
Department for a permit. Along with the application shall be a set of plans
and specifications setting forth how the building is to be wrecked or moved.
Upon an examination of the application, including the plans and
specifications, and when it is found that the application and plans and
specifications comply with the terms of this chapter, the Public Works
Department shall issue a permit upon payment of a permit fee as established
by City Council resolution. A permit is required for the wrecking of all
buildings or structures including any building or structure that has been
condemned and ordered wrecked by the Council or the Board of Health. No
permit fee shall be charged for the wrecking of condemned buildings.



(1999 Code, § 123.01)  (Ord. 2271, passed 11-11-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 113.02  REVOCATION.



   The Public Works Department shall revoke the permit by serving written
notice upon the contractor or individual doing the wrecking when it is found
that the contractor or an individual is in violation of the terms of this
chapter. The written notice shall give the contractor or individual 24 hours
in which to comply with this chapter. If the contractor or individual does
not so comply within the time allowed, the permit shall be revoked. The
contractor or individual commits a municipal infraction if the contractor or
individual continues to wreck or move the building after revocation of the
permit.



(1999 Code, § 123.02) (Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.03  WRECKING PROCEDURE DESIGNATED.



   The method or procedure in the wrecking of any building shall be story
by story, commencing with the top story, and each story shall be completely
removed. No material shall be placed upon the floor of any building in the
course of demolition, but the bricks, timbers and other parts of each story
shall be lowered to the ground immediately upon displacement.



(1999 Code, § 123.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.04  REMOVAL OF DEBRIS; FILLING EXCAVATION.



   Every building or structure that is wrecked, including the foundation
walls, shall be removed from the site of the wrecked building except in the
case of solid masonry wreckage which may be used to fill the excavated area;
provided it is covered with not less than 12 inches of good dirt or six
inches of macadam. All excavated areas shall be filled at least to the lowest
adjoining grade. Other higher adjoining grades must be protected with
permanent retaining walls and guardrails or surrounded with terraces not
steeper than three feet horizontal to two feet vertical. The contractor or
individual shall seed any cleared site resulting from the demolition or
moving of a building with grass seed or other approved ground cover unless
the site is scheduled for immediate redevelopment.



(1999 Code, § 123.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.05  SIDEWALK SAFETY MEASURES.



   Protection for pedestrians shall be provided as follows:



   (A)   Before any demolition work is commenced, every sidewalk or
public thoroughfare adjacent to the work site shall either be closed or
protected as specified in this section. All thoroughfares which are open to
the public shall be kept clear and unobstructed at all times;



   (B)   If the structure to be demolished is more than two stories or
25-feet high, measured from sidewalk or street level, and the horizontal
distance from the inside of the sidewalk to the structure is 15 feet or less,
a substantial sidewalk shed shall be constructed over the entire length of
the sidewalk adjacent to the structure, of sufficient width to accommodate
pedestrian traffic without causing congestion. The sidewalk shed shall be
lighted either by natural or artificial means sufficient to ensure safety at
all times;



   (C)   Every sidewalk shed shall be capable of safely sustaining a
load of 150 pounds per square foot. If material is to be stored thereon, it
shall be capable of sustaining a load of at least 300 per square foot;



   (D)   The outside edge and ends of the deck of the shed shall be
provided with a substantial enclosure of at least 42 inches above the deck of
the shed. The enclosures may be vertical or inclined outward at approximately
45 degrees and shall consist of boards laid close together secured to braced
uprights, or toeboards and galvanized wire netting formed of not less than
No. 16 U.S. gauge wire and one and one-half inch mesh;



   (E)   Sidewalk shed openings for loading purposes shall be kept
closed at all times except during actual loading operations;



   (F)   The roof deck flooring of a sidewalk shed shall consist of
planking not less than two inches in thickness (nominal size), closely laid.
All members of the shed shall be adequately braced and connected to resist
displacement of members or distortion of the framework;



   (G)   Unless the top deck of the sidewalk is built solidly against
the face of the structure to be demolished, the vertical face of the shed
supports next to the building shall be solidly fenced throughout. This shall
not prohibit the construction and use of solid sliding or swinging gates as
may be necessary for the prosecution of the work;



   (H)   When the horizontal distance from the inside of the sidewalk
to the structure is more than 15 feet and less than 25 feet, a sidewalk shed
may be constructed over the sidewalk as described above or, in place of a
shed, a substantial fence shall be constructed along the inside edge of the
sidewalk or, if permission has been granted to close the sidewalks, along the
inside edge of the roadway;



   (I)   Every fence shall be constructed at least six feet high of
wood or other suitable material and shall be built solid for its entire
height and length, except that openings necessary for the proper execution of
the work may be provided with solid sliding or swinging gates;



   (J)   When the horizontal distance from the inside of the sidewalk
to the structure is more than 25 feet, a shed or fence as described in this
section may be built or, in place of a shed or fence, a substantial railing
shall be constructed on the inside of the sidewalk or roadway along the
entire length of the demolition site and provided with movable bars as may be
necessary for the proper execution of the work; and



   (K)   Where workers’ entrances to buildings being demolished are
not completely protected by sidewalk sheds, all entrances shall be protected
by canopies extending from the face of the building to a point not less than
eight feet from it. In each case, the overhead protection shall be at least
two feet wider than the building entrance or opening, and all canopy roof
deck flooring shall be at least as strong as the sidewalk shed specified in
this section.



(1999 Code, § 123.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.06  APPROVAL OF MOVING ROUTE REQUIRED.



   The Public Works Department shall not issue a permit to move a building
until the party applying has secured the written consent for the proposed
routing from the Police Chief and any public utility maintaining telephone,
telegraph, electric light or power lines which will have to be disturbed,
removed or interfered with in consequence of any moving of a building.



(1999 Code, § 123.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.07  ROUTE DESIGNATION AND PERIOD OF MOVING.



   The Public Works Department shall designate the route to be followed
and limit the time for moving on the streets and shall issue these
instructions in writing to the mover when the permit is issued. The Public
Works Department may require that the moving of a building be continuous
during all hours of the day and day-by-day, and at night, until completed,
when deemed necessary and advisable.



(1999 Code, § 123.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.08  SAFETY PROCEDURES.



   No building which is being moved shall be allowed to remain overnight
upon any street crossing or intersection, or so near thereto as to prevent
easy access to any fire hydrant. Warning lights shall be kept in a
conspicuous place at each end of the building during the night.



(1999 Code, § 123.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.09  INSURANCE REQUIRED; COVERAGE SPECIFIED.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in the
business of wrecking and/or moving buildings shall file with the Clerk a
certificate of liability insurance and a copy of the insurance policy
covering the operations. The insurance policy shall provide the following
minimum limits of liability:



 


Injury or Damage Sustained

 

Limit



Bodily injury, per occurrence
 

$200,000



Bodily injury, per individual
 

$100,000



Property damage
 

$50,000




 



   (B)   The insurance policy or policies shall be approved by the City
Attorney. The Public Works Department and City Attorney may require the
filing of a certificate of coverage and policy of liability insurance in
greater amounts as they determine to be reasonable and proper for any
additional hazards. In no event shall they require more than $200,000 bodily
injury per occurrence, $100,000 bodily injury per individual, and $50,000
property damage.



(1999 Code, § 123.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.10  CAPPING SEWER AND WATER PIPES.



   When any building is moved from its foundation and no new building is
to be built on the remaining foundation, the individual moving the building
shall properly cap the sewer and water pipes leading into the foundation of
the building that has been moved. The required insurance policy specified in
§ 113.09 will not be released until evidence of the capping is presented and
accepted by the Public Works Department.



(1999 Code, § 123.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.11  OVERHEAD WIRES.



   The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that all
telephone, cable television and electric wires and poles are removed when
necessary and replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of
the same.



(1999 Code, § 123.11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 114:  LICENSING OF TAXICABS AND VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Vehicle for hire business permit required



   114.03   Application for vehicle for hire business permit



   114.04   Vehicle for hire business permit fees



   114.05   Issuance and renewal of taxicab or vehicle for hire
business permit



   114.06   Vehicle for hire information and identification



   114.07   Investigation and report



   114.08   Contents of vehicle for hire business permit



   114.09   Disposition of fees



   114.10   Vehicle for hire business permit term



   114.11   Permit not transferable



   114.12   Suspension and revocation of permit



   114.13   Supervision and inspection



   114.14   Taximeters optional



   114.15   Rates/fares



   114.16   Displaying of vehicle for hire business permit and rates



   114.17   Financial responsibility



   114.18   Vehicle for hire driver’s license



   114.19   Application for vehicle for hire driver’s license



   114.20   Driver’s qualifications



   114.21   Maximum working hours



   114.22   Vehicle for hire regulations



   114.23   Open stands



   114.24   City held harmless in use of vehicles for hire



   114.25   Applicability of chapter



 



   114.99   Penalty



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD OF APPEALS.  See §§ 32.800 through 32.802 of this code.



   CHAPTER. Chapter 114 of the Clinton, Iowa Municipal Code of Ordinances.



   CITY.  The City of Clinton, Iowa.



   CLERK. The City Clerk for the City of Clinton, Iowa.



   CODE or CITY CODE. The Clinton, Iowa Municipal Code of Ordinances.



   LICENSE. A license an individual taxi driver must obtain from the city
in order to lawfully operate a taxi for a permitted taxicab company, as
defined in this chapter of the city code. The term LICENSE as used in this
chapter shall not be construed to refer in any way to the driver’s license
required under the provisions of the Iowa Code and/or Iowa Department of
Transportation regulations.



   LIMOUSINE. A vehicle furnished with a driver that carries passengers
for hire either on a fixed route within the city or pursuant to a written
contract with reservations in advance of the service, operates without a
taximeter, and charges for services on an hourly basis or longer periods of
time with a minimum charge of one hour.



   LIMOUSINE BUSINESS. A firm that provides limousine services originating
within the corporate limits of the city.



   OWNER. Any person who owns a taxicab or limousine business, either
wholly or in conjunction with other individuals or entities, and who operates
or seeks to operate such business within city limits.



   PERMIT or VEHICLE FOR HIRE BUSINESS PERMIT. A permit issued by the City
Council or their designee authorizing the owner or operator thereof to
conduct a taxicab, limousine or vehicle for hire business in the city as
defined in this chapter.



   TAXI or TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle that is used on the streets of the
city for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire, except for publicly
owned vehicles, buses, ambulances and private carpools.



   VEHICLE FOR HIRE.  A motor vehicle with a seating capacity of less
than seven persons used to transport persons for hire or other consideration
and includes limousines, luxury limousines, vans, horses and carriages, and
taxicabs. VEHICLES FOR HIRE does not include buses, the city bus system,
transportation services provided by contractors hired by the city
transportation department, and vehicles used for volunteer transportation
such as carpools and courtesy buses.



   VEHICLE FOR HIRE DRIVER or DRIVER. Any person hired to drive any motor
vehicle on the streets of the city, for the purpose of carrying passengers
for hire, which follows no regular route or time schedule and who operates a
vehicle for hire that has a seating capacity of less than seven passengers.
This definition specifically includes, but is not limited to limousine
drivers and taxicab drivers.



(Ord. 2433, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 114.02  VEHICLE FOR HIRE BUSINESS PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It is unlawful to operate a vehicle for hire without a valid vehicle
for hire business permit issued under this chapter. Vehicles for hire that
are operated and permitted principally in other cities that use the streets
of the city only on isolated occasions need not have a permit under this
chapter. This section shall not apply to funeral directors conducting a
funeral procession.



(Ord. 2433, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 2528, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 2561, passed
1-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.03  APPLICATION FOR VEHICLE FOR HIRE BUSINESS PERMIT.



   (A)   An application for a vehicle for hire permit shall be filed
with the City Clerk upon forms provided by the city. The application shall be
verified under oath and shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant
is a corporation, the name and address of all stockholders, directors,
officers of the corporation, along with the principal place of business of
the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, names and addresses of
all general and limited partners of the partnership, along with the address
of the principal place of business of the partnership;



      (2)   The financial statement or balance sheet of the
applicant. A listing of any unpaid judgements pending either against the
applicant or any person or legal entity owning any interest in the applicant,
including a brief description of the nature of the litigation or proceedings
out of which any such judgement arose;



      (3)   Proof of financial responsibility as defined in §
114.17 of this chapter;



      (4)   Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove
that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a vehicle for
hire permit;



      (5)   The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by
the applicant/business partnership and corporation. The application shall
include the make, model, VIN number, state license plate number, and
insurance policy number of each taxi or vehicle for hire;



      (6)   A vehicle inspection report for each vehicle the
applicant intends to put into operation under its permit that complies with
the requirements of § 114.13 of this chapter. The fee for each vehicle shall
be the same as set forth in § 114.04 of this chapter and the fee shall
accompany the application;



      (7)   The insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or
vehicles of the applicant;



      (8)   The proposed rates of fare; and



      (9)   Whether the applicant has ever had a similar license
suspended or revoked and if so the details thereof.



   (B)   Pursuant to Iowa Code § 321.241(2), a vehicle for hire
company applying for a permit is not required to maintain a physical place of
business in the city as a condition of receiving a vehicle for hire permit
under this chapter. All vehicle for hire business permit holders and vehicle
for hire drivers shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 159 of this
code regarding the storage and parking of vehicles covered by this chapter.



   (C)   No vehicle for hire permit shall be sold, assigned, pledged,
or otherwise encumbered or transferred in any way to any other operator
without the express prior approval of the Council.



   (D)   Upon the filing of an application, the City Clerk shall
forward a copy of the same to the Chief of Police or designee to investigate
the applicant, and the vehicles subject to licensing and file a written
report and recommendation with the City Clerk.



(Ord. 2433, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 2528, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 2561, passed
1-9-2018)



§ 114.04  VEHICLE FOR HIRE BUSINESS PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Permit fees. No permit shall be issued or renewed unless the
owner or operator of the taxicab or vehicle for hire has paid an annual
permit fee of $60 dollars for each vehicle operated pursuant to the permit.
This fee shall be in addition to any other fees or charges established by
proper authority and applicable to said owner or operator of the vehicle, or
vehicles under his/her operation or control. All permit application and
renewal fees shall be made payable to the Finance Department, and the
applicant shall make said payments directly to the Finance Department



   (B)   Additional fee for non-driver owners. For owners applying for
a vehicle for hire business permit who are not also vehicle for hire
operators, an additional $15 non-refundable fee shall be required. This fee
shall be used by the city to conduct the necessary background check of the
applicant in advance of the city making an approval decision. Where the owner
applying for the vehicle for hire business permit is also a vehicle for hire
driver's license applicant, no additional fee shall be required, as this cost
is included in the vehicle for hire driver's license application fee.



   (C)   Acquisition of new vehicles for hire or sale of existing
permitted vehicles for hire by the owner or operator of a permit shall be
reported in writing to the Clerk within seven days of the acquisition or
sale, so the current permit may be transferred, a new or revised permit
issued, or existing permit cancelled as is deemed appropriate.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.05  ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL OF TAXICAB OR VEHICLE FOR HIRE BUSINESS
PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall review the permit application for
compliance with this section and recommendation of the Chief of Police to
determine if a license should issue.  The Clerk shall take into
consideration:



      (1)   Whether issuance is consistent with the safety, health,
welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents.



      (2)   The character and reputation, as law abiding citizens,
of the applicant or its members, officers or directors.



      (3)   The financial ability of the applicant to render lawful,
safe, suitable and comfortable service and to maintain or replace the
equipment for such service.



      (4)   The financial ability of the applicant to pay all
judgments and awards as may be rendered for any cause arising out of the
operation of the vehicle.



   (B)   A permit application may be denied for the following reasons:



      (1)   The motor vehicles listed on the applications failed
equipment qualifications;



      (2)   Insignia are similar to existing taxicabs so as to cause
confusion to the riding public;



      (3)   A history of the applicant showing disregard for the
safety of the riding public;



      (4)   Revocation or suspension of a similar license by the
city or other municipality;



      (5)   The applicant having shown a lack of law abiding
character and has been convicted of a crime or crimes and specifically those
involving assault or injuries to persons and felonies or forcible felonies;



      (6)   Giving incomplete, false, or misleading information on
the application;



      (7)   Lack of financial ability as set forth above.



   (C)    If the Clerk finds the applicant is otherwise qualified under
division (A), the Clerk shall forward the application information to the
Police Department for review, and upon Police Department approval, the Clerk
shall issue a permit to the applicant, including:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The description of the vehicle(s) authorized to operate
within the city pursuant to said business license;



      (3)   The vehicle identification number and license plate
number of the vehicle(s);



      (4)   The vehicle inspection date from an ASE Certified
Technician; and



      (5)   The date of issuance of business license. 



   (D)   Each vehicle for hire that is in service must be registered
with the city. The operator shall notify the Council when a permitted vehicle
for hire is withdrawn from service and when additional vehicles for hire are
put into service. It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a
permitted vehicle for hire business to allow any individual who does not
comply with all requirements of § 114.19 of this chapter to operate any
vehicle covered by a vehicle for hire permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
See Iowa Code § 321.241(1).



   (E)   Permit renewal. Upon expiration of a current permit, each
applicant must reapply for a vehicle for hire business permit subject to the
provisions of this chapter. An owner or operator must submit its renewal
application and supporting documentation within the 30-day period prior to
the expiration of the permit, which shall be December 31 of each calendar
year pursuant to § 114.10 of this chapter. To apply for renewal of a permit
issued under this chapter, the owner or operator must provide the Clerk with
the application materials required of non-renewal applicants, which are set
forth in § 114.03 of this chapter. Renewal applicants must also submit
payment of the fees set forth in § 114.04 with their renewal application
materials.



   (F)   Issuance of renewal permits. Vehicle for hire business permits
shall be issued between January 1 and January 31 of each year and shall be
valid for the remainder of the calendar year for which the application was
submitted. A vehicle for hire business shall not be considered to be
operating without a permit for a period of 30 days following the permit
expiration date, so long as all permit renewal documentation required by
division (E) above has been submitted to the Clerk for processing. A permit,
when issued, shall be signed by the Mayor and Clerk, shall identify the
vehicles permitted, and shall state the date of issuance, the operator to
whom issued, and the period of time for which the permit is valid. The city
will provide a sticker or other adhesive emblem for each vehicle for hire
covered by the permit issued. This sticker shall be displayed in the bottom
corner of the rear windshield at all times while the vehicle is operating
under the permit. Removal of this sticker or applying a sticker that does not
correspond to the vehicle for which the sticker was issued is a violation of
this section.



   (G)   Incomplete applications and renewal applications. Any permit
application or renewal application that does not contain all items required
by division (E) above shall be deemed incomplete and will not be processed by
the Clerk until such time as all necessary documentation has been provided.
The Clerk shall provide the renewal applicant with notice of any deficiency
in its application materials within three business days of discovery of such
deficiency so that the issue may be remedied by the applicant.



(Ord. 2433, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 2528, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 2561, passed
1-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.06  VEHICLE FOR HIRE INFORMATION AND IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   No taxi operator or owner shall be issued a vehicle for hire
business permit unless the color scheme of the taxi is distinctly different
from that of any other taxi operator or owner's taxi. Each vehicle for hire
shall bear on the outside on each side of the vehicle, in painted or
permanently affixed vinyl letters not less than two inches or more than four
inches in height, the name of the owner; and, in addition, may bear an
identifying design approved by the Board of Appeals. No vehicle covered by
the terms of this chapter shall be permitted whose identifying design,
monogram, or insignia to be used thereon shall, in the opinion of the Board
of Appeals conflict with or imitate any identifying design, monogram or
insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles already operating under the chapter,
in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the
public: and provided further, that if, after a permit has been issued for
taxicab hereunder, the identifying design, monogram, or insignia thereof is
changed so as to be in the opinion of the Board of Appeals in conflict with
or imitate any identifying design, monogram, or insignia used by any other
person, owner or operator, in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to
deceive the public, the permit of such vehicle(s) for hire shall be suspended
or revoked.



   (B)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for a vehicle for hire
owner, operator or driver to operate a vehicle, regardless of whether such
vehicle is actually being operated as a vehicle for hire, that bears the
insignia or the name of a permitted vehicle for hire business unless such
vehicle is one identified by and included in the business' vehicle for hire
permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter. This prohibition includes
vehicles being operated for advertising or marketing purposes only.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.07  INVESTIGATION AND REPORT.



   Before issuance of the permit, the Police Chief shall investigate the
character of the applicant and shall be furnished by the applicant with a
current inspection certificate, pursuant to § 114.13 of this chapter, for
each vehicle for hire to be permitted, for compliance with the state motor
vehicle law and this chapter.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 114.08  CONTENTS OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE BUSINESS PERMIT.



   A permit shall contain the authorized signatures, the date of issuance,
the period for which it is valid, the passenger seating capacity of the taxi
or vehicle for hire, and the information contained in the application.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 114.09  DISPOSITION OF FEES.



   Immediately after acting on a permit application, the authorizing
personnel shall deposit the permit fee in the city treasury or return the
disapproved application and fee to the applicant.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 114.10  VEHICLE FOR HIRE BUSINESS PERMIT TERM.



   Any business permit issued after the effective date of this chapter
shall expire on December 31 of the year of issue. Any permit issued prior to
the effective date of this chapter that has not yet expired shall be deemed
to expire as of December 31, 2017 so as to place all permit holders on the
same renewal application timeline. No person shall operate a taxicab,
limousine or vehicle for hire, where service originates upon the streets of
the city, without a vehicle for hire business permit that covers each vehicle
for hire in its fleet. A vehicle for hire shall also require such permit or
certificates as may be required by the Department of Transportation of the
State of Iowa.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 114.11  PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   Each vehicle for hire permit shall be issued for one specific vehicle
for hire only and shall not be transferable from vehicle to vehicle or to a
different operator. The operator shall notify the city when a permitted
vehicle for hire is withdrawn from service. No portion of this fee is
refundable.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.12  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The City Administrator or designee shall have the authority to
suspend or revoke any vehicle for hire business permit issued under this
chapter for the following:



      (1)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The discontinued operation within the city for more than
60 days.



      (3)   Any violation of the ordinances of the city, or the laws
of the State of Iowa or Illinois or laws of the United States which reflect
unfavorably upon the fitness of the owner or operator to offer public
transportation.



      (4)   The commission of any act or acts which would be grounds
for denial of the application when initially applied for.



      (5)   If any public passenger vehicle shall become unsafe for
operation or if its body or seating facilities shall be so damaged,
deteriorated or unclean as to render the vehicle unfit for public use.



   (B)   The revocation shall be effective for a period not exceeding
one year. The City Administrator or designee shall notify the person in
writing by certified mail, or other means as provided by the Code of Iowa, of
the revocation, time period of revocation, to surrender the permit to the
City Clerk, reason for revocation and right to appeal. At the conclusion of a
revocation period, the person may reapply for a business permit.



   (C)   A person may appeal a suspension or revocation of a business
permit to the Board of Appeals within ten days of the date of the written
notice. The City Clerk shall notify the permittee in writing by certified
mail of the decision of the Board of Appeals. The decision of the Board of
Appeals is final. The suspension or revocation becomes effective ten days
after the notice if no appeal is requested.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 114.13  SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION.



   (A)   All vehicles for hire shall be inspected annually by an ASE
Certified Technician and an inspection report shall be delivered to the City
Clerk prior to issuance of a vehicle for hire permit.  No taxicab or vehicle
for hire shall be operated unless it is equipped with operable lights, tires
of adequate tread depth, horn, a complete exhaust system, rear vision mirror,
windshield wipers, insignia, child restraint device and operable safety belts
or safety harness in the rear passenger seat, and adequate body and interior
maintenance for the comfort and convenience of passengers and which shall
include paint in a uniform color, repair of all rust throughs and damage as
result of a legally reportable collision or accident as defined by Iowa Code
§ 321.266(2), interior seats free of rips or tears and an exterior and
interior free of any dirt, grime, trash or refuse.



   (B)   Vehicle inspections are the responsibility of the applicant
and a copy of the current inspection documents shall be filed with the City
Clerk prior to obtaining a city vehicle for hire permit. It shall constitute
a municipal infraction to operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire upon the
streets of the city without having a current inspection report in the vehicle.



   (C)   All vehicles operated under a vehicle for hire business permit
shall be reinspected annually. A copy of the inspection report for each and
every vehicle for hire operating under the business permit shall be provided
to the Clerk simultaneously with the permit renewal documentation. Any
vehicle up for renewal under a business permit shall not be approved under
this chapter unless a current inspection report has been submitted to the
Clerk.



(Ord. 2433, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 2528, passed 10-13-2015; Ord. 2561, passed
1-9-2018; Ord. 2577, passed 4-24-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.14  TAXIMETER OPTIONAL.



   (A)   All taxicabs operated under the authority of this chapter may
be equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to
them at all times day and night; and, after sundown, the face of the
taximeter shall be illuminated.



   (B)   If a taximeter is installed and used in a vehicle fore hire,
the The taximeter shall be operated by a mechanism of standard design and
construction, which will accurately record the fare for each trip. They shall
be sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect
their correct reading and recording. Each taximeter shall have a device or
signal to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed;
and it shall be at the recording position at the termination of each trip.



   (C)   The taximeters shall be subject to inspection from time to
time by the Iowa Department of Agriculture. The City Administrator or
designee is hereby authorized either on complaint of a person or without such
complaint, to inspect any meter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy
therein, to notify the person operating the taxicab to cease operation.
Thereupon the taxicab shall be kept out of service until the taximeter is
repaired and in the required working condition.



   (D)   The City Administrator may impose an inspection fee equal to
the expenses incurred for an inspection. The Administrator also may contract
with an independent agency to perform the necessary inspections. The fee of
any independent agency shall be paid by the taxi owner.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, mutilate
or break any taximeter or the seal thereof or to transfer a taximeter from
one taxicab to another for use in transportation of passengers for hire.



   (F)   The use of a taxi meter shall not prohibit a taxicab from
making a prearranged agreement with a user for the rate of fare for fixed
amount for a specific trip which may include multiple destinations or
stops.  If such agreement is entered into the taxicab operator shall so
designate in its logs.



   (G)   Limousine businesses and all limousines covered by the vehicle
for hire business permit held by a limousine business are specifically exempt
from the provisions of this section.



   (H)   Regardless of whether a permit holder chooses to install and
use a taximeter in any of its permitted vehicles for hire, nothing in this
section shall be construed to eliminate or otherwise alter the posting
requirements provided for in §§ 114.16 and 114.18.



(Ord. 2433, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)  Penalty, see §
114.99



§ 114.15  RATES/FARES.



   (A)   Taxi and vehicle for hire operators shall submit proposed rate
changes at the time of permit renewal and the rate schedule for each
permitted taxi company shall be recorded with the Clerk.



   (B)   On request of a passenger, a driver shall advise any passenger
in advance as to the rate to be charged for transporting that passenger
between any two points within the city.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to charge any fare other than
the amount registered on the rate card or the agreed charge when the vehicle
is employed by the hour or for transporting goods, wares and merchandise.



   (D)   Every driver shall have the right to demand payment of the
legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless so prepaid.



   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to fail to pay or to receive
payment for the fare in accordance with such determination or for any person
to willfully fail to pay the established rate if there is no reasonable
dispute as to the amount owed.



   (F)   The person driving a vehicle for hire shall be equipped at all
times to render a receipt for the amount charged, either by mechanically
printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be listed
the name of the company, permit number or motor number, amount of rate, if so
recorded or charges and date of transaction.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.16  DISPLAYING OF VEHICLE FOR HIRE BUSINESS PERMIT AND RATES.



   Owners or operators shall display within the taxi and vehicle for hire,
in full view of passengers, the taxi permit and a schedule of rates.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.17  FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   Before beginning operation of any vehicle for hire, the
operator shall file with the Clerk evidence of financial responsibility in
the form of an indemnity bond with a corporate surety authorized to do
business in the state, or an insurance policy issued by a company authorized
to do business in the state, to cover possible liabilities arising out of the
operation of each permitted vehicle for hire.



   (B)   The minimum limits of liability of such evidence of financial
responsibility shall be as follows:



      To cover the operator's legal liability for personal injury or
death resulting therefrom, for each vehicle for hire, the owner shall
maintain primary automobile insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000
because of bodily injury to or death of one or more persons and injury to or
destruction of property of others in any one accident. (Iowa Code § 325A.6
(2017))



   (C)   Every bond or insurance policy filed with the Clerk shall have
attached thereto the following endorsement:



      It is understood and agreed that before the policy, or bond, to
which this endorsement is attached may be suspended or canceled, the City of
Clinton, Iowa, will be given ten days' prior written notice of such proposed
suspension or cancellation.



   (D)   Such bond or insurance policy shall be issued for a period to
cover the life of the permit applied for. Failure to keep such insurance
policy or bond in full force and effect shall be a cause for immediate
revocation of the permit.



   (E)   Proof of financial responsibility (insurance or bond) shall be
provided to the Clerk each year simultaneously with the owner's application
for renewal of permit and vehicle inspection reports. No permit shall be
renewed unless proof of financial responsibility has been provided to the
Clerk as required by this section. 



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.18  VEHICLE FOR HIRE DRIVER'S LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle for hire within the city
without having obtained a vehicle for hire driver's license pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   No owner or operator shall permit the operation of a vehicle
for hire within the city without the driver having obtained a vehicle for
hire driver's license pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   Every driver licensed under this chapter shall post the
vehicle for hire driver's license in such a place as to be in full view of
all passengers while the driver is operating a vehicle for hire. A driver
operating a vehicle for hire shall have his or her driver's license in
immediate possession at all times when operating the vehicle for hire and
shall display the same upon the demand of a Police Officer.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.19  APPLICATION FOR VEHICLE FOR HIRE DRIVER'S LICENSE.



   (A)   A person desiring a taxicab driver's license shall file with
the City Clerk a signed and sworn application on forms provided by the city,
containing the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant; addresses for the
past five years; date of birth; race; height; color of hair and eyes; place
of birth; social security number and driver's license number;



      (2)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers; including any previous cities in which the applicant has operated
a cab;



      (3)   Whether the applicant's motor vehicle license has been
suspended or revoked within the previous three years and if so the reasons
therefor and the dates and periods of suspension or revocation; and



      (4)   A list of all felony and misdemeanor convictions
including traffic violations for the past seven years.



   (B)   Upon the approval of an application for a vehicle for hire
driver's license and payment of the license fee, the City Clerk shall issue a
vehicle for hire driver's license to the applicant which shall bear the name,
address, race, date of birth, signature and photograph of the applicant. 
The annual fee shall be $35 dollars, $15 of which is a non-refundable fee for
the mandatory background check performed for each applicant and renewal
applicant.



   (C)   Any license issued after the effective date of this chapter
shall expire one year after the date of issuance. A person may renew a
driver's license 30 days before its expiration date, however, the initial
date of issuance will remain as its expiration date. A person shall not be
considered to be driving without a license during a period of 30 days
following the license expiration date.



   (D)   A duplicate license may be obtained upon the filing of a
signed and sworn statement by the person that the original license was lost,
stolen or destroyed and the payment of a five dollar fee.



(Ord. 2561, 1-9-2018)



§ 114.20  DRIVER'S QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Every driver of a vehicle for hire shall possess a valid Iowa
driving license in accordance with Iowa Code § 321.241. A vehicle for hire
company permitted under this chapter shall not allow any person to drive any
of its permitted vehicles if any of the following apply to the driver:



      (1)   The person is restricted to operating motor vehicles
equipped with an ignition interlock device.



      (2)   The person's driving privileges have been suspended,
revoked, barred, canceled, denied, or disqualified in the prior three-year
period.



      (3)   The person has been convicted of more than three moving
violations in the prior three-year period.



      (4)   The person has been convicted of violating Iowa Code
§§ 321.218, 321.277, or 321J.21, or § 321A.32, subsection 1, in the prior
three-year period.



      (5)   The person has been convicted in the prior seven-year
period of a felony, of violating Iowa Code §§ 321J.2 or 321J.2A, or of any
crime involving resisting law enforcement, dishonesty, injury to another
person, damage to the property of another person, or operating a vehicle in a
manner that endangers another person.



      (6)   The person is registered on the national sex offender
registry.



   (B)   The City Administrator or designee shall have the authority to
suspend or revoke a vehicle for hire driver's license to operate a vehicle
for hire under this chapter if the driver commits an act or acts which would
be grounds for a denial of a driver's license under Iowa Code § 321.241, or
operating a vehicle for hire while a vehicle for hire driver's license or
state motor vehicle license is under suspension. The revocation shall be
effective for a period not exceeding one year. The City Administrator or
designee shall notify the person in writing by certified mail, or other means
as provided by the Code of Iowa, of the revocation, time period of
revocation, to surrender his or her license to the City Clerk, reason for
revocation and right to appeal. At the conclusion of a revocation period, the
person may reapply for a vehicle for hire driver's license.



   (C)   A person may appeal a suspension or revocation of a vehicle
for hire driver's license to the Board of Appeals within ten days of the date
of the written notice. The City Clerk shall notify the driver in writing by
certified mail of the decision of the Board of Appeals. The decision of the
Board of Appeals is final. The suspension or revocation becomes effective ten
days after the notice if no appeal is requested.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.21  MAXIMUM WORKING HOURS.



   No operator shall require or permit any person to drive a vehicle for
hire in excess of these maximum periods: not more than 12 consecutive hours
in any 24-hour period except that the driver may begin work again after he or
she has been off duty for ten hours and not more than 12 non-consecutive
hours in any 24-hour period.



(Ord. 2433, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)  Penalty, § 114.99



§ 114.22  VEHICLE FOR HIRE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Prohibited solicitation. No driver shall stop, park or drive
about the city streets or public places to solicit passengers by words, signs
or signals, but they may take on a passenger anywhere in the city at a
passenger's request.



   (B)   Receipt and discharge of passengers on sidewalk only. 
Drivers of vehicles for hire shall not receive or discharge passengers in the
roadway, but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible
or in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road
and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets, where
passengers may be discharged at either the right- or left-hand sidewalk, or
side of the road in the absence of a sidewalk.



   (C)   Additional passengers.  No driver shall permit any other
person to ride in the vehicle for hire, unless the person or persons first
employing the vehicle shall consent to the acceptance of additional passenger
or passengers. No charge shall be made for an additional passenger except
when the additional passenger rides beyond the previous passenger's
destination and then only for the additional distance so traveled.



   (D)   Restriction on number of passengers.  No driver shall permit
more persons to be carried in a vehicle for hire as passengers than the rated
seating capacity of his or her vehicle as stated by the manufacturer of the
vehicle.  A child under the age of six shall be subject to the city and
state laws concerning child restraint devices, safety belt or safety
harnesses.



   (E)   Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited.  No driver
shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons, upon
request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions
of this chapter to do so.



   (F)   Prohibitions of drivers. It shall be a violation of this
chapter for any driver of a vehicle for hire to solicit business for any
hotel, motel or inn or to attempt to divert patronage from one hotel, motel
or inn to another.  Neither shall such driver engage in selling intoxicating
liquors or solicit business for any house of ill repute or use his or her
vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of passengers or small
parcels.  It shall be unlawful for a driver, owner or operator to knowingly
permit any vehicle for hire to be used in the perpetration of a crime.



   (G)   Prohibition of passengers.  It shall be unlawful for the
driver of any vehicle for hire to permit any person to stand on the outside
of such vehicle while the same is in motion, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to ride on the outside board of such vehicle when the same is in
motion.



   (H)   Traffic rules. It shall be the duty of every driver of a
vehicle for hire to obey all traffic laws established by the city or state.



   (I)   No smoking. No smoking shall be permitted in any vehicle for
hire.



   (J)   Operation of non-permitted vehicles. No owner or driver shall
accept a fare, allow another to accept a fare on behalf of a permitted
business, or otherwise operate as a vehicle for hire if the vehicle in use is
not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Any owner or driver
found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to all penalties
provided for in this chapter, including but not limited to fines and
suspension or revocation of the vehicle for hire business permit or vehicle
for hire driver's license, as the case may be.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 114.99



§ 114.23  OPEN STANDS.



   (A)   The City Administrator is hereby authorized and empowered to
establish open stands in such place or places upon the streets of the city as
it deems necessary for the use of taxicabs operated in the city.  The City
Administrator shall not create an open stand without taking into
consideration the need for the stands by the companies and the convenience to
the general public. The City Administrator shall prescribe the number of cabs
that shall occupy the open stands. The City Administrator shall not create an
open stand in front of any place of business where the abutting property
owners object to the same or where the stand would tend to create a traffic
hazard. The traffic engineer shall place signs in compliance with the Uniform
Code of traffic control devices.



   (B)   Open stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first
come-first served basis. The driver shall pull on to the open stand from the
rear and shall advance forward as the cabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay
within five feet of their cabs; they shall not solicit passengers; or, engage
in loud or boisterous talk while at an open stand. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the cab of his or
her choice that is parked at open stands. A violation of this section shall
be fined pursuant to § 10.99.



   (C)   Private or other vehicles for hire shall not at any time
occupy the space upon the streets that has been established as open stands.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 114.24  CITY HELD HARMLESS IN USE OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE.



   In accepting a vehicle for hire permit under this chapter, the operator
receiving it, including all persons having an ownership interest, agrees to
indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all claims, demands,
damages, causes of actions, and costs, including all costs of litigation,
costs of any kind including attorney's fees, based on or arising out of the
operation or use of vehicles for hire under the permit issued under this
chapter.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 114.25  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to transportation
network services (aka rideshare services) or drivers operating under such
services. Transportation network services are defined and governed solely by
the provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 321N and any applicable Iowa Department
of Transportation Regulations.



(Ord. 2561, passed 1-9-2018)



§ 114.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a municipal
infraction and shall be cited and punished according to the fine schedule
below in addition to any and all fines imposed by applicable provisions of
the Iowa Code. These citations and fines may be issued in conjunction with
any other punitive procedures provided for in § 10.99 of this code.



   (B)   The following scheduled fines are fixed for violations of §§
114.02, 114.18 and 114.20:



      First Offense         $50



      Second Offense      $150



      Third Offense         $250



   (C)   For violation of any section of this chapter, except for §§
114.02, 114.18 and 114.20, the scheduled fine is $50.



(Ord. 2433, passed 11-9-2010; Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017; Ord. 2561, passed
1-9-2018)



CHAPTER 115:  MASSAGE THERAPY ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   115.01   Purpose



   115.02   Definitions



   115.03   License, permit and compliance required



   115.04   Exemptions



   115.05   Massage therapy business permits



   115.06   Massage therapy at nonconforming premises prohibited



   115.07   Electronic surveillance prohibited



   115.08   Registration of patrons



   115.09   Health standards



   115.10   Unlawful acts and other regulations



   115.11   Grounds for denial and revocation or suspension



   115.12   Investigation of violations



   115.13   Appeal process



 



   115.99   Penalty



§ 115.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of massage
therapists and massage therapy businesses and to establish regulations
against the unauthorized delivery of massage therapy services.



(1999 Code, § 125.01) (Ord. 2586, passed 7-10-2018; Ord. 2603, passed
3-12-2019)



§ 115.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  Any person applying for a permit to operate or conduct a
massage business and includes all partners in a partnership and all
stockholders of a corporation.



   LICENSE. The license that confers permission to a person to engage in
massage therapy shall be issued by the Iowa Board of Massage Therapy for
State of Iowa in accordance with Iowa Code Chapter 152C.



   MASSAGE PATRON.  Any person who receives or pays to receive a massage
or massage services from a massage technician for value.



   MASSAGE THERAPIST.  Any person who is licensed to practice and engages
in the business of performing massage services for value, on or for other
persons by use of any or all of the treatments, techniques or methods of
treatment referred to in the definition of massage therapy located above.



   MASSAGETHERAPY.  Performance for compensation of massage, myotherapy,
massotherapy, bodywork therapy, or therapeutic massage including
hydrotherapy, superficial hot and cold applications, vibration and topical
applications, or other therapy which involves manipulation of the muscle and
connective tissue of the body, excluding osseous tissue, to treat the muscle
tonus system for the purpose of enhancing health, muscle relaxation,
increasing range of motion, reducing stress, relieving pain, or improving
circulation.



   MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS.  Any place of business wherein any of the
treatments, techniques or methods of treatment referred to in the definition
of massage therapy located above are administered, practiced, used, given or
applied whether incorporated, sole proprietorship, or in other legally
recognized form.



   PERMIT. Permission granted by competent authority to exercise a certain
privilege that, without such authorization, would constitute an illegal act.
Massage therapy business permits shall be issued by the city in accordance
with this chapter.



   PERSON OF GOOD MORAL CHARACTER.  Any person who meets all of the
following requirements:



      (1)   Has financial standing and good reputation as will
satisfy the city that he or she will comply with this chapter and all laws,
ordinances and regulations applicable to any operations under this chapter;



      (2)   Not held a permit under this chapter which has been
revoked during the year last preceding the date of application; and



      (3)   Has not been convicted of a felony involving moral
turpitude. However, if this conviction of a felony occurred more than five
years before the date of the application for a permit, and if the
applicant’s rights of citizenship have been restored by the Governor, the
city may determine that the person is a person of good moral character
notwithstanding the conviction.



   REFLEXOLOGY. Manipulation of the soft tissues of the human body which
is restricted to the hands, feet, or ears, performed by persons who do not
hold themselves out to be massage therapists or to be performing massage
therapy.



(1999 Code, § 125.02) (Ord. 2586, passed 7-10-2018; Ord. 2603, passed
3-12-2019)



§ 115.03  LICENSE, PERMIT AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall operate a massage therapy business, either
exclusively or in connection with another business, without being permitted
as provided in this chapter. A separate permit shall be obtained for each
place of business. The permittee shall display the permit in a prominent
place in the permitted business at all times.



   (B)   No person shall operate, own, conduct, carry on or permit to
be operated, owned, conducted or carried on any massage therapy business of
any type or kind, including but not limited to any massage business or
service offered in conjunction with or as part of any health club, health
spa, resort or health resort, gymnasium, athletic club or other business
without compliance with Iowa Code Chapter 152C (providing for licensing and
massage therapists and related requirements) and the provisions of this
chapter.



   (C)   It shall further be unlawful for a person to engage in or
offer to engage in the practice of massage therapy, or use in connection with
the person’s name, the initials “L.M.T.,” or the words “licensed
massage therapist,” “masseur,” “masseuse,” or any other word or
title that implies or represents that the person practices massage therapy,
unless the person possesses a license issued by the Iowa Board of Massage
Therapy pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 152C.



(1999 Code, § 125.03) (Ord. 2586, passed 7-10-2018; Ord. 2588, passed
8-14-2018; Ord. 2603, passed 3-12-2019)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.04  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following businesses are excluded from the operation of this
chapter:



   (A)   Businesses operated by persons licensed by the state under the
provisions of the Iowa Code Chapters 148 (licensed doctors/surgeons,
osteopathic doctors/surgeons), 148A (licensed physical therapists), 148B
(licensed occupational therapists), 148C (licensed physicians assistants),
149 (licensed podiatrists), 151 (licensed chiropractors), 152 (licensed
nurses working under direction of licensed physician), 152B (licensed
respiratory therapists working under direction of a licensed physician), 157
(licensed cosmetologists) or 158 (licensed barbers), when performing massage
therapy or massage services as part of the profession or trade for which
licensed;



   (B)   Businesses performing massage therapy under the direct
supervision of a person licensed as described in division (A) above;



   (C)   Businesses performing massage therapy upon a person pursuant
to the written instruction or order of a licensed physician;



   (D)   Nurses’ aides, technicians and attendants at any hospital or
health care facility licensed pursuant to the Iowa Code Chapters 135B, 135C
or 145A, in the course of their employment, under the supervision of the
administrator thereof or of a person licensed as described in division (A)
above; and



   (E)   An athletic coach or trainer in any accredited public or
private school, junior college, college or university or employed by a
professional or semiprofessional athletic team or organization in the course
of employment as a coach or trainer.



   (F)   Businesses practicing reflexology.



   (G)   Massage businesses licensed in other jurisdictions temporarily
in the city for the purposes of training or providing seminars on massage
therapy.



(1999 Code, § 125.04)  (Ord. 2586, passed 7-10-2018; Ord. 2588, passed
8-14-2018; Ord. 2603, passed 3-12-2019)



§ 115.05  MASSAGE THERAPY BUSINESS  PERMITS.



   (A)   Generally.  No person shall operate, own, conduct, carry on
or permit to be operated, owned, conducted or carried on any massage therapy
business in the city unless the premises at which the business is located
meets the minimum standards set forth in § 115.09 of this chapter and unless
a permit to operate a massage therapy business is obtained from the city in
compliance with the provisions of this section. The annual permit fee is $25
per business location and is not refundable. The Fire, Health, and Police
Departments shall have the right to inspect the massage therapy business
establishment at any time to determine whether there is compliance with the
terms of this chapter.



   (B)   Application.  Any person seeking a permit to operate a
massage therapy business shall make application to the Clerk. The Clerk shall
cause an investigation of the applicant to be made by the Police Department
to determine if the applicant is of good moral character. The Clerk shall
also cause an investigation to be made by the Fire Department and the
Planning/Community Development Director to determine that all requirements of
this chapter have been satisfied and the applicant has fully complied with
all applicable ordinances and regulations relating to buildings, zoning, fire
and health.



   (C)   Contents of application.



      (1)   The application shall contain the following:



         (a)   Full name, address and Social Security number of
applicant, a recent photo of applicant, and proof that applicant is an adult;



         (b)   A government issued photo ID of the applicant,
owner, manager and all employees or persons present on the premises who are
or will be employed to perform massage therapy;



         (c)   Full name of the business and the address of the
premises for which the application is being made; a plan denoting the area to
be used for this business, along with parking areas, lounges, waiting rooms,
storerooms and any other rooms or places used in conjunction with the massage
therapy business;



         (d)   The criminal record of the applicant, if any,
including descriptions of all crimes or other offenses, including the time,
place, date and disposition for which the applicant, owner, manager, and all
persons employed by the applicant or present on the premise to perform
massage therapy have been arrested, charged, or convicted;



         (e)   Any other information as the Chief of Police or
City Clerk may require for purposes of conducting a background check. If it
is determined that a nationwide background check is required, the applicant
may be responsible for the expense to complete the background check;



         (f)   A statement that the applicant is of good moral
character;



         (g)   A statement that the contents of the application
are true;



         (h)   Dates and locations of other places the applicant
has owned or operated as a massage therapy business;



         (i)   The type of business entity, such as a sole
proprietorship, partnership or corporation; and in the case of a corporation,
the names and addresses of all officers and directors of the corporation and
a copy of the certificate of incorporation;



         (j)   The name and address of the owner, lessor, or the
contract seller and of the buyer, lessee  and the mortgagor, whichever is
applicable, of the building wherein the massage therapy business will be
located;



         (k)   Copies of any contracts, lease or rental
agreements governing the applicant’s rights in the permitted premises;



         (l)   Signature of the applicant, or if the application
is in the name of a corporation, the signature of each officer of the
corporation;



         (m)   A statement as to whether the applicant, owner,
manager, or any person employed by the applicant has had any license or
permit to perform massage therapy denied, revoked or suspended in any city,
state, county, or any country and the reason for the denial, revocation or
suspension, including copies of any documentation related to the denial,
revocation or suspension;



         (n)   A copy of the state licenses of all persons
performing therapy services at the business address;



         (o)   Proof of insurance of liability insurance for
injury to patrons of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence and $1,000,000
aggregate. All insurance policies hereunder shall provide for at least 30
consecutive days prior notice to the Police Department before a cancellation
thereof is effective and shall continue to provide coverage as to all matters
arising during the term of the insurance policy whether or not later
cancelled; and



         (p)   The permit fee shall accompany the application.



      (2)   All information required in this section of any
applicant shall also be provided for every person who, directly or
indirectly, has any right to participate in the management or control of the
business to be conducted at the premises of the proposed massage therapy
business.



   (D)   Conditions governing issuance of business permit. 



      (1)   Licenses shall be issued only if the applicant and all
of its owners, managers, employees and agents are free of convictions for
offenses which involve sex crimes or which relate directly to such person’s
ability or fitness to legally and safely perform the duties and discharge the
responsibilities of the licensed activity.



      (2)   Licenses shall only be issued to applicants who have
provided all of the information requested in the application, have paid the
license fee and have cooperated with the Chief of Police and other city
officials in review of the application.



      (3)   The Planning, Fire, Health and Police Departments shall
make written reports of their investigations and shall submit the reports to
the Clerk within 30 days of the date of application, and the Clerk shall
place the matter before the Council. If the Council finds that the applicant
has fully complied with all requirements of this chapter and all applicable
ordinances and codes regulating fire, buildings, health and zoning, and that
the applicant is of good moral character, the Council shall authorize the
issuance of a permit to conduct a massage therapy business at the location
designated in the application. The permit shall expire one year from the date
of issuance.



   (E)   Separate permits.  Each massage therapy business shall have a
separate permit for each place of business, which permit shall be valid only
for the business conducted at that location.



   (F)   Display of permit. 



      (1)   By permitted business. Each massage therapy  business
shall display the business permit conspicuously in the lobby or waiting room
area, where the permit may be readily observed by all persons entering the
premises.



      (2)   By licensed massage therapist. Further, the state
license of each therapist performing massage therapy services on the premises
shall be displayed in plain view on the premises at a location where services
are provided.



   (G)   Sale or transfer prohibited.  No massage therapy
establishment permit shall be sold or transferred. The purchaser of any
massage therapy business or of the majority of the stock of any corporation
operating a massage therapy business shall obtain a new permit before
operating a massage therapy business at the location for which the permit has
been issued.



   (H)   Temporary accommodations in the event of emergency. In the
event of an emergency situation which prevents a licensee from using the
licensed premises while awaiting repair or reconstruction of the premises, or
when the licensee must move to a new premises on short notice for other
reasons beyond the control of the licensee, a temporary license may be
obtained from the City Administrator by written appeal to the City
Administrator. Said temporary license shall be good for a temporary location
for a period not to exceed 60 days.



(1999 Code, § 125.05) (Ord. 2586, passed 7-10-2018; Ord. 2588, passed
8-14-2018; Ord. 2603, passed 3-12-2019)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.06  MASSAGE THERAPY AT NONCONFORMING PREMISES PROHIBITED.



   No massage therapist shall administer any massage therapy at a location
within the city limits which does not conform to or comply with the standards
set forth in this chapter, except when providing massage therapy to
physically disabled patients who are unable to travel to the licensed site,
or to persons who are unable to drive due to age or other infirmity, or when
providing massage at public fairs or similar community service events at a
business or public location.



(1999 Code, § 125.07) (Ord. 2586, passed 7-10-2018; Ord. 2603, passed
3-12-2019)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.07  ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE PROHIBITED.



   No methods of electronic surveillance such as cameras, tape recorders,
microphones or similar equipment shall be used in a massage therapy business,
unless notice of the electronic surveillance is posted in a readily
observable, conspicuous location in each room in the massage therapy business
where the electronic surveillance is being used, and in addition, the massage
patron is individually advised of the presence and use of electronic
surveillance. One-way windows or combination mirrors and windows are
prohibited within any massage therapy business.



(1999 Code, § 125.08)  (Ord. 2586, passed 7-10-2018; Ord. 2603, passed
3-12-2019)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.08  REGISTRATION OF PATRONS.



   Each massage therapy business shall maintain appropriate confidential
records of each customer and all treatments rendered.



(1999 Code, § 125.09)  (Ord. 2586, passed 7-10-2018; Ord. 2603, passed
3-12-2019)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.09  HEALTH STANDARDS.



   (A)   No massage therapy business shall be established, maintained
or operated in the city which does not conform to or comply with the
following standards.



      (1)   Each room or enclosure where massage therapy is
performed on patrons shall be provided a minimum of four foot-candles of
illumination as measured four feet above the floor.



      (2)   The premises shall have adequate equipment for
disinfecting and cleaning nondisposable instruments and materials used in
administering massage therapy. The materials and instruments shall be cleaned
after each use.



      (3)   Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all
times convenient to all rooms where the massage therapy is performed.



      (4)   Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the
storage of all equipment, supplies and clean linens. All used disposable
materials and soiled linens shall be kept in covered containers or cabinets,
which containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from clean storage
cabinets.



      (5)   Clean linen and towels shall be provided for each
massage patron. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted.



      (6)   All massage therapy tables, bath tubs, shower stalls,
sauna baths, steam or bath areas and all floors and walls shall have surfaces
which may be readily cleaned.



      (7)   Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in
administering massages shall be kept in clean containers or cabinets.



      (8)   Adequate and separate bathing, dressing, locker and
massage room facilities and private toilet facilities shall be provided
separately for male patrons, female patrons and employees. All patrons’
lockers shall be lockable.



      (9)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs,
steam rooms and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry steam rooms, steam
or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation.
Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.



      (10)   Each massage therapist shall wash his or her hands in
hot running water using soap or disinfectant before and after administering
massage therapy to each patron.



      (11)   The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for
custodial services, which sink shall be located in a janitorial room or
custodial room separate from massage therapy rooms, waiting rooms, lounges or
offices or any other room used by the patrons.



      (12)   No person shall consume food or beverages in massage
therapy work areas, except as professionally recommended as part of the
course of treatment.



      (13)   Animals, except for seeing-eye dogs, shall not be
permitted in massage therapy businesses.



      (14)   All massage therapy businesses shall continuously
comply with all applicable building, fire or health ordinances and
regulations.



   (B)   No massage therapist shall administer massage therapy if any
of the following conditions exist:



      (1)   If the massage therapist believes, knows or should know
that he or she is not free of any contagious or communicable disease or
infection;



      (2)   To any massage patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin
infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption; provided, however, that a
physician duly licensed to practice in the state may certify that the person
may be safely massaged prescribing the condition therefor; or



      (3)   To any person who is not free of communicable disease or
infection or to any person the massage therapist believes or has reason to
believe is not free of communicable disease or infection.



(1999 Code, § 125.10)  (Ord. 2586, passed 7-10-2018; Ord. 2603, passed
3-12-2019)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.10  UNLAWFUL ACTS AND OTHER REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Compliance with laws. No massage therapist administering the
massage therapy shall commit any act which:



      (1)   Would be a violation of Iowa law, the laws of any other
state, or federal law;



      (2)   Which violates the standards set forth in Iowa Code
Chapter 152C; or



      (3)   Which violates any of the standards incumbent upon
massage therapists licensed pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 152C.



   (B)   Person in charge. If the applicant is a partnership,
corporation or other organization, the applicant shall designate a person to
be manager and in responsible charge of the business. The manager shall be a
resident of Iowa. The manager shall provide written consent to serve as an
agent for service of notices and other processes relating to the business.
The manager shall remain responsible for the conduct of the business until
another suitable person has been designated in writing by the permittee. The
permittee shall promptly notify the Chief of Police and City Clerk in writing
of any change indicating the address of the new manager and the effective
date of such change.



   (C)   Hours of business. The permitted premises shall not be open
for business nor shall patrons be permitted on the premises between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(1999 Code, § 125.11)  (Ord. 2586, passed 7-10-2018; Ord. 2603, passed
3-12-2019)  Penalty, see § 115.99



§ 115.11  GROUNDS FOR DENIAL AND REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   It shall be grounds for denial, revocation and/or suspension of an
application or massage therapy business permit if one or more of the
following conditions are met:



   (A)   If the applicant or permittee, or employees of the same, is
not complying with or has a history of violations of the laws and ordinances
that might adversely impact public health or safety, either in Clinton or any
other jurisdiction.  For purposes of this section, "applicant or permittee"
is defined to include any current or former corporations in which applicant
or permittee has, or had, an ownership interest, and including any aliases of
applicant or permittee, and includes any persons who will be participants in
the proposed business of applicant or permittee;



   (B)   If the applicant or permittee has had a similar license or
permit denied, revoked or suspended in any other city, county or other
municipality in Iowa or any other state within the previous five years;



   (C)   If the permittee solicits or advertises, whether expressly or
by implication, to offer services that are a violation of this chapter. This
provision is enforceable regardless of whether said solicitations or
advertisements are made personally by the applicant/permittee or made under
the guise of any other existing or prior businesses associated with such
individuals or establishments;



   (D)   If the permittee is convicted of any violation, reasonably
related to the permitted activity and/or occurring on the permitted premise,
of any city ordinance or federal or state statute;



   (E)   If there is fraud or deception involved in the permit
application;



   (F)   If the permittee is found to be in control or possession of
any narcotic drugs or controlled substances on the premises for which they
are permitted to operate, possession of which is illegal as defined by Iowa
statutes or city ordinances;



   (G)   If the permittee has, in the past, engaged in willful
disregard for health codes and regulations in Clinton or any other
jurisdiction in connection with the massage business;



   (H)   If the applicant fails to provide all the information and
certificates required by this chapter;



   (I)   The applicant cannot demonstrate a reasonable likelihood that
a licensed massage therapist will be present at the permitted business, and
that only licensed massage therapists will perform services at the permitted
business; or if the permittee allows an unpermitted individual(s) to conduct
massage therapy services at the permittee's premises, regardless of whether
the permittee expressly authorized or had actual knowledge;



   (J)   If the permittee refuses to permit any authorized police
officers or authorized city, county, or state governmental officials to
inspect the premises or operations;



   (K)   If the permittee is found to be violating any provision(s) of
this chapter or the Iowa Code;



   (L)   If the business, or any individual performing activities
covered by this chapter at the permitted premises, promotes its services on
websites that are known to advertise services that are illegal; or



   (M)   If the background evidence indicates the application is a
subterfuge to obtain licensure for persons or entities who would otherwise be
barred by this section.



(Ord. 2603, passed 3-12-2019)



§ 115.12  INVESTIGATION OF VIOLATIONS.



   In the event the Clerk is apprised of information indicating that
permittee is in violation of § 115.11 or any other provision of this chapter
such that grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a massage therapy
business permit may exist, the Clerk shall cause an investigation of the
grounds to be made by the appropriate city department or departments and
shall advise the Council in writing of the results of the investigation and
any actions taken as a result of said investigation. A letter stating the
actions taken by the Clerk as a result of the investigation shall be mailed
to permittee's home address and the address of the permitted premises via
U.S. mail and shall contain a short summary of the investigation, the city's
findings, any and all actions taken as a result of the investigation, and the
permittee's right to appeal the decision pursuant to § 115.13.



(Ord. 2603, passed 3-12-2019)



§ 115.13  APPEAL PROCESS.



   (A)   If an applicant has been denied, revoked or suspended pursuant
to this chapter, then said applicant may file a written request with the City
Administrator for review of the decision within ten  days from the receipt
of said notice of denial, revocation or suspension. Failure to file a written
request for review of the decision within this time frame shall constitute a
waiver of any right to contest the decision to deny, revoke or suspend a
permit.



   (B)   Within ten days of the receipt of a request to review a
decision of denial, revocation or suspension of any applicant's permit, the
City Administrator shall notify the applicant of a date, time and place for a
hearing to review the decision. Said hearing shall be informal and the
applicant may present any oral or written testimony the City Administrator
deems pertinent.



   (C)   Within ten days from the hearing held pursuant to division
(B), the City Administrator will provide a written finding and decision to
the applicant.



   (D)   If the applicant's denial, revocation or suspension is upheld
by the City Administrator, the applicant may then appeal said decision to the
District Court pursuant to the laws of the State of Iowa.



(Ord. 2603, passed 3-12-2019)



§ 115.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A person who commits or attempts to commit, conspires to
commit or aids or abets in the commission of an act constituting a violation
of this chapter, whether individually or in connection with one or more other
persons or as principal, agent, or accessory, is guilty of a simple
misdemeanor. A person who falsely, fraudulently, forcibly or willfully
induces, causes, coerces, permits or directs another to violate a provision
of this chapter is guilty of a simple misdemeanor.



   (B)   The city may, at its option, in lieu of or in addition to
seeking criminal penalties, treat non-compliance as a municipal infraction
and seek an appropriate court order imposing daily civil penalties,
injunctive relief including a cease and desist order, and all other relief
allowed by the Clinton Code of Ordinances. Each violation shall be considered
separate and distinct and in the event it is a continuing violation, each day
the violation continues shall be considered a separate and distinct violation.



   (C)   Violations of this chapter by any massage therapy business or
any owner, manager, employee, or other agent thereof, may, in addition to
imposition of the criminal or civil penalties, result in the revocation of
the business permit.



(1999 Code, § 125.13) (Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017; Ord. 2586, passed
7-10-2018; Ord. 2603, passed 3-12-2019)



CHAPTER 116:  PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS AND OTHER BUSINESSES



Section



   116.01   License required



   116.02   Application for license



   116.03   Term of license



   116.04   License fees



§ 116.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in or transact any business, profession or
vocation or perform any act or make any exhibition or performance listed in
this section without first having obtained a license therefor as provided in
this chapter:



   (A)   Dance hall;



   (B)   Fortuneteller, palmist, clairvoyant or similar profession;



   (C)   Carnival;



   (D)   Pool hall;



   (E)   Bowling alley;



   (F)   Tree trimmer; and



   (G)   Video game arcade.



(1999 Code, § 126.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.02  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   The required license shall be obtained by submitting a license
application to the Clerk on a form furnished by the Clerk. The license
applicant shall furnish his or her name, address, phone number, the license
being applied for and any other information as required for the license. Upon
compliance with this chapter and payment of the required fee, the Clerk shall
issue the appropriate license. Upon the denial of any license by the Clerk,
within 15 days the applicant may appeal the denial to the Council. Within 30
days after receipt of the appeal, the Council shall issue its decision
thereon.



(1999 Code, § 126.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.03  TERM OF LICENSE.



   Each license shall be for a term of one year, from January 1 through
December 31. Any license application made on or after July 1 shall require
payment of one-half of the annual license fee. Application for licenses for
the following year shall be made from December 1 through December 31. License
fee refunds will be pro rated on a semiannual basis.



(1999 Code, § 126.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.04  LICENSE FEES.



   The license fees shall be established by City Council resolution.



(1999 Code, § 126.04)  (Ord. 2271, passed 11-11-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 117:  PAWNBROKERS



Section



   117.01   Definition



   117.02   License required



   117.03   Application for license; investigation



   117.04   Fee



   117.05   Records



   117.06   Weapons



   117.07   Minors



   117.08   Goods believed to be stolen or lost



§ 117.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PAWNBROKER.  Any person whose business consists primarily of buying
personal property subject to the right of repurchase or redemption, or of
receiving actual possession of personal property as security for loans with
or without a mortgage or bill of sale. This definition does not include
banks, trust companies, building and loan associates and similar businesses.



(1999 Code, § 127.01)



§ 117.02  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall conduct or operate the business of pawnbroker without
having first obtained a license therefor as provided in this chapter, or
conduct or operate a business in violation of any of the provisions herein
contained. Any pawnbroker’s license may be revoked by the Council for any
violation of any provision of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 127.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVESTIGATION.



   The application for a pawnbroker’s license shall be made to the Clerk
and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the place of business and
the number of employees intended to be engaged. The Police Department shall
investigate each applicant for a license and shall report back to the Council
whether or not the applicant is a person of good character. No license shall
be issued to a person who has been convicted of the offense of receiving
stolen goods or of burglary or robbery.



(1999 Code, § 127.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.04  FEE.



   The license fee shall be established by City Council resolution.



(1999 Code, § 127.04)  (Ord. 2271, passed 11-11-2003)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 117.05  RECORDS.



   (A)   Each pawnbroker shall keep at his or her place of business a
register in which records are kept showing the following:



      (1)   A description of all property taken, purchased or
received by the pawnbroker, including the number of any watch, bicycle or
other article;



      (2)   The name or initials or any identification mark upon any
article so taken by or deposited with the person;



      (3)   The name and residence and street and number of the
person from whom the property is received or taken;



      (4)   The amount loaned on the property or paid to the person
leaving or depositing the same;



      (5)   The interest charged or accruing to be paid by the
person leaving or depositing the property; and



      (6)   The time when the loan falls due or when the contract
made with the person depositing the property expires or matures.



   (B)   All entries made in the register shall be made in ink. The
register shall be open to examination by any police officer at any time.
Copies of the register shall be delivered by the pawnbroker to the Police
Department at times as the Police Department shall prescribe.



(1999 Code, § 127.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.06  WEAPONS.



   If a pawnbroker receives as a pledge or purchase any revolver, pistol,
blackjack, shotgun or any type of firearm whatsoever, the pawnbroker shall
submit to the Police Chief, within 48 hours, all information pertaining to
the transaction, including but not limited to the owner, the owner’s
address, a description of the firearm and the firearm’s serial number.



(1999 Code, § 127.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.07  MINORS.



   No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with any
person less than 18 years of age, except with the written consent by the
parent or guardian of the minor to each particular transaction. No
pawnbroker’s license shall be issued to any person who is not 18 years of
age or over, and no pawnbroker shall employ a person under 18 years of age to
assist in the business.



(1999 Code, § 127.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.08  GOODS BELIEVED TO BE STOLEN OR LOST.



   It is the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article
pledged with the pawnbroker, if there is reason to believe that the article
was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the
case of a lost article.



(1999 Code, § 127.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 118:  SEWER AND DRAIN LAYERS



Section



   118.01   License required



   118.02   Application and examination



   118.03   License fees; renewal



   118.04   Bond required



   118.05   Revocation of license



§ 118.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in the business of constructing, repairing or
maintaining sewers and drains within the city without first obtaining a sewer
and drain layer’s license from the city.



(1999 Code, § 128.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.02  APPLICATION AND EXAMINATION.



   Any person desiring to be registered as a licensed sewer and drain
layer shall appear in person before the Public Works Department and make
application for a sewer and drain layer’s license. The Public Works
Department is empowered to prepare examination questionnaires, hold
examinations and to register as qualified for licensed sewer and drain layers
only those persons who have successfully completed and passed the required
examination.



(1999 Code, § 128.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.03  LICENSE FEES; RENEWAL.



   Licensees shall pay to the city an annual license fee of $105 for a
license, which may be renewed each year without examination (unless the
license is revoked) upon payment of the annual license fee.



(1999 Code, § 128.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.04  BOND REQUIRED.



   Before the Public Works Department issues a license, the applicant
shall file with the Clerk a bond on a form furnished by the city in the penal
sum of $1,000 conditioned for the faithful performance of all the duties
required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city, and to save
harmless the city from all claims and damages of any kind caused by the
operations of the licensee or by reason of neglect or incompetence in the
performance of the work, or careless guarding and maintaining of excavations
made, or failure to replace all streets or public places opened in the same
condition as before breaking up or opening, or for any cause growing out of
the negligence or carelessness of the licensee. The persons shall also file
an affidavit with the Clerk showing that a public liability insurance policy
is in effect on the project which meets current city insurance coverage
requirements.



(1999 Code, § 128.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 118.05  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   The Public Works Department may at any time revoke the license of any
licensee upon evidence and proof of neglect or carelessness in the
prosecution of the work carried on under the license. If the license is
revoked, the licensee may not apply for reexamination or renewal of the
license for a period of one year from the date of revocation.



(1999 Code, § 128.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 119:  EXCURSION GAMBLING BOATS



Section



   119.01   Admission fee



   119.02   Revenue



§ 119.01  ADMISSION FEE.



   An admission fee of $.50 per person shall be charged for each person
embarking on an excursion gambling boat docking within the city. The fee
shall be charged for each person for each excursion taken by the person. The
excursion boat licensee is responsible for collecting this fee. The excursion
boat licensee shall remit the fee to the Clerk on a monthly basis by the
fifteenth day of the month following the collection of the fees.



(1999 Code, § 130.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 119.02  REVENUE.



   The admission for revenue received by the city under this chapter shall
be credited to the city’s General Fund.



(1999 Code, § 130.02)



CHAPTER 120:  CABLE TELEVISION



Section



General Provisions



   120.001   Purpose



   120.002   Definitions of terms



   120.003   Franchise required



   120.004   Action of parties



   120.005   Equal protection



   120.006   Notices



   120.007   Waiver or exemption



Grant of Franchise



   120.020   Purpose



   120.021   Length of franchise



   120.022   Significance of franchise



   120.023   Rights reserved to the grantor



   120.024   Application for franchise



   120.025   Acceptance and effective date of franchise



Standards of Service



   120.040   Geographical coverage



   120.041   Conditions of street occupancy



   120.042   Restoration of public ways



   120.043   Relocation at request of the franchising authority



   120.044   Safety requirements



   120.045   Underground and overground installation requirements



   120.046   Extension of service



   120.047   Service to public buildings



   120.048   Customer service standards; FCC model



   120.049   Local office



   120.050   Deposits



   120.051   Subscriber antennas



   120.052   Disconnection



   120.053   Reconnections



   120.054   Downgrades



   120.055   Termination of service



   120.056   Notification to grantor of service interruptions



   120.057   Subscriber credit for service interruptions



   120.058   Service repair standards



   120.059   Refunds to subscribers



   120.060   Channel card



   120.061   Customer handbook



   120.062   Subscriber privacy



   120.063   Discriminatory or preferential practices



   120.064   Identification of employees



   120.065   Subscriber payments



System Design and Equipment Requirements



   120.080   All channels emergency alert system



   120.081   Switching device



   120.082   Parental control devices



   120.083   Public, educational and governmental channels



   120.084   Access equipment and facilities fee



   120.085   Leased access channels



   120.086   Interference



   120.087   Additional services



   120.088   Technical standards



   120.089   Filing of maps



Regulations by the Franchising Authority



   120.100   Franchise fee



   120.101   Rates and charges



   120.102   Franchise renewal



   120.103   Conditions of sale



   120.104   Transfer of franchise



   120.105   Right of inspection of construction



   120.106   New developments



Compliance and Monitoring



   120.120   Testing for compliance



   120.121   Books and records



   120.122   Communication with regulatory agencies



   120.123   Complaint records



   120.124   City role in complaints



   120.125   Performance testing



   120.126   Review sessions



   120.127   Regulatory responsibility



   120.128   Annual report



Insurance and Indemnification



   120.140   Indemnification



   120.141   Insurance coverage and notifications



   120.142   Insurance for contractors and subcontractors



   120.143   Foreclosure



   120.144   Receivership



   120.145   Continuity of service



   120.146   Franchise processing costs



   120.147   Taxes



Enforcement and Violations



   120.160   Notice of violation



   120.161   Grantee’s right to cure or respond



   120.162   Public hearing



   120.163   Enforcement



   120.164   Prompt compliance



   120.165   Impossibility of performance



   120.166   Termination of franchise



   120.167   Security fund



   120.168   Faithful performance bond



 



   120.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 120.001  PURPOSE.



   The franchising authority, after having determined that the financial,
legal and technical ability of the grantee is reasonably sufficient to
provide services, facilities and equipment necessary to meet the future
cable-related needs of the community, may grant a franchise agreement to
qualified grantees for the construction and operation of a cable system on
the terms set forth herein.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.002  DEFINITIONS OF TERMS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense and words in the plural number shall include the
singular number, and words in the singular number shall include the plural
number:



   BASIC CABLE.  The lowest priced tier of service that includes the
retransmission of local broadcast television signals and any public,
educational and governmental access channels.



   CABLE ACT.  Collectively means the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., and the Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq., and
the Telecommunications Act of 1996, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., as
amended.



   CABLE OPERATOR.  Defined as the same definition used in the Cable Act.



   CABLE SERVICE.  Defined as the same definition used in the Cable Act.



   CABLE SYSTEM.  Defined as the same definition used in the Cable Act.



   CITY.  The City of Clinton and the geographical area within the
corporate boundaries of the city.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission or successor governmental
entity thereto.



   FRANCHISE.  The initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by
the franchising authority, whether the authorization is designated as a
franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, or otherwise,
which authorizes construction and operation of the cable system.



   FRANCHISING AUTHORITY or GRANTOR.  The City Council of the City of
Clinton or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof.



   GRANTEE.  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity granted a
franchise hereunder, or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee thereof.



   GROSS REVENUES.  Any and all revenue received by the grantee from the
operation of the cable system to provide cable service to subscribers in the
service area, provided, however, that the phrase shall not include any fees
or franchise fees or taxes which are imposed directly or indirectly on any
subscriber thereof by any governmental unit or agency, and which are
collected by the grantee on behalf of the governmental unit or agency.



   HEADEND.  The land, electronic processing equipment, antennas, tower,
building and other appurtenances normally associated with and located at the
starting point of a cable system.



   HOUSE DROP or DROP.  A cable that connects each building or home to
the nearest feeder line of the cable network.



   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS.  Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve subscribers. In all cases,
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS, as a minimum, shall mean those hours when the City
Hall is open to serve citizens.



   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS.  Those service conditions which are
within the control of the grantee. Those conditions which are not within the
control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters,
strikes, civil disturbances, power outages,  telephone network outages and
severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily
within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, special
promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal
demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.



   OUTLET.  The point of connection of the cable or wire to a television.



   PERSON.  An individual, partnership, association, joint stock company,
trust, corporation or governmental entity.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  All property, real, personal or mixed, owned by a
private person, including property owned by a public utility not owned or
operated by the city.



   PROPERTY OF THE GRANTEE.  All property, real, personal or mixed, owned
or used by the grantee, however arising from or related to or connected with
the franchise.



   PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL.  Channel capacity designated for noncommercial
public access use.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  All property, real, personal or mixed, owned or used
by the city, including property owned or used by a public utility owned or
operated by the city.



   PUBLIC WAY.  The surface of, and the space above and below, any public
street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard,
sidewalk, parkway, way lane, public way, drive circle or other public
right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements,
dedicated utility strips or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and
any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now or
hereafter held by the franchising authority in the service area which shall
entitle the franchising authority and the grantee to the use thereof for the
purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the system.
PUBLIC WAY shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the
franchising authority within the service area for the purpose of public
travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses,
and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their
proper use and meaning entitle the franchising authority and the grantee to
the use thereof for the purposes of installing and operating the grantee’s
cable system over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be
ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system.



   SERVICE AREA.  The present municipal boundaries of the franchising
authority.



   SERVICE INTERRUPTION.  The loss of video or audio on one or more
channels.



   SERVICE TIER.  A category of cable service or other services provided
by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged by the cable
operator.



   SHALL and WILL.  Are mandatory; MAY is permissive.



   SUBSCRIBER.  A person or user of the system who lawfully receives
communications and other services therefrom with the grantee’s express
permission.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.003  FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



   Subject to federal and state law, no person, firm, company, corporation
or association shall construct, install, maintain or operate within any
public street in the city, or within any other public property of the city,
any equipment or facilities for the distribution of television signals over a
cable system to any subscriber, unless a franchise authorizing the use of the
streets or properties or areas has first been obtained pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, and unless the franchise is in full force and
effect.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.004  ACTION OF PARTIES.



   In any action by the franchising authority or the grantee that is
mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, the party shall act in a
reasonable, expeditious and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where
approval or consent is required under the terms hereof, the approval or
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.005  EQUAL PROTECTION.



   In the event the franchising authority enters into a franchise, permit,
license, authorization or other agreement of any kind with any other person
or entity other than the grantee to enter into the franchising authority’s
streets and public ways for the purpose of constructing or operating a cable
system or providing cable service to any part of the service area, the
material provisions thereof shall be reasonably comparable to those contained
herein, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair competitive
advantage over another, and to provide all parties equal protection under the
law.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.006  NOTICES.



   Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or
response required by a franchise to be served upon the franchising authority
or the grantee shall be in writing, and shall be deemed to have been duly
given to the required party five business days after having been posted in a
properly sealed and correctly addressed envelope when hand delivered or sent
by certified or registered mail, postage prepaid or express mail service.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.007  WAIVER OR EXEMPTION.



   The franchising authority reserves the right to waive provisions of
this chapter or exempt all grantees from meeting provisions of this chapter,
if the franchising authority determines the waiver or exemption is in the
public interest.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



GRANT OF FRANCHISE



§ 120.020  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to specify requirements for the
establishment, construction, operation and maintenance of a cable system in
the city pursuant to the Iowa Code Chapter 364 and applicable federal law. If
a new applicant submits a proposal acceptable to the grantor, meets the
requirements of this chapter, the requirements of the FCC, and applicable
state law the grantor may then proceed to enter into a nonexclusive franchise
agreement with the prospective grantee, subject to the provisions of the
chapter. If the incumbent operator submits a proposal acceptable under the
terms of the Cable Act as amended, and meets the requirements of the FCC, the
city shall proceed to fulfill its obligations under § 626 of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.021  LENGTH OF FRANCHISE.



   The term of a franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations and
restrictions pertaining thereto shall be determined by the grantor in the
franchise agreement.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.022  SIGNIFICANCE OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Franchise nonexclusive.  Any franchise granted hereunder by
the city shall not be exclusive and the city reserves the right to grant a
similar franchise to any qualified person at any time.



   (B)   Privileges must be specified.  No privilege of exemption
shall be inferred from the granting of any franchise, unless it is
specifically prescribed.



   (C)   Authority granted.  Any franchise granted hereunder shall
give to the grantee the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate,
modify and maintain, in, upon, along, above, over and under streets and
public ways, as defined in § 120.002 herein, which have been or may
hereafter be dedicated and open to public use in the city, towers, antennas,
poles, cables, electronic equipment and other network appurtenances necessary
for the operation of a cable system in the city, subject to the requirements
of this chapter.



   (D)   Subject to other regulatory agencies rules and regulations.
The grantee shall at all times during the life of any franchise granted
hereunder be subject to all generally applicable ordinances promulgated
pursuant to the lawful exercise of the police power by the grantor.



   (E)   Pole use agreements required.  Any franchise granted
hereunder shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in
obtaining pole or conduit-use agreements from the gas, electric and the
telephone companies or others maintaining poles or conduits in the streets of
the city.



   (F)   Chapter revisions.  Any franchises granted under this chapter
are  made subject to the lawful  revisions of this chapter and the city
code of ordinances of the grantor, provided that the revisions do not
materially alter or impair the rights or the obligations of grantee set forth
in any franchise agreement and are mutually agreed to by the grantor and
grantees.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.023  RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE GRANTOR.



   (A)   Right of amendment reserved to grantor.  The grantor may from
time to time add to, modify or delete provisions of this chapter as it shall
deem necessary in the exercise of its lawful police powers  and as may be
mutually agreed to by the grantor and grantee. The additions or revisions
shall be made only after a public hearing for which the grantee shall have
received written notice at least 30 days prior to the hearing.



   (B)   No impairment of city’s rights.  Nothing herein shall be
deemed or construed to impair or affect in any way to any extent any right of
the grantor pursuant to Iowa law.



   (C)   Grantee agrees to city’s rights.  The grantor reserves
every right and power which is required to be reserved or provided by an
ordinance of the grantor, and the grantee, by its acceptance of the
franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or
requirements of the grantor in its exercise of the rights or powers which
have been or will be enacted or established subject to the provisions of
division (D) below.



   (D)   Police powers of the grantor.  Neither the granting of any
franchise nor any provision governing the franchise shall constitute a waiver
of any lawful governmental right or power of the grantor.



   (E)   Grantor transfer of functions.  Any administrative right or
power in or administrative duty imposed upon any elected official of the city
shall be subject to transfer by the grantor to any other elected official,
officer, employee, department or board.



   (F)   Grantor right of inspection.  The grantor reserves the right,
during the life of any franchise granted hereunder, to inspect and oversee
all construction or installation work performed in the public right-of-way.



   (G)   Grantor right of network installation.  The grantor reserves
the right during the life of any franchise granted hereunder to install and
maintain for a reasonable charge upon or in the poles and conduits of the
grantee and pole fixtures necessary for municipal networks on the condition
that the installation and maintenance thereof does not interfere with the
operation of the grantee. The grantee agrees that the compensation or charge
shall not exceed those paid by it to public utilities pursuant to the
applicable pole attachment agreement or other authorization relating to the
service area and the use shall be noncommercial and may not be supplied for
any municipal use directly competing with the grantee.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.024  APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE.



   No initial franchise may be granted unless the applicant has
successfully completed the application procedure in accordance with the
following filing instructions promulgated by the grantor.



   (A)   Filing fee.  Payment of a non refundable filing fee to the
grantor of $100 which sum shall be due and payable at the time with the
submission of the application.



   (B)   Content.  All applicants must complete an application which
shall include, but not be limited, to the following:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant.  The name and business
address of the applicant, date of application and signature of applicant or
appropriate corporate officer(s);



      (2)   Description of proposed operation.  A general
description of the applicant’s proposed operation, including but not
limited to business hours, operating staff, maintenance procedures beyond
those required in the chapter, management and marketing staff policies and
procedures, and, if available, the rules of operation for public access;



      (3)   Signal carriage.  A statement of the television and
radio services to be provided, including both off-the-air and locally
originated signals;



      (4)   Special services.  A statement setting forth a
description of the automated services proposed as well as a description of
the production facilities to be made available by the grantee for the public,
governmental and educational channels required to be made available by the
provisions of this chapter;



      (5)   Corporate organization.  A statement detailing the
corporation organization of the applicant, if any, including the names and
addresses of its officers and directors and the number of shares held by each
officer and director;



      (6)   Stockholders.  A statement identifying the number of
authorized outstanding shares of applicant’s stock including a current list
of the names and current addresses of its shareholders holding 5% or more of
the applicant’s outstanding stock;



      (7)   Inter-company relationships.  A statement describing
all inter-company relationships of the applicant, including parent,
subsidiary or affiliated companies;



      (8)   Agreements and understandings.  A statement setting
forth all agreements and understandings, whether written or oral, existing
between the applicant and  any other person with respect to any franchise
awarded hereunder and the conduct of the operation thereof existing at the
time of proposal submittal;



      (9)   Financial statement.  A copy of the financial
statements for the two previous fiscal years;



      (10)   Financial projection.  A five-year operations pro
forma which shall include the initial and continuing plant investment, annual
profit and loss statements detailing income and expenses, annual balance
sheets and annual levels of subscriber penetration.  Costs and revenues
anticipated for voluntary services shall, if presented, be incorporated in
the pro forma as required in this chapter, but shall be separately identified
in the pro forma;



      (11)   Financial support.  Suitable written evidence from a
recognized financing institution, addressed to both applicant’s financial
ability and planned operation and that the financing institution is prepared
to make the required funds available to applicant if it is awarded a
franchise. If the planned operation is to be internally financed, a Board
resolution shall be supplied authorizing the obtainment and expenditure of
the funds as are required to construct, install and operate the cable
television system contemplated hereunder;



      (12)   Construction timetable.  A description of system
construction including the timetable for provision and extension of service
to different parts of the city;



      (13)   Technical description.  A technical description of the
type of system proposed by the applicant, including but not limited to system
configuration, (i.e. hub, dual cable), system capacity, two-way capability
and the like;



      (14)   Existing franchises.  A statement of existing
franchises held by the applicant indicating when the franchises were issued
and when the cable systems were constructed and the present state(s) of the
cable system(s) in each respective governmental unit, together with the name
and address and phone number of a responsible governmental official
knowledgeable of the applicant;



      (15)   Convictions.  A statement as to whether the applicant
or any of its officers or directors or holders of 5% or more of its voting
stock has in the past ten years been convicted of or has any charges pending
for any crime other than a routine traffic offense and the disposition of
each case;



      (16)   Operating experience.  A statement detailing the prior
cable television experience of the applicant, including that of the
applicant’s officers, management and staff to be associated, where known,
with the proposed franchise;



      (17)   Supplementation to applications.  The grantor reserves
the right to require the supplementary, additional or other information that
the grantor deems reasonably necessary for its determinations. The
modifications, deletions, additions or amendments to the application shall be
considered only if specifically requested by the grantor; and



      (18)   Incorporation of proposals.  The grantee, by the
acceptance of any initial franchise awarded hereunder, agrees that the
matters contained in the grantee’s application for franchise, except as
inconsistent with the FCC Rules and Regulations, law or ordinance, shall be
incorporated into the franchise as though set out verbatim.



   (C)   Forfeiture of proposal bond.  Should the grantee fail to
comply with the provisions above, it shall acquire no rights, privileges or
authority under this chapter whatever, and the amount of the proposal bond or
certified check in lieu thereof, submitted with its application, shall be
forfeited in full to the grantor as liquidated damages.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.025  ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Franchise acceptance, procedures.  Any initial franchise
awarded hereunder or franchise renewal and the rights, privileges and
authority granted thereby shall take effect and be in force from and after
the award thereof, provided that the grantee shall file with the grantor the
following:



      (1)   A statement by the grantee of the unconditional
acceptance of the franchise;



      (2)   A certificate of insurance as set forth in § 120.141;
and



      (3)   Reimbursement to the grantor for the costs of
publication of the franchise ordinance and the holding of the election
connected therewith, if required by law.



   (B)   Grantee to have no recourse.  In accordance with § 635A of
the Cable Act, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., the grantee shall have no
monetary recourse whatsoever against the grantor for any loss, cost, expense
or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or its
regulation. This shall not include negligent acts of the grantor, its agents
or employees which are performed outside the regulatory or franchise awarding
authority hereunder.



   (C)   Acceptance of power and authority of grantor.  The grantee
expressly acknowledges that in accepting any franchise awarded hereunder, it
has relied upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and
authority of the grantor to grant this franchise.



   (D)   Inducements not offered.  The grantee, by acceptance of any
franchise awarded hereunder, acknowledges that it has not been induced to
enter into this franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement,
whether verbal or written, by or in behalf of the grantor concerning any term
or condition of this franchise that is not included in this chapter and
franchise agreement.



   (E)   Grantee accepts terms of franchise.  The grantee acknowledges
by the acceptance of the franchise and the terms herein and in this chapter
that it has carefully read the terms and conditions and it is willing to and
does accept all other obligations of the terms and conditions and further
agrees that it will not claim that any provision of this chapter as adopted,
or any franchise granted hereunder, is unreasonable or arbitrary.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



STANDARDS OF SERVICE



§ 120.040  GEOGRAPHICAL COVERAGE.



   The grantee shall provide a cable system in a manner as to pass and
provide adequate tap off facilities for every single-family dwelling unit,
multiple dwelling unit or other residential unit within the service area,
subject to the provisions of the franchise agreement.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.041  CONDITIONS OF STREET OCCUPANCY.



   All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines and
equipment installed or erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms hereof
shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper use
of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners who own property that adjoins any of the public ways. A grantee shall
first obtain a permit from the grantor prior to commencing construction on
the streets, alleys, public grounds or places and shall be on a form provided
by the grantor. A grantee shall not open or disturb the surface of any
street, sidewalk, driveway or public place for any purpose without having
first obtained a permit to do so in the manner provided by ordinance. All
excavation shall be coordinated with other utility excavation or construction
so as to minimize disruption to the public.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.042  RESTORATION OF PUBLIC WAYS.



   If during the course of the grantee’s construction, operation or
maintenance of the cable system there occurs a disturbance of any public way
by the grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and restore the public way
to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the public way
existing immediately prior to the disturbance.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.043  RELOCATION AT REQUEST OF THE FRANCHISING AUTHORITY.



   Upon its receipt of reasonable advance notice, not to be less than ten
business days, the grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way, or remove from the public
way, any property of the grantee when lawfully required by the franchising
authority by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street abandonment,
freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade,
installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of
structures or improvements by the franchising authority; but, the grantee
shall in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property. If public
funds are available to any person using the street, easement or right-of-way
for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, the
franchising authority shall provide notice to the grantee of the grantor’s
application for funds and shall allow the grantee to apply on its own behalf
for funds.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.044  SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.



   Construction, installation and maintenance of the system shall be
performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All work shall be performed
in substantial accordance with applicable FCC or other federal, state and
local regulations and the National Electric Safety Code. The cable system
shall not unreasonably endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or
property in the service area.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.045  UNDERGROUND AND OVERGROUND INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Pole agreements.  The grantee may lease, rent or in any other
manner by mutual agreement obtain the use of towers, poles, lines, cables and
other equipment and facilities from utility companies operating within the
city, and use towers, poles, lines, cables and other equipment and facilities
for the system. When and where practicable, the poles used by the grantee’s
distribution system shall be those erected and maintained by the utility
companies operating within the city, provided mutually satisfactory rental
agreements can be reached. It is the grantor’s desire that all holders of
public franchises in the city cooperate with the grantee and allow the
grantee the use of their poles and pole line facilities whenever possible so
that the number of new or additional poles installed in the city may be
minimized.



   (B)   Grantee’s poles.  The grantee shall have the right to
erect, install and maintain its own towers, poles, guys, anchors, underground
conduits and manholes as may be necessary for the proper construction and
maintenance of the antenna site, headend and distribution system, providing
that the grantee has at the worksite the necessary grantor permit(s) or copy
thereof, for scheduled work, obtained in advance from the appropriate
department of the grantor. However, the grantor’s poles cannot be located
any closer to a street than what is permitted for tree plantings as written
in the city’s code of ordinances.



   (C)   Rent of grantee’s poles.  A grantee shall have the right to
establish terms, conditions and specifications governing the form, type,
size, quantity and location of equipment of others on its poles, and shall
have the further right to charge a fair rental for attachment space or spaces
occupied by the equipment and plant of others, except that no rent shall be
paid by the grantor for its attachment to the grantee’s poles and the use
shall be noncommercial and may not be supplied for any municipal use directly
competing with the grantee. The grantor shall pay any costs incurred by a
grantee in providing space for a grantor’s attachments, including any
necessary rearrangements of a grantee’s equipment and plant to provide room
for grantor’s attachments. Upon expiration, termination or revocation of a
franchise, or should a grantee wish to dispose of any of its poles, conduit
or manholes, being used by the grantor, the grantor shall have the option to
purchase them in place for their fair market value.



   (D)   Underground facilities.  In those areas of the city where
transmission or distribution facilities of both telephone and power companies
are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, the grantee shall
likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and
distribution facilities underground to the maximum extent the then existing
technology permits, in accordance with the most recent National Electrical
Code, and its successor document, as well as in conformance with all
applicable state and municipal ordinances and codes. If and when necessary,
amplifiers and/or transformers in the grantee’s transmission and
distribution lines shall be in appropriate housings on the surface of the
ground. The grantee shall obtain a permit from the grantor for underground
construction of all work required or pursuant to this section. Even when not
required, underground installation is preferable to the placing of additional
poles.



   (E)   Compliance to codes.



      (1)   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and
equipment erected by the grantee in the city shall be located so as not to
endanger or interfere with the normal use of streets, alleys or other public
ways and places so as to cause minimum interference with the rights or
reasonable convenience of the general public and adjoining property owners
and so as not to interfere with existing public utility installations and so
as to comply with the most recent National Electrical Code, as amended, as
well as in conformance with all applicable state and municipal ordinances and
codes of general applicability.



      (2)   In the case of any disturbance by the grantee or its
equipment of pavement, sidewalks, driveway, lawn or other surfacing the
grantee shall, at its expense and in the manner required by the grantor,
promptly replace and restore all surfacing to a reasonably comparable
condition.



      (3)   The construction, installation, operation, maintenance
and/or removal of the cable communications system shall meet all of the
following safety, construction and technical specifications and codes and
standards:



         (a)   Occupational Safety and Health Administration
Regulations (OSHA);



         (b)   National Electric Code;



         (c)   National Electrical Safety Code (NESC);



         (d)   All federal, state and municipal construction
requirements, including FCC Rules and Regulations;



         (e)   All building and zoning codes, as the same exist
or may be amended hereafter; and



         (f)   City standard specifications.



   (F)   Interference with other utilities.  The grantee shall not
place poles, conduits, or other fixtures above or below ground where the same
shall interfere with any prior placement of gas, electric, telephone
fixtures, water hydrant or other utilities, and all poles, conduits or other
fixtures above or below ground shall be so placed as to comply with all the
lawful requirements of the grantor.



   (G)   Moving permits.  The grantee shall, on request of any persons
holding a moving permit issued by the grantor, temporarily move its wires or
fixtures to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of the temporary
removal shall be paid in advance by the person requesting the same, and the
grantee shall be given not less than seven business days advance notice to
arrange for temporary changes.



   (H)   Authority to trim trees and shrubbery.  The grantee shall
have the authority under the supervision and direction of the grantor to trim
trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its cable system in the
street or alley right-of-way so as to prevent branches from coming in contact
with the grantee’s wires, cables or other equipment. The grantee shall
reasonably compensate the grantor or property owner for any damages caused by
trimming, or shall, in its sole discretion, and at its own cost and expense,
reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as a result of any
construction of the cable system undertaken by grantee. Replacement shall
satisfy any and all obligations grantee may have to the grantor pursuant to
the terms of this section.



   (I)   Service area.  The grantee shall design and construct the
cable system in a manner as to pass by and provide adequate tap-off
facilities for every single-family dwelling, multiple-family dwelling,
apartment, school and government building located within the city limits
based upon the corporate boundaries at the time of the granting of the
franchise, provided that the locations meet the density requirements pursuant
to § 120.046.



   (J)   Underground construction.  The grantee shall participate in
and use Iowa One Call and ensure that cable is buried pursuant to standards
established by Iowa One Call or any state mandated successor agency.



   (K)   Temporary drops.  Temporary drops shall be buried within 45
days of installation, except during the winter months which shall be defined
as November 15 to April 1. In the event that the grantee fails to bury any
cable drops, within the two-month period, the grantee shall provide basic and
expanded basic cable service without charge to the affected cable subscriber
from the last date that the drop was to have been buried to that actual date
that it is buried. In the event that the grantor fails to buy any cable
drops, the city shall have the authority to take the necessary action to
complete the tasks and collect the costs back from the grantor.



   (L)   Closing of streets.  The grantee shall not be entitled to
damages from the grantor sustained by the virtue of the closing, vacation or
relocation of any streets or alleys.



   (M)   Private easements.  No cable, line, wire, amplifier,
converter or other pieces of equipment owned by the grantee shall be
installed by the grantee within private easements without first securing the
written permission of the owner, lessee or tenant of the property involved,
unless a private easement is determined to be available for use by the
grantee in accordance with applicable law.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.046  EXTENSION OF SERVICE.



   Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall require that a
grantee shall, at its expense, promptly extend its system to have service
available to all potential subscribers of:



   (A)   The corporate limits of the city and newly annexed areas to
the city, not then served by a cable system, where the average density is at
least six potential subscribers per lineal one-quarter mile of the proposed
trunk and feeder cable route;



   (B)   Any new single-family dwelling unit, commercial establishment,
or potential subscriber within 200 feet of the existing distribution system
in the city, upon request of the potential subscriber; and



   (C)   (1)   No customer shall be refused service arbitrarily.
However, for unusual circumstances, such as:



         (a)   Existence of more than 200 feet of distance from
the distribution cable to the connection point of service to the customers: or



         (b)   A density of less than six potential subscribers
per 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet of trunk or distribution cable, service
may be made available on the basis of a capital contribution in aid of
construction, including cost of material, labor and easements.



      (2)   For the purpose of determining the amount of capital
contribution in the aid of construction to be borne by the grantee and the
customers in the area in which service may be expanded, the grantee will
contribute an amount equal to the construction and other costs per
one-quarter mile, multiplied by a fraction whose numerator equals the actual
number of residences per 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet of its trunks or
distribution cable, and whose denominator equals six potential subscribers.
Customers who request service hereunder will bear the remainder of the
construction and other costs on a pro rata basis. The grantee may require
that the payment of the capital contribution in aid of the construction borne
by the  potential customers be paid in advance.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.047  SERVICE TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS.



   Any grantee shall upon request, provide without charge, one outlet of
basic service and expanded basic service to those public buildings identified
in the franchise agreement in accordance with the terms set forth in the
franchise agreement.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.048  CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS; FCC MODEL.



   Any grantee shall adhere to the FCC’s customer service standards. A
copy of the standards effective as of the date of the passage of this chapter
is attached to the ordinance codified herein as Exhibit A, which is available
for public inspection at the City Clerk’s office during regular city
business hours.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.049  LOCAL OFFICE.



   A grantee shall establish a local office conveniently located within
the city, which shall be open during normal business hours, and adequately
staffed to accept subscriber payments and respond to service requests and
complaints.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.050  DEPOSITS.



   If required by federal law, a grantee shall bear interest at the
minimum lending rate required by law on any subscriber deposit or a rate
equal to that paid by the grantor for water and/or sewer deposits.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.051  SUBSCRIBER ANTENNAS.



   A grantee shall not require the removal of any potential or existing
subscriber’s antenna as a condition of provision of service, except with
the consent of the cable subscriber. This provision shall not apply to
satellite receiving antennas.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.052  DISCONNECTION.



   There shall be no charge for a disconnection of cable service. The
grantee may prescribe advance disconnect notice requirements for use when a
subscriber voluntarily elects to disconnect cable service. If any subscriber
fails to pay a fee or charge, a grantee may disconnect the subscriber’s
service. The disconnection shall not be effected until the subscriber has
been given ten days advance written notice of the intention to disconnect.
After disconnection, upon payment of any required delinquent fee or
reconnection charge, the grantee shall reinstate the subscriber’s service.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.053  RECONNECTIONS.



   A grantee shall restore service to customers wishing restoration of
service provided customer shall first satisfy any previous obligations owed.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.054  DOWNGRADES.



   Subscribers shall have the right to have cable service disconnected or
downgraded in accordance with FCC rules. The reduced billing for the service
will be effective immediately and the disconnection or downgrade shall be
made as soon as practicable. A refund of unused service charges shall be paid
to the customer within 30 days from the date of termination of service.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.055  TERMINATION OF SERVICE.



   Within 30 days of termination of service to any subscriber for any
reason, a grantee may, upon the subscriber’s written request, promptly
remove all its aerial facilities and equipment from the subscriber’s
premises, pursuant to FCC Rules and Regulations.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.056  NOTIFICATION TO GRANTOR OF SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS.



   A grantee shall promptly notify the grantor, in writing, or, if
appropriate, by oral communication, of any significant interruption in the
operation of the system. For the purposes of this section, a SIGNIFICANT
INTERRUPTION IN THE OPERATION OF THE SYSTEM shall mean any interruption of
audio or video on one or more channels for a duration of at least one hour to
at least one fiber node or a maximum of 600 subscribers,  in the service
area, or an interruption of audio or video on at least one or more channels
initiated by the grantee of at least four hours to any single subscriber. The
grantee shall not be required to provide specific notice to the grantor of
service interruptions in the case of a cable system upgrade.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.057  SUBSCRIBER CREDIT FOR SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS.



   Upon service interruption of subscriber’s cable service, the
following shall apply:



   (A)   For service interruptions of over four hours and up to seven
days, the grantee shall provide, at the subscriber’s verbal or written
request, a credit of one-thirtieth of one-month’s fees for affected
services for each 24-hour period service is interrupted for four or more
hours for all affected subscribers.



   (B)   For interruptions of 15 days or more in one month, the grantee
shall provide, at the subscriber’s request, a full month’s credit for
affected services for all affected subscribers, except in situations beyond
the control of the grantee.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.058  SERVICE REPAIR STANDARDS.



   A grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible.
Scheduled service interruptions, insofar as possible, shall occur during
periods of minimum use of the cable system. A written log or an equivalent
stored in computer memory and capable of access and reproduction, shall be
maintained for all service interruptions, as required by this chapter.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.059  REFUNDS TO SUBSCRIBERS.



   (A)   If a grantee fails to provide any material service requested
by a subscriber in accordance with the current FCC standards, the grantee
shall, after adequate notification and being afforded the opportunity to
provide the service, promptly refund all deposits or advance charges paid for
the service in question by the subscriber.



   (B)   If any subscriber terminates for any other reason, a grantee
shall refund the unused portion of any prepaid subscriber service fee on a
daily pro rata basis. The effective date used to pro rate the refunds shall
be the date that the subscriber contacts the grantee or a mutually agreed
upon date.



   (C)   Any disputes arising under this section shall be resolved in
accordance with § 120.124 this chapter.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.060  CHANNEL CARD.



   The grantee shall distribute to all subscribers via direct mail or bill
stuffers no less than annually an accurate and up-to-date channel card
listing the cable channels and services available over the cable system. A
revised channel card shall be distributed via a newspaper of record within 30
days after a change or  an addition in channels or services offered
affecting two or fewer channels. Whenever changes in channels or services
have affected three or more channels since the last channel card distributed
via direct mail or bill stuffers, then a new channel card shall be
distributed to every subscriber within 30 days via direct mail or bill
stuffers.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.061  CUSTOMER HANDBOOK.



   A grantee shall provide written customer policies or a handbook to all
new subscribers and, thereafter, upon request. A grantee’s written customer
policies or handbook shall, at a minimum, comply with all notice requirements
in this chapter and those promulgated by the FCC. If the grantee’s
operating rules are changed, subscribers shall be notified in a timely manner.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.062  SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.



   A grantee shall abide by current federal law and FCC regulations and §
631 of the Cable Act, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., regarding protection
of subscriber privacy.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.063  DISCRIMINATORY OR PREFERENTIAL PRACTICES.



   A grantee shall not, in making available the services or facilities of
its cable system, or in its rules or regulations, or in any other manner,
make or grant preferences or advantages to any subscriber or potential
subscriber, or to any user or potential user, and shall not subject any
person to any prejudice or disadvantage, based on their race, color, national
origin or gender. This provision shall not prohibit promotional campaigns to
stimulate subscriptions to the cable system or other legitimate uses thereof,
nor the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate
schedules to which any subscriber coming within the classification shall be
entitled.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.064  IDENTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES.



   Every field service and installation employee of the grantee shall be
clearly identified by an identification card, badge or uniform shirt. All
employees of grantee shall display proper identification upon request of a
subscriber, provided that the grantor requires all utilities operating in the
city to do the same. Every field service and installation vehicle of the
grantee shall be clearly marked by logo or decals.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.065  SUBSCRIBER PAYMENTS.



   Subscribers shall be given no less than 15 days to make payment without
penalty from the date of the receipt of the invoice for cable service. The
grantee shall not send persons to subscriber’s residence to collect cable
bills. The cable operator shall attempt to collect cable bills by phone
calls, and if not successful, shall disconnect cable service.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



SYSTEM DESIGN AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS



§ 120.080  ALL CHANNELS EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM.



   The grantee shall, in the case of any emergency or disaster, make its
entire cable system available without charge to the grantor or to any other
governmental or civil defense agency that the grantor shall designate. The
cable system shall be engineered to provide an audio and video alert system
to allow authorized officials to automatically override the audio and video
signal on all channels and transmit and report emergency information pursuant
to FCC regulations. The franchising authority shall hold the grantee, its
agents, employees, officers and assigns hereunder, harmless from any claims
arising out of the emergency use of its facilities by the franchising
authority, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees and
costs, provided that the emergency alert system is in good repair and is
operational as required by FCC regulations and the franchise agreement. The
grantee will install and maintain a back up generator at its headend that
will provide the needed power to generate the headend in the event of a power
outage.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.081  SWITCHING DEVICE.



   A grantee, upon request from any subscriber, shall install at a
reasonable charge a switching device to permit a subscriber to continue to
utilize the subscriber’s television antenna. The grantee shall not require
the removal, or offer to remove, any subscriber’s antenna lead-in wire.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.082  PARENTAL CONTROL DEVICES.



   Upon request, and within 120 days, grantee shall provide at a
reasonable charge to subscribers, parental control devices that allow any
channel or channels to be locked out. The devices shall block both the video
and the audio portion of the channels to the extent that both are
unintelligible. The lockout device described herein shall be made available
to all subscribers requesting it beginning on the first day that any cable
service is provided.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.083  PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL CHANNELS.



   The grantee shall provide at least two specially dedicated,
noncommercial education and government channels to be made available to the
public, groups and individuals on a first-come, non-discriminatory basis, as
required by the franchise agreement. The channels shall be operated in accord
with FCC Rules and Regulations. The grantee shall make no charge for use of
the channel. The franchising authority or its designee shall exercise sole
control over the operation and shall establish rules providing for access to
the education and government channels.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.084  ACCESS EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES FEE.



   If authorized by the grantor, and after 60-days’ notice from the
grantor to a grantee, a grantor shall provide ongoing support for public,
educational and governmental access equipment and facilities in the amount of
not to exceed $1 per subscriber per month for the entire term of this
franchise payable in the same manner as the franchise fee payment pursuant to
§ 120.100 hereof. The grantor acknowledges that this amount shall not be
considered gross revenues subject to the payment of franchise fees pursuant
to § 120.100 hereof. Furthermore, payments of this ongoing support shall not
be deemed to be “franchise fees” within the meaning of § 622 of the
Cable Act, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., and the payment shall not be
deemed to be “payments-in-kind” or any involuntary payments chargeable
against the compensation to be paid to the grantor by a grantee pursuant to
§ 120.100 hereof. A grantee shall be allowed to collect a fee as a pass
through to cable subscribers. This fee shall be revised on an annual basis in
accordance with the consumer price index.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.085  LEASED ACCESS CHANNELS.



   Any grantee shall make a portion of the remaining unused channels
available for lease as required by § 612 of the Cable Act, being 47 U.S.C.
§§ 521 et seq.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.086  INTERFERENCE.



   The grantee’s cable system shall be designed, engineered and
maintained so as not to interfere with the television and radio reception of
residents of the city who are not subscribers on the cable system.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.087  ADDITIONAL SERVICES.



   The grantee is encouraged to make available the additional video,
audio, radio, digital, point-to-point service and other services as are
requested by subscribers and programmers who are willing to pay for services,
provided that the services are technologically and economically feasible. If
no applicable rate exists when a service is requested, the rate change
notification procedures established in § 120.101 shall be followed.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.088  TECHNICAL STANDARDS.



   The cable system shall be operated and maintained in compliance with
FCC Rules and Regulations Technical Standards K of 47 C.F.R. Ch. 1, Part 76,
as revised or amended from time to time and is attached to the ordinance
codified herein as Exhibit B. FCC proof of performance test results shall be
delivered to the grantor annually or upon written request of the grantor. The
grantee shall file a copy of test results performed by the FCC or other
governmental regulatory agencies on the cable system with the grantor.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.089  FILING OF MAPS.



   Upon request of the grantor, the grantee shall file with the grantor
strand maps, showing the location of all property and facilities of the
grantee within the city. All maps supplied by the grantee shall be considered
confidential and proprietary.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



REGULATIONS BY THE FRANCHISING AUTHORITY



§ 120.100  FRANCHISE FEE.



   (A)   Franchise fee payment.  In consideration for the use of the
streets and public ways of the city for the construction, operation,
maintenance and reconstruction of a cable system within the city, the grantee
shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee, as specified in the franchise
agreement.



   (B)   Quarterly payments.  Payment due to the grantor under the
franchise agreement shall be made quarterly at the City Clerk’s office not
later than 45 days following March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31
of each year. Any fee not paid when due shall bear interest at a rate of
1-1/2% per month from the date due. Each payment shall be accompanied with a
detailed report, as shown in Exhibit C, which is available for public
inspection at the City Clerk’s office during regular city business hours,
showing the basis for the computation, and shall include but not be limited
to, a specific breakdown of the following items:  basic tier service
charges, expanded basic service charges, installation charges, reconnection
fees, premium channel revenues, revenue from other sources such as contracted
or subleased cable services, pay per view, miscellaneous revenue and other
relevant facts, as may be required by the grantor, necessary to determine the
accuracy of the franchise payment as specified in of this chapter. The
acceptance of any payment shall not be construed as an accord that the amount
paid is, in fact, the correct amount; nor shall the acceptance of payment be
construed as a release of any claim the grantor may have for additional sums
payable by the grantee. All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and
recomputation by the grantor. The grantee shall permit the city, upon request
with reasonable notice, to review at grantee’s local office its gross
revenue records as may be necessary to monitor compliance with this section
of this chapter.



   (C)   Franchise fee audit.  A grantee will fully cooperate with a
franchise fee audit performed by a professional firm that is chosen by the
grantor. The costs associated with the audit will be paid for by the grantor,
except that the grantee shall pay for the costs if the audit shows an
underpayment of franchise fees in excess of 5% or more for a one-year audited
period. The grantee agrees to permit the city, upon request with reasonable
notice, to review at grantee’s local office its gross revenue records as
may be necessary to monitor compliance with this section of this chapter.



   (D)   Franchise fee increases.  The grantor may request an increase
in franchise fees at any time during the term of the franchise, equal to the
maximum percentage allowed by federal law. However, the request shall be made
in writing and the grantee will not be liable for the increase until proper
notice, as defined by federal law, is given to its subscriber. Prior to
making a final decision regarding an increase in franchise fees, the grantor
shall conduct a public hearing and shall grant an opportunity to the grantee
to discuss the proposed increase in franchise fee.



   (E)   Limitation on franchise fee actions.  The period of
limitation for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder shall be five
years from the date on which payment by a grantee is due.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.101  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The franchising authority may regulate rates for the provision
of basic cable and equipment as permitted by of the Cable Act.



   (B)   Any rate adjustments shall be filed with the City Clerk not
later than 30 days prior to the implementation of the adjustment.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.102  FRANCHISE RENEWAL.



   Any proceedings undertaken by the franchising authority that relate to
the renewal of a grantee’s franchise shall be governed by and comply with
the provisions of § 626 of the Cable Act, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.,
as amended, unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth
therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of
any subsequent provision of federal or state law.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.103  CONDITIONS OF SALE.



   (A)   If a renewal or extension of a grantee’s franchise is denied
or the franchise is lawfully terminated, and the franchising authority either
lawfully acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions lawfully
effects a transfer or ownership of the cable system to another person,
provisions set forth in § 627 of the Cable Act, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et
seq.



   (B)   In the case of a final determination of a lawful revocation of
the franchise, at the grantee’s request, which shall be made in its sole
discretion, the grantee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to effectuate
a transfer of its system to a qualified third party. During a period of time
the franchise authority shall authorize the grantee to continue to operate
pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise. However, in no event shall the
authorization exceed a period of time greater than six months from the
effective date of the revocation. If, at the end of that time, the grantee is
unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its system
which is reasonably acceptable to the franchise authority, the grantee and
the franchising authority may avail themselves of any rights they may have
pursuant to federal or state law. The grantee may continue to operate of its
system during the six-month period and it shall not be deemed to be a waiver
or extinguishments of any right of either the franchising authority or the
grantee.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.104  TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Transfer of franchise.  Any franchise granted under this
chapter shall be a privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. Any
franchise so granted cannot, in any event, be sold, transferred, leased,
assigned or disposed of, including, but not limited to, by forced or
voluntary sale, except to entity controlling, controlled by or under common
control with the grantee, without the prior written consent of the
franchising authority. Consent as required by the franchising authority,
shall be given or denied no later than 120 days following any request and
shall not be unreasonably withheld. Prior consent shall not be required when
transferring the franchise between wholly-owned subsidiaries of the same
entity. Nor shall consent be required for a transfer in trust, by mortgage,
by other hypothecation, or assignment of any rights, title or interest of the
grantee in the cable system in order to secure indebtedness.



   (B)   Ownership or control.  In the event that the grantee sells or
otherwise transfers ownership in the cable system, the sale or transfer shall
conform with § 617 of the Cable Act, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq. For
the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to the change, transfer
or acquisition of control, the franchising authority may in accordance with
§ 617 inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party,
and the grantee shall assist the franchising authority in any inquiry. In
seeking the grantor’s consent to any change in ownership or control, the
transferee shall have the responsibility:



      (1)   To show to the satisfaction of the franchising authority
whether the proposed purchaser, transferee or assignee (the proposed
transferee), which in the case of a corporation, shall include all directors
and all persons having a legal or equitable interest of 50% or more of the
voting stock:



         (a)   Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts
involving moral turpitude including, but not limited to, any violation of
federal, state or local law or regulations, or is presently under an
indictment, investigation or complaint charging the acts;



         (b)   Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud,
deceit or misrepresentation entered against it, her, him or them by any court
of competent jurisdiction; or



         (c)   Has pending any legal claim, lawsuit or
administrative proceeding arising out of or involving a cable system. The
franchising authority retains the right to withhold approval of the transfer
until the transferee has provided the information required in this division
(B)(1).



      (2)   To establish the financial solvency of the proposed
transferee by submitting all current financial data for the proposed
transferee and other data to determine the legal, financial and technical
qualification of the transferee; and



      (3)   To establish that the technical capability of the
proposed transferee is such as shall enable it to maintain and operate the
cable system for the remaining term of the franchise under the existing
franchise terms.



   (C)   Any financial institution having a pledge of the franchise or
its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation
of the franchise shall have the right to notify the franchising authority
that the financial institution, or its designee, as approved in writing by
the franchising authority, shall take control and operate the cable system in
the event of a grantee default in its financial obligations. Further, the
financial institution shall also submit a plan for the operation that will
ensure continued service and compliance with all franchise requirements
during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system.
The financial institution shall not exercise control over the cable system
for a period exceeding one year, unless extended by the franchising authority
at its discretion, but during the period of time it shall have the right to
petition the franchising authority to transfer the franchise to another
grantee. Except insofar as the enforceability of this division may be limited
by applicable bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium or similar
laws affecting creditors rights generally, and further subject to applicable
federal, state or local law, if the franchising authority finds that the
transfer, after considering the legal, financial, character, technical and
other public interest qualities of the proposed transferee, is satisfactory,
the franchising authority shall transfer and assign the right and obligations
of the franchise as in the public interest.



   (D)   The consent or approval of the franchising authority to any
transfer by the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the
rights of the franchising authority in and to the streets, and any transfer
shall by its terms, be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of any
franchise.



   (E)   In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be
approved without the successor in interest becoming a signatory of the
franchise agreement.



   (F)   The franchising authority may approve the transfer or deny the
transfer pursuant to § 617 of the Cable Act.



   (G)   When the grantor approves a transfer under this section, the
new grantee shall indicate acceptance of the franchise as specified in §
120.025, including the filing of all necessary bonds, funds, proofs of
insurance and certifications.



   (H)   The restrictions of this section shall be effective
immediately upon execution of a franchise agreement.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.105  RIGHT OF INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION.



   The grantor shall have the right to visually inspect all construction
or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this chapter and
to make visual inspections as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other pertinent provision of law.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.106  NEW DEVELOPMENTS.



   The grantee is encouraged to upgrade its facilities, equipment and
service so that its cable system is as advanced as the current state of
production technology will allow. New developments shall be a topic of
discussion at all review sessions and shall be a factor to be considered in
connection with requests for rate adjustments, pursuant to FCC Rules and
Regulations.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



COMPLIANCE AND MONITORING



§ 120.120  TESTING FOR COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   The grantee shall meet or exceed all FCC minimum performance
and technical standards. The grantor shall have the right to compel the
grantee to provide results of grantee’s testing of the cable system. In the
event that the grantor has evidence of noncompliance, the grantor may also
perform technical tests of the cable system during reasonable times and in a
manner which does not unreasonably interfere with the normal business
operations of the grantee or the cable system in order to determine whether
or not the grantee is in compliance with the terms hereof and applicable
state or federal laws. Tests may be undertaken only after giving the grantee
reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than ten business days, and
providing a representative of the grantee has an opportunity to be present
during the tests. In the event that testing demonstrates that the grantee has
substantially failed to comply with a material requirement hereof, the
reasonable costs of the tests shall be borne by  the grantee. In the event
that the testing demonstrates that the grantee has substantially complied
with the material provisions hereof, the cost of the testing shall be borne
by the franchising authority. Except in emergency circumstances, the
franchising authority agrees that the testing shall be undertaken no more
than once a year, and that the results thereof shall be made available to the
grantee.



   (B)   Any special performance tests or measurements required by the
grantor shall be reported to the grantor within 14 business days after the
test or measurements are performed. The report shall include the following
information:  the nature of the complaint which precipitated the special
tests; what system component was tested, the equipment used and procedures
employed in the testing; the results of the tests; and the method in which
the complaints were resolved. Any other information pertinent to the special
test shall be recorded.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.121  BOOKS AND RECORDS.



   The franchising authority or its certified public accountant upon
reasonable notice to the grantee may review such of its books and records at
the grantee’s business office, during normal business hours and on a
nondisruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the
terms hereof. The records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any
public records required to be kept by the grantee pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth
herein, the grantee shall not be required to disclose information which it
reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature under state and
federal rules of evidence. The franchising authority agrees to treat any
information disclosed by the grantee as confidential and only to disclose it
to employees, representatives and agents thereof that have a need to know, or
in order to enforce the provisions hereof. The grantee shall not be required
to provide subscriber information in violation of § 631 of the Cable Act,
being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.122  COMMUNICATION WITH REGULATORY AGENCIES.



   Copies of all petitions, applications, communications, reports and all
other documents pertaining specifically to the city’s cable system and
franchise submitted by the grantee or its parent companies to the FCC,
Securities Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory
commission or agency shall be made available to the grantor upon written
request to the grantee.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.123  COMPLAINT RECORDS.



   A written log or an equivalent stored in computer memory and capable of
access and reproduction, shall be maintained for all service interruptions or
complaints regarding system service problems. The grantee shall maintain
detailed logs setting forth the date and substance of each service
interruption or complaint regarding the system service problems received by
phone, mail or other means during the preceding calendar month, and the date
and nature of action taken by the grantee to respond to the complaints, or,
if still pending, the status thereof. Logs shall be available to the grantor
for review for two years thereafter. A COMPLAINT as used herein shall be a
written or oral complaint from a subscriber regarding signal quality or
service, but not regarding programming or rates which, in the case of oral
complaints is not resolved within the original telephone call or visit from
the subscriber.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.124  CITY ROLE IN COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   Unresolved complaints concerning the system or its operation
or maintenance may be directed to the City Administrator.



   (B)   The procedure to handle complaints shall be as follows.



      (1)   Within 30 days from the occurrence of the facts and
circumstances giving rise to a complaint or grievance, the complainant shall
state his or her complaint or grievance to the grantee in writing. In the
event a complaint or grievance is received by the city, the same shall be
forwarded to grantee in writing.



      (2)   Within five business days from the receipt by the
grantee of a complaint from the city, the grantee shall state to complainant
its intentions with respect to the complaint in writing.



      (3)   Unresolved complaints concerning the system or its
operation or maintenance shall be directed to the city. The city shall
promptly forward the complaint to the grantee or shall take the question up
by correspondence with the grantee. Within the time as may be reasonably
prescribed by the city, the grantee shall resolve the complaint or advise the
city of its refusal or inability to do so. When the grantee resolves the
complaint, it shall so notify the city. If a complaint has not been resolved,
the city may take any appropriate action authorized by this chapter.



      (4)   All subscribers shall be notified by the grantee at the
time of their initial installation of these complaint procedures in writing
and on the cable bills on an annual basis.



      (5)   Nothing herein shall limit or alter the requirement or
requirements contained in this chapter for customer service standards as
contained in Exhibit A, which is available for public inspection at the City
Clerk’s office during regular city business hours.



      (6)   The grantor shall be notified of action taken to resolve
grievances or complaints that have been referred to the grantee by the
grantor.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.125  PERFORMANCE TESTING.



   The grantee shall perform all cable system tests and maintenance
procedures as required by the FCC and this chapter.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.126  REVIEW SESSIONS.



   (A)   Purpose of review sessions.  In recognition of the fact that
a great many technical, financial, marketing and legal uncertainties are
associated with all aspects of cable communications at the present time, it
is the intent of the city to provide for a maximum feasible degree of
flexibility in a franchise throughout its term to achieve an advanced and
modern cable system for the city. The principal means for accomplishing this
flexibility will be the scheduled review sessions provided for in this
chapter. It is intended that review sessions will serve as a means of
cooperatively working out solutions to problems that develop. Furthermore,
review sessions shall be two-way processes. For example, if either party has
perceived that some major problem has developed, the session shall be devoted
primarily to working out solutions acceptable to both parties.



   (B)   Topics to be covered.



      (1)   The grantor and the grantee shall hold scheduled review
sessions on the third, sixth and ninth anniversary dates of the effective
date of the franchise agreement. All review sessions shall be open to the
public and notice thereof shall be published once, not less than four days or
more than 20 days before each review session, as provided by law. The
published notice shall specify the topics to be discussed. The review
sessions may be canceled by mutual agreement of the grantor and grantee. The
following topics may be discussed at every scheduled review session:



         (a)   Recent and developing judicial and federal
communications rulings;



         (b)   Service rate structures;



         (c)   Free and discounted services;



         (d)   Application of new technology or new developments;



         (e)   Cable system performance;



         (f)   Cable system extension policy;



         (g)   Services provided;



         (h)   Programming offered;



         (i)   Customer complaints review;



         (j)   Community development and education;



         (k)   Interconnection;



         (l)   New services;



         (m)   Subscriber privacy abuse issues;



         (n)   New developments;



         (o)   Franchise fees; and



         (p)   Other topics, in addition to those listed, may be
added by either party.



      (2)   Members of the general public may also request
additional topics.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.127  REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITY.



   The franchising authority, acting alone or acting jointly with other
franchising authorities, may exercise or delegate the following
responsibilities:



   (A)   Administering the provision of a cable system franchise(s);



   (B)   Coordinating the operation of a local access channel and
facilities;



   (C)   Providing technical, programming and operational support to
public agency users, such as government departments, schools and health care
institutions;



   (D)   Establishing jointly with a grantee, or as otherwise specified
in the franchise agreement, procedures and standards for use of channels
dedicated to public use and the sharing of public facilities, if provided for
in any franchise agreement;



   (E)   Planning the expansion and growth of public benefit cable
services;



   (F)   Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable systems with
other local, regional or national telecommunications networks; and



   (G)   Formulating and recommending long-range telecommunications
policy.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.128  ANNUAL REPORT.



   No later than 90 days after the close of a grantee’s fiscal year, and
upon written request, the grantee shall submit a detailed written informative
report to the city, including the following information:



   (A)   A summary of the previous year’s activities in development
of the cable system, including, but not limited to, services begun or dropped
and newly served geographic areas within the city limits;



   (B)   A summary of complaints, identifying the number and specific
nature of complaints and their disposition;



   (C)   A list of key management for the city’s franchise along with
their addresses and job titles;



   (D)   The annual report of the parent company, if a public
corporation. The report shall be construed to mean the report of the previous
year; and



   (E)   The total estimated annual value of the potential revenue from
cable services provided in the service area without charge or provided under
a barter arrangement, along with the total estimated number of persons who
are provided cable services in the service area without charge or under a
barter agreement.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION



§ 120.140  INDEMNIFICATION.



   Any grantee shall defend, indemnify, protect and hold harmless the
grantor from and against any and all liability, losses and damage to property
or bodily injury or death to any person, including payments made under
worker’s compensation laws, which may arise out of or be caused by the
erection, construction, replacement, removal, maintenance or operation of
grantee’s cable system and caused by any act or failure to act on the part
of the grantee, its agents, officers, servants or employees. The grantor
shall give the grantee written notice of its obligation to indemnify, within
30 days following service of a petition or other similar pleading. If the
grantor determines that it is necessary for it to employ separate counsel,
the costs for separate counsel shall be the responsibility of the grantor.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.141  INSURANCE COVERAGE AND NOTIFICATIONS.



   (A)   A grantee shall maintain insurance in amounts and kinds of
coverages as may be specified by the grantor in the franchise agreement.
Coverages may be reasonably adjusted by the grantor with 90-day notification,
provided that the grantor demonstrates the need for increases in coverages.
The grantee shall maintain insurance with insurance underwriters authorized
to do business in the state. All policies shall name the grantor, its
employees, servants, agents and officers as additional insured parties. Each
policy shall provide that it may not be canceled nor the amount of coverage
altered until 30 days after receipt by the City Clerk of a registered mail
notice of the intent to cancel or alter coverage.



   (B)   The grantee shall provide a certificate of insurance
designating the grantor as an additional insured. The grantee shall maintain
and provide to the grantor proof of public liability insurance for not less
than the amounts specified in the franchise agreement.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.142  INSURANCE FOR CONTRACTORS AND SUBCONTRACTORS.



   Any grantee shall provide coverage for any contractor or subcontractor
involved in the construction, installation, maintenance or operation of its
cable system by either obtaining the necessary endorsements to its insurance
policies or requiring the contractor or subcontractor to obtain appropriate
insurance coverage consistent with this section and appropriate to the extent
of its involvement in the construction, installation, maintenance or
operation of the grantee’s cable system.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.143  FORECLOSURE.



   A foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or part of the system shall
be treated as a change in control of the grantee and the provision of §
120.166 of this chapter shall apply.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.144  RECEIVERSHIP.



   The city shall have the right to cancel this franchise 120 days after
the appointment of a receiver or trustee, to take over and conduct the
business of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy
or other action or proceedings, unless the receivership or trusteeship shall
have been vacated prior to the expiration of 120 days, or less:



   (A)   Within 120 days after being elected or appointed, the receiver
or trustee shall have fully complied with all provisions of this chapter and
remedied all defaults thereunder; and



   (B)   Shall have executed an agreement, approved by the court having
jurisdiction, whereby the receiver or trustee agrees to be bound by this
chapter and the franchise granted to the grantee.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.145  CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Right to continuous service.  It shall be the right of all
subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and
other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee
elects to rebuild, modify or sell the cable system, or the franchising
authority gives notice in accordance with the franchise or this chapter of
intent to terminate or fails to renew this franchise, the grantee shall act
so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted
service for six months. In the event of a change of grantee, or in the event
a new operator acquires the cable system, the original grantee shall
cooperate with the franchising authority, new grantee or operator in
maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During the period,
grantee shall be entitled to the revenue for any period during which it
operates the cable system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its
services when it no longer operates the cable system.



   (B)   Right of franchising authority to operate cable system.  In
the event grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days
without prior approval of the franchising authority or without just cause,
the franchising authority may, working in conjunction with any financial
institution having a pledge of the franchise or its assets for the
advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise,
operate the system or designate an operator until a time as grantee restores
service under conditions acceptable to the franchising authority or a
permanent operator is selected. If the franchising authority is required to
fulfill this obligation for the grantee, then during the period as the
franchising authority fulfills the obligation, the franchising authority
shall be entitled to a reasonable management fee.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.146  FRANCHISE PROCESSING COSTS.



   (A)   Initial franchises.  For an initial franchise awarded, the
costs to be borne by the grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to,
all costs of publication of notices prior to any public meeting, publication
of relevant ordinances and franchise agreements, incurred by the franchising
authority.



   (B)   Franchise renewal costs.  For a franchise renewal, the
grantee shall reimburse the franchising authority cost of publication of 
relevant ordinances and  publication of franchise agreements.



   (C)   Franchise transfer.  For a franchise transfer, the transferee
shall reimburse the franchising authority the cost of publication of notices,
publication of relevant ordinances and publication of franchise agreements.
The franchising authority reserves the right to withhold approval of the
transfer until all costs have been reimbursed by the transferee.



   (D)   Other costs.  The publication costs provided for in this
section shall be in addition to any other inspection or permit fee or other
fees due to franchising authority under any other ordinance of general
applicability.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.147  TAXES.



   Subject to federal and state law, the grantee shall pay all real estate
taxes, special assessments, personal property taxes, license fees, permit
fees and other generally applicable charges of a like nature which may be
taxed, charged, assessed, levied or imposed upon the property of the grantee
and upon any services rendered by the grantee.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS



§ 120.160  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   In  the event that the franchising authority believes that the grantee
has not complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify the grantee
in writing of the exact nature of the alleged noncompliance.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.161  GRANTEE’S RIGHT TO CURE OR RESPOND.



   The grantee shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice described in
§ 120.160:



   (A)   To respond to the franchising authority, contesting the
assertion of noncompliance;



   (B)   To cure the default; or



   (C)   In the event that, by the nature of default, the default
cannot be cured within the 30-day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy
the default and notify the franchising authority of the steps being taken and
the projected date that they will be completed.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.162  PUBLIC HEARING.



   In the event that the grantee fails to respond to the notice described
in § 120.160 pursuant to the procedures set forth in § 120.161, or in the
event that the alleged default is not remedied within 30 days or the date
projected pursuant to § 120.161 above, the franchising authority shall
schedule a public hearing to investigate the default. The franchising
authority shall notify the grantee in writing of the time and place of the
meeting no less than five business days in advance and provide the grantee
with an opportunity to be heard.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.163  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event the
franchising authority, after a public hearing, determines that the grantee is
in default of any provision of the franchise, the franchising authority may:



      (1)   Seek specific performance of any provision, which
reasonably lends itself to a remedy, as an alternative to damages;



      (2)   Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek
other equitable relief; or



      (3)   In the case of a substantial default of a material
provision of the franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked in
accordance with the procedures outlined in this section.



   (B)   The franchising authority shall give written notice to the
grantee of its intent to revoke the franchise on the basis of noncompliance
by the grantee, including one or more instances of substantial noncompliance
with a material provision of the franchise. The notice shall set forth the
exact nature of the noncompliance. The grantee shall have 90 days from the
notice to object in writing and to state its reasons for the objection. In
the event the franchising authority has not received a response satisfactory
from the grantee, it may then seek termination of the franchise at a public
meeting. The franchising authority shall cause to be served upon the grantee,
at least ten days prior to a public meeting, a written notice specifying the
time and place of the meeting and stating its intent to request a termination.



   (C)   At the designated meeting, the franchising authority shall
give the grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, after
which it shall determine whether or not the franchise shall be revoked. The
grantee may appeal the determination to an appropriate court, which shall
have the power to review the decision of the franchising authority “de
novo” and to modify or reverse the decision as justice may require. An
appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within 60 days of the issuance
of the determination of the franchising authority.



   (D)   The franchising authority may, at its sole discretion, take
any lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the franchising
authority’s rights under the franchise in lieu of revocation of the
franchise.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.164  PROMPT COMPLIANCE.



   The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with this
chapter by reason of the grantor’s failure to enforce prompt compliance.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.165  IMPOSSIBILITY OF PERFORMANCE.



   A grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the
provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating
thereto, where noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by the following
circumstances if reasonably beyond its control:



   (A)   Necessary utility rearrangements, pole change-outs or
obtainment of easement rights;



   (B)   Governmental or regulatory restrictions;



   (C)   Lockouts;



   (D)   War;



   (E)   National emergencies;



   (F)   Fire;



   (G)   Acts of God; and



   (H)   Strikes.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



§ 120.166  TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Grounds for revocation.  The grantor reserves the right to
revoke any franchise and rescind all rights and privileges associated with
the franchise in the following circumstances:



      (1)   If the grantee should default in the performance of any
of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise and fails to
cure the default within 60 days after receipt of written notice of the
default from the grantor, or a longer time as specified by the grantor;



      (2)   If a petition is filed by or against the grantee under
the Bankruptcy Act or any other insolvency or creditors’ rights law, state
or federal, and the grantee shall fail to have it dismissed;



      (3)   If a receiver, trustee or liquidator of the grantee is
applied for or appointed for all or part of the grantee’s assets;



      (4)   If the grantee makes an assignment for the benefit of
creditors;



      (5)   If the grantee violates any order or ruling of any state
or federal regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee, unless the
grantee or any party similarly affected is lawfully contesting the legality
or applicability of an order or ruling and has received a stay from a court
of appropriate jurisdiction;



      (6)   If the grantee evades any of the provisions of this
chapter or the franchise agreement;



      (7)   If the grantee practices any intentional fraud or deceit
upon the grantor or cable subscribers;



      (8)   If the grantee materially misrepresents facts in the
application for a franchise; or



      (9)   If the grantee ceases to provide services over the cable
system for seven consecutive days for any reason within the control of the
grantee.



   (B)   Restoration of property.  In removing its plant, structures
and equipment, the grantee shall refill at its own expense any excavation
that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as
good condition as that prevailing prior to the grantee’s removal of its
equipment and appliances, without affecting the electric or telephone cables,
wires or attachments. The grantor shall inspect and approve the condition of
the public ways and public places and cables, wires, attachments and poles
after removal. Liability insurance indemnity provided in § 120.141 and the
performance bond in § 120.168 shall continue in full force and effect during
the period of removal.



   (C)   Reimbursement of costs pursuant to divisions (A) and (B) of
this section.  In the event of a failure by the grantee to complete any work
as required above or any work required by law or ordinance within the time
established and to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor, after due
notice and opportunity to cure, the city may cause the work to be done and
the grantee shall reimburse the grantor the costs thereof within 30 days
after receipt of an itemized list of the costs or the grantor may recover the
costs as provided in § 120.167.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.167  SECURITY FUND.



   (A)   Within ten days after execution of the franchise agreement,
the grantee shall deposit with the City Clerk, and maintain on deposit
through the term of the franchise, the sum of $10,000 as security for the
faithful performance by it of all the provisions of the franchise and
compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency of the
grantor having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under the franchise,
and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the grantor
which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the
system.



   (B)   Within ten days after notice that any amount has been
withdrawn from the security fund deposited pursuant to division (A) of this
section, the grantee shall pay to, or deposit with, the City Clerk a sum of
money sufficient to restore the security fund to the original amount of
$10,000.



   (C)   If the grantee fails to pay to the grantor any compensation
within the time fixed herein; or fails after ten days notice to pay to the
grantor any taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay to the grantor within the
ten days, any damages, costs or expenses which the grantor shall be compelled
to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with the
franchise; or fails after three days notice of the failure by the grantor to
comply with any provision of the franchise which the grantor reasonably
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security, the City Clerk
may immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any penalties,
from the security fund. Upon the withdrawal, the City Clerk shall notify the
company of the amount and date thereof.



   (D)   The security fund deposited pursuant to this section shall
become the property of the grantor in the event that the franchise is
canceled by reason of the default of the grantee. The grantee, however, shall
be entitled to the return of the security fund, or portion thereof, as
remains on deposit at the expiration of the term of the franchise, provided
that there is then no outstanding default on the part of the grantee.
Interest earned by the investment of the security fund will accrue to the
grantee.



   (E)   The rights reserved to the grantor with respect to the
security fund are in addition to all other rights of the grantor, whether
reserved by the franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or
exercise of a right with respect to the security fund shall affect any other
right the grantor may have.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.168  FAITHFUL PERFORMANCE BOND.



   Upon acceptance of a franchise, the grantee shall submit and maintain
throughout the term of the franchise, a faithful performance bond in the
amount of $100,000. The bond shall ensure compliance with all applicable
laws, regulations, ordinances and provisions of this permit, shall provide
for recoverable loss or damages, compensation, indemnification, reasonable
attorney fees, cost of removal or abandonment of grantee’s property, and
shall cover penalties of $100 per day for failure to meet the construction
requirements of any franchise agreement.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)  Penalty, see § 120.999



§ 120.999  PENALTY.



   If the grantee fails to comply with the requirements of this cable
franchise regulatory chapter, and a cable franchise agreement, then the city
may invoke and secure compliance in accordance with § 10.99(B) of the code
of ordinances for the city and as authorized by the Iowa Code § 364.22.



(Ord. 2314, passed 1-25-2006)



CHAPTER 121:  RAGBRAI - MISCELLANEOUS PERMITS



Section



   121.01   Commercial food booth; permit required



   121.02   Commercial food booth fees



   121.03   Commercial food booth location



   121.04   Health regulations



   121.05   Commercial non-food booth; permit required



   121.06   Commercial non-food booth fees



   121.07   Commercial non-food booth location



   121.08   Glass containers



   121.09   Nuisance



   121.10   Violations; penalties



   121.11   Effective period



   121.12   Street closings



   121.13   Bus staging



   121.14   Camping



§ 121.01  COMMERCIAL FOOD BOOTH; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, club, group, organization, corporation, or entity of any
kind shall provide or sell food to the public in Clinton on July 20, 21, or
28, 2012, unless the person or entity shall first obtain a Commercial Booth
Permit from the City of Clinton through the City Clerk located at 611 South
3rd Street, Clinton, Iowa.  However, any person or entity which is a
resident of Clinton County and in possession of a valid permit issued by the
State of Iowa for the sale of food to be consumed on its premises as of June
30, 2012, or in possession of a current Iowa Retail Sales Tax Permit, or has
obtained a permit from the Official RAGBRAI Committee shall be exempt from
the requirements of this section.  For the purposes of this section, the
Clinton County Pork Products and Clinton County Cattleman's Association shall
each be deemed to be a resident of Clinton.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 121.02  COMMERCIAL FOOD BOOTH FEES.



   The fee for a Clinton Commercial Booth Permit shall be $75 for
non-profit food booths without electricity; $100 for non-profit food booths
with electricity; $250 for for-profit food booths without electricity; $350
for for-profit food booths with electricity.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 121.03  COMMERCIAL FOOD BOOTH LOCATION.



   A vendor who has been granted a Clinton Commercial Booth Permit shall
locate its temporary sale facility at a location to be determined by the
official Clinton RAGBRAI Committee.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 121.04  HEALTH REGULATIONS.



   A person or entity issued a commercial booth permit pursuant to the
chapter (a RAGBRAI Commercial Booth Permittee herein) shall comply with the
Department of Health and Clinton County Health Inspections rules and
regulations pertaining to the sale and dispensing of food for consumption on
its premises.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 121.05  COMMERCIAL NON-FOOD BOOTH; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, club, group, organization, corporation, or entity of any
kind shall sell merchandise to the public in Clinton on July 20, 21, or 28,
2012, at a location other than their regularly established place of business
unless said person or entity shall first obtain a Commercial Booth Non-Food
Permit from the City of Clinton through the City Clerk located at 611 South
3rd Street, Clinton, Iowa.  Those Clinton businesses, which operate only
from their regularly established locations, are exempt from the requirements
of this section.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 121.06  COMMERCIAL NON-FOOD BOOTH FEES.



   The fee for a Clinton Commercial Booth Non-Food permit shall be $75 for
non-profit food booths without electricity; $100 for non-profit food booths
with electricity; $250 for for-profit food booths without electricity; $350
for for-profit food booths with electricity.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 121.07  COMMERCIAL NON-FOOD BOOTH LOCATION.



   A commercial booth non-food permittee who has been granted a Clinton
Commercial Booth Non-Food permit shall locate its temporary facility at a
location to be determined by the official Clinton RAGBRAI Committee.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 121.08  GLASS CONTAINERS.



   To promote safety during RAGBRAI, all beverages sold in Clinton, Iowa,
by Commercial Booth permittees on July 20, 21, or 28, 2012 shall be sold in
non-glass containers only.  This requirement shall also apply to any
existing business, restaurant, service station, grocery store or
establishment selling beverages on its premises in an outdoor setting open to
the public.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 121.09  NUISANCE.



   The sale of food or the erection of a temporary facility for the sale
of food or other merchandise without a Clinton Commercial Booth or Clinton
Commercial Booth Non-Food permit on July 20, 21, or 28, 2012, in violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a nuisance, as defined by
Chapter 90 of this code.  If this type of nuisance is determined to exist,
an emergency abatement procedure pursuant to § 90.11 is hereby authorized
and may be executed by any peace officer or those acting at their direction
by dismantling and removing the nuisance without notice.  However, if the
only nuisance or violation of this chapter is the offender's failure to
obtain the necessary permit, the RAGBRAI Committee, in lieu of immediate
abatement, may allow the person or organization to immediately purchase a
necessary permit as provided by this chapter.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 121.10  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.



   Selling or supplying food or merchandise to any person without a
Clinton Commercial Booth or Clinton Commercial Booth Non-Food permit on July
20, 21, 28, 2012, or any violation of this chapter shall be a municipal
infraction as set forth in § 10.99, and therefore, any civil penalties may
likewise be assessed and enforced as set forth.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012; Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)



§ 121.11  EFFECTIVE PERIOD.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be effective from 7:00 a.m. on
July 20, 2012 to 11:00 a.m. on July 21, 2012 and from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
on July 28, 2012.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 121.12  STREET CLOSINGS.



   During the effective dates of this chapter and without prior Council
approval regarding the blocking of any city streets, any City of Clinton
Police Officer, or those at their direction, may place barricades or road
blocks in any city street, alley or roadway to redirect vehicular traffic in
order to enhance the proper and safe flow of bicycle and vehicular traffic
within the city limits of the City of Clinton.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 121.13  BUS STAGING.



   During the effective dates of this chapter, the city ordinances with
regard to weight restriction in city parking lots for bus staging shall be
suspended.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



§ 121.14  CAMPING.



   During the effective dates of this chapter, the city ordinances with
regard to overnight camping restrictions in Riverview Park shall be suspended.



(Ord. 2478, passed 7-10-2012)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



   Chapter



      130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE



      131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



      132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



      133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PEOPLE



      134.   OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS



      135.   FIREARMS



CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE



Section



   130.01   Assault



   130.02   Harassment



   130.03   Willful disturbance



   130.04   Disorderly conduct



   130.05   Riot



   130.06   Unlawful assembly



   130.07   Failure to disperse



   130.08   Stalking



§ 130.01  ASSAULT.



   (A)   No person shall, without justification, commit any of the
following:



      (1)   Pain or injury.  Any act which is intended to cause
pain or injury to, or which is intended to result in physical contact which
will be insulting or offensive to another, coupled with the apparent ability
to execute the act;



(Iowa Code § 708.1(1))



      (2)   Threat of pain or injury.  Any act which is intended to
place another in fear of immediate physical contact which will be painful,
injurious, insulting or offensive, coupled with the apparent ability to
execute the act; and/or



(Iowa Code § 708.1(2))



      (3)   Dangerous weapon.  Intentionally point any firearm
toward another, or display in a threatening manner any dangerous weapon
toward another.



(Iowa Code § 708.1(3))



   (B)   However, where the person doing any of the above enumerated
acts, and another person, are voluntary participants in a sport, social or
other activity, not in itself criminal, and the act is a reasonably
foreseeable incident of a sport or activity, and does not create an
unreasonable risk or serious injury or breach of the peace, the act is not an
assault. Provided, where the person doing any of the above enumerated acts is
employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic school, or is an area
education agency staff member who provides services to a school or school
district, and intervenes in a fight or physical struggle, or other disruptive
situation that takes place in the presence of the employee or staff member
performing employment duties in a school building, on school grounds or at an
official school function regardless of the location, the act is not an
assault, whether the fight or physical struggle or other disruptive situation
is between students or other individuals if the degree and the force of the
intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the
safety of those assembled.



(Iowa Code § 708.1)



(1999 Code, § 40.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.02  HARASSMENT.



   (A)   No person shall commit harassment.



   (B)   A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate,
annoy or alarm another person, the person does any of the following:



      (1)   Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph or
writing without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely to cause the other
person annoyance or harm;



(Iowa Code § 708.7)



      (2)   Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary
device in or near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or
railroad car, or boat occupied by the other person;



(Iowa Code § 708.7)



      (3)   Orders merchandise or services in the name of another,
or to be delivered to another, without the other person’s knowledge or
consent; and



(Iowa Code § 708.7)



      (4)   Reports or causes to be reported false information to a
law enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity,
knowing that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a
criminal act, knowing the same did not occur.



(Iowa Code § 708.7)



   (C)   A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and
without legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with
the intent to threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in
this section, unless the context otherwise requires, PERSONAL CONTACT means
an encounter in which two or more people are in visual or physical proximity
to each other. Personal contact does not require a physical touching or oral
communication, although it may include these types of contacts.



(1999 Code, § 40.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.03  WILLFUL DISTURBANCE.



   No person shall willfully disturb any deliberative body or agency of
the state, or subdivision thereof, with the purpose of disrupting the
functioning of the body or agency by tumultuous behavior, or coercing by
force or the threat of force any official conduct or proceeding.



(Iowa Code § 718.3)  (1999 Code, § 40.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   No person shall do any of the following:



   (A)   Fighting.  Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any
public place or in or near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that
participants in athletic contests may engage in conduct which is reasonably
related to that sport;



(Iowa Code § 723.4(1))



   (B)   Noise.  Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any
residence or public building which causes unreasonable distress to the
occupants thereof;



(Iowa Code § 723.4(2))



   (C)   Abusive language.  Direct abusive epithets or make any
threatening gesture which the person knows or reasonably should know is
likely to provoke a violent reaction by another;



(Iowa Code § 723.4(3))



   (D)   Disrupt lawful assembly.  Without lawful authority or color
of authority, disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct
intended to disrupt the meeting or assembly;



(Iowa Code § 723.4(4))



   (E)   False report of catastrophe.  By words or action, initiate or
circulate a report or warning of fire, epidemic or other catastrophe, knowing
the report to be false or the warning to be baseless;



(Iowa Code § 723.4(5))



   (F)   Disrespect of flag.



      (1)   Knowingly and publicly uses the flag of the United
States in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the
United States, with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will
provoke or encourage another to commit trespass or assault.



      (2)   As used in this division:



         (a)   DEFACE.  To intentionally mar the external
appearance.



         (b)   DEFILE.  To intentionally make physically unclean.



         (c)   FLAG.  A piece of woven cloth or other material
designed to be flown from a pole or mast.



         (d)   MUTILATE.  To intentionally cut up or alter so as
to make imperfect.



         (e)   SHOW DISRESPECT.  T o deface, defile, mutilate,
or trample.



         (f)   TRAMPLE.  To intentionally tread upon or
intentionally cause a machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.



      (3)   This division does not apply to a flag retirement
ceremony conducted pursuant to federal law.



(Iowa Code § 723.4(6))



   (G)   Obstruct use of street.  Without authority or justification,
obstruct any street, sidewalk, highway or other public way, with the intent
to prevent or hinder its lawful use by others.



(Iowa Code § 723.4(7))



(1999 Code, § 40.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.05  RIOT.



   It is unlawful for three or more persons to assemble together in a
violent manner, to the disturbance of others, and with any use of unlawful
force or violence by them or any of them against another person or causing
property damage. No person shall willingly join in or remain part of a riot,
knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe that it is such.



(Iowa Code § 723.1)  (1999 Code, § 40.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.06  UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.



   It is unlawful for three or more persons to assemble together, with
them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or
any of them will commit a public offense. No person shall willingly join in
or remain part of an unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds
to believe it is such.



(Iowa Code § 723.2)  (1999 Code, § 40.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.07  FAILURE TO DISPERSE.



   A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or unlawful
assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly
to disperse. No person within hearing distance of the command shall refuse to
obey.



(Iowa Code § 723.3)  (1999 Code, § 40.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.08  STALKING.



   (A)   Generally.  No person shall stalk another person.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACCOMPANYING OFFENSE.  Any public offense committed as part of
the course of conduct engaged in while committing the offense of stalking.



      COURSE OF CONDUCT.  Repeatedly maintaining a visual or physical
proximity to a person without legitimate purpose or repeatedly conveying oral
or written threats, threats implied by conduct, or a combination thereof,
directed at or toward a person.



      IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER.  A spouse, parent, child, sibling or
any other person who regularly resides in the household of a specific person,
or who within the prior six months regularly resided in the household of a
specific person.



      REPEATEDLY.  On two or more occasions.



   (C)   Stalking.  A person commits stalking when all of the
following occur:



      (1)   The person purposefully engages in a course of conduct
directed at a specific person that would cause a reasonable person to fear
bodily injury to, or the death of, that specific person or a member of the
specific person’s immediate family;



      (2)   The person has knowledge or should have knowledge that
the specific person will be placed in reasonable fear of bodily injury to, or
the death of, that specific person or a member of the specific person’s
immediate family by the course of conduct; and



      (3)   The person’s course of conduct induces fear in the
specific person of bodily injury to or the death of the specific person or a
member of the specific person’s immediate family.



(Iowa Code § 708.11)  (1999 Code, § 40.08)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section



   131.01   Distributing dangerous substances



   131.02   False reports to or communications with public safety
entities



   131.03   Impersonating a public official



   131.04   Interference with official acts



   131.05   Refusing to assist officer



   131.06   Harassment of public officers and employees



   131.07   Reckless use of fire or explosives



   131.08   Antenna and radio wires



   131.09   Urinating and defecating



§ 131.01  DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.



   No person shall distribute samples of any drugs or medicine, or any
corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious substance unless the person
delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise takes
reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or
animals from the place where the substance is deposited.



(Iowa Code § 727.1)  (1999 Code, § 41.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.02  FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY ENTITIES.



   No person shall do any of the following:



   (A)   Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire
department, a law enforcement authority or other public safety entity,
knowing that the information is false, or report the alleged occurrence of a
criminal act knowing the act did not occur;



   (B)   Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that
he or she is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency
information or assistance; or



   (C)   Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement
officer who enters the information on a citation.



(Iowa Code § 718.6)  (1999 Code, § 41.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.03  IMPERSONATING A PUBLIC OFFICIAL.



   No person shall falsely hold himself or herself out or assume to act as
an elected or appointed officer, magistrate, peace officer or person
authorized to act on behalf of the state or any subdivision thereof, having
no authority to do so.



(Iowa Code § 718.2)  (1999 Code, § 41.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.04  INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS.



   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct anyone known by the person
to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider or firefighter,
whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act which is within the
scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency medical care
provider or firefighter, or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or
execution by any authorized person of any civil or criminal process or order
of any court. The terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in this
section do not include verbal harassment unless the verbal harassment is
accompanied by a present ability and apparent intention to execute a verbal
threat physically.



(Iowa Code § 719.1)  (1999 Code, § 41.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.05  REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER.



   Any person who is requested or ordered by any magistrate or peace
officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or
attempting to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal
act, shall render assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and
without lawful cause, refuse or neglect to render assistance when so
requested.



(Iowa Code § 719.2)  (1999 Code, § 41.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.06  HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   No person shall willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public
officer or employee from performing the officer’s or employee’s duty.



(Iowa Code § 718.4)  (1999 Code, § 41.07)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.07  RECKLESS USE OF FIRE OR EXPLOSIVES.



   No person shall so use fire or any incendiary or explosive device or
material as to endanger recklessly the property or safety of another.



(Iowa Code § 712.5)  (1999 Code, § 41.09)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.08  ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES.



   It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna wires, antenna supports,
radio wires or television wires to exist over any street, alley, highway,
sidewalk, public way, public ground or public building without written
consent of the Council.



(Iowa Code § 364.12(2))  (1999 Code, § 41.10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.09  URINATING AND DEFECATING.



   It is unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate onto any sidewalk,
street, alley, or other public way, public park or public place or onto any
public or private building, including but not limited to the wall, floor,
hallway, steps, stairway, doorway or window thereof.



(1999 Code, § 41.14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



Public Property



   132.01   Criminal mischief



   132.02   Unauthorized entry



   132.03   Possession of traffic control device



   132.04   Defacing proclamations or notices



Private Property



   132.15   Trespassing prohibited



   132.16   Electronic and mechanical eavesdropping



   132.17   Damage to property



   132.18   Fraud



   132.19   Theft



PUBLIC PROPERTY



§ 132.01  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.



   It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to
intentionally damage, deface, alter or destroy tangible property.



(Iowa Code § 716.1)  (1999 Code, § 42.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.02  UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY.



   No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or upon any public
building, premises or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or
when the building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public.
When open to the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also
constitutes an unauthorized entry.



(Iowa Code § 364.1)  (1999 Code, § 42.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.03  POSSESSION OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.



   It is unlawful for any person to have in that person’s possession any
official traffic control device except by legal right or authority.



(Iowa Code § 321.260)  (1999 Code, § 42.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.04  DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES.



   It is unlawful for a person intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear
down or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or extract from or of any
law of the United States or the state, or any proclamation, advertisement or
notification, set up at any place within the city by authority of the law or
by order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.



(Iowa Code § 716.1)  (1999 Code, § 42.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 132.15  TRESPASSING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon the
property of another. As used in this section, the term PROPERTY includes any
land, dwelling, building, conveyance, vehicle or other temporary or permanent
structure whether publicly or privately owned. The term TRESPASS means one or
more of the following acts: 



      (1)   Entering property without permission.  Entering upon or
in property without the express permission of the owner, lessee or person in
lawful possession with the intent to commit a public offense or to use,
remove therefrom, alter, damage, harass or place thereon or therein anything
animate or inanimate;



(Iowa Code § 716.7(2)(a))



      (2)   Entering or remaining on property.  Entering or
remaining upon or in property without justification after being notified or
requested to abstain from entering or to remove or vacate therefrom by the
owner, lessee or person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer,
magistrate or public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or
maintenance of the property;



(Iowa Code § 716.7(2)(b))



      (3)   Interfering with lawful use of property.  Entering upon
or in property for the purpose or with the effect of unduly interfering with
the lawful use of the property by others; and/or



(Iowa Code § 716.7(2)(c))



      (4)   Using property without permission.  Being upon or in
property and wrongfully using, removing therefrom, altering, damaging,
harassing or placing thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate,
without the implied or actual permission of the owner, lessee or person in
lawful possession.



(Iowa Code § 716.7(2)(d))



   (B)   None of the above shall be construed to prohibit entering upon
the property of another for the sole purpose of retrieving personal property
which has accidentally or inadvertently been thrown, fallen, strayed or blown
onto the property of another, provided that the person retrieving the
property takes the most direct and accessible route to and from the property
to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is possible, and does not
unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.



(Iowa Code § 716.7(3))



(Iowa Code §§ 716.7, 716.8)  (1999 Code, § 43.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.16  ELECTRONIC AND MECHANICAL EAVESDROPPING.



   No person, having no right or authority to do so, shall tap into or
connect a listening or recording device to any telephone or other
communication wire, or shall by any electronic or mechanical means listen to,
record, or otherwise intercept a conversation or communication of any kind;
provided, that the sender or recipient of a message or one who is openly
present and participating in or listening to a communication shall not be
prohibited hereby from recording the message or communication; and further
provided, that nothing herein shall restrict the use of any radio or
television receiver to receive any communication transmitted by radio or
wireless signal.



(Iowa Code § 727.8)  (1999 Code, § 43.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.17  DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.



   It is unlawful to cut, hack, break, deface or otherwise injure any
ornamental or shade tree, fence, private building, railing or other property
belonging to another person.



(Iowa Code § 716.1)  (1999 Code, § 43.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.18  FRAUD.



   It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as
defined in the Iowa Code § 714.8.



(Iowa Code § 714.8)  (1999 Code, § 43.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.19  THEFT.



   It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in the Iowa
Code § 714.1.



(Iowa Code § 714.1)  (1999 Code, § 43.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 133:  OFFENSES AGAINST PEOPLE



Section



Alcohol Consumption and Intoxication



   133.01   Persons under legal age



   133.02   Public consumption or intoxication



   133.03   Open container on streets and highways



Drug Paraphernalia



   133.15   Purpose



   133.16   Controlled substance defined



   133.17   Drug paraphernalia defined



   133.18   Determining factors



   133.19   Possession of drug paraphernalia



   133.20   Manufacture, delivery or offering for sale



   133.21   Legislative intent



ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION



§ 133.01  PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE.



   (A)   As used in this section, LEGAL AGE means 21 years of age or
more.



   (B)   A person shall not sell, give or otherwise supply alcoholic
liquor, wine or beer to any person knowing or having reasonable cause to
believe that person to be under legal age.



(Iowa Code § 123.47(1))



   (C)   A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or
attempt to purchase or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or
beer in his, her or their possession or control; except in the case of
liquor, wine or beer given or dispensed to a person under legal age within a
private home and with the knowledge, presence and consent of the parent or
guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as administered to the person
by either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and except to the
extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages, wine and
beer during the regular course of the person’s employment by a liquor
control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under state laws.



(Iowa Code § 123.47(2))



   (D)   A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s
age for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic
beverage, wine or beer from any licensee or permittee.



(Iowa Code § 123.49(3))



(1999 Code, § 45.01)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.02  PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ARREST.  The same as defined in the Iowa Code § 804.5 and
includes taking into custody pursuant to Iowa Code § 232.19.



      CHEMICAL TEST.  A test of a person’s blood, breath or urine to
determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using
devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.



      PEACE OFFICER.  The same as defined in the Iowa Code § 801.4.



      SCHOOL.  A public or private school or that portion of a public
or private school which provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten
through grade 12.



   (B)   A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or
beer upon the public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume
alcoholic liquor in any public place, except premises covered by a liquor
control license. A person shall not possess or consume alcoholic liquors,
wine or beer on public school property or while attending any public or
private school-related function. A person shall not be intoxicated or
simulate intoxication in a public place. A person violating this division
commits a municipal infraction. Any municipal infraction citation issued
under this section shall be prosecuted in conjunction with any citations for
violation of any applicable state or federal law.



   (C)   When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public
intoxication under this section, the peace officer shall inform the person
that the person may have a chemical test administered at the person’s own
expense. If a device approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety for
testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine the person’s blood
alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be
offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication,
evidence of the results of a chemical test performed under this division is
admissible upon proof of a proper foundation. The percentage of alcohol
present in a person’s blood, breath or urine established by the results of
a chemical test performed within two hours after the person’s arrest on a
charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of alcohol
present at the time of arrest.



(Iowa Code § 123.46)  (1999 Code, § 45.02) (Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)
Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.03  OPEN CONTAINER ON STREETS AND HIGHWAYS.



   See § 72.15 of this code of ordinances.



(1999 Code, § 45.03)  Penalty, see § 10.99



DRUG PARAPHERNALIA



§ 133.15  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to prohibit the use, possession with
intent to use, manufacture and delivery of drug paraphernalia as defined
herein.



(1999 Code, § 48.01)



§ 133.16  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE DEFINED.



   The term CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE as used in this subchapter is defined as
the term controlled substance is defined in the Uniform Controlled Substance
Act, Iowa Code Chapter 124, as it now exists or is hereafter amended.



(1999 Code, § 48.02)



§ 133.17  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEFINED.



   The term DRUG PARAPHERNALIA as used in this subchapter means all
equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for
use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing,
containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled
Substances Act, Iowa Code Chapter 124. It  includes, but is not limited to:



   (A)   Growing kits.  Kits used, intended for use or designed for
use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any
species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived;



   (B)   Processing kits.  Kits used, intended for use or designed for
use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or
preparing controlled substances;



   (C)   Isomerization devices.  Isomerization devices used, intended
for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant
which is a controlled substance;



   (D)   Testing equipment.  Testing equipment used, intended for use
or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength,
effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;



   (E)   Scales.  Scales and balances used, intended for use or
designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;



   (F)   Diluents.  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine
hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, used, intended for use
or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;



   (G)   Separators; sifters.  Separation gins and sifters used,
intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in
otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana;



   (H)   Mixing devices.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and
mixing devices used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding
controlled substances;



   (I)   Containers.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other
containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small
quantities of controlled substances;



   (J)   Storage containers.  Containers and other objects used,
intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled
substances;



   (K)   Injecting devices.  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other
objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting
controlled substances into the human body; and



   (L)   Ingesting-inhaling device.  Objects used, intended for use or
designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing heroin,
marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as:



      (1)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic
pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured
metal bowls;



      (2)   Water pipes;



      (3)   Carburetion tubes and devices;



      (4)   Smoking and carburetion masks;



      (5)   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning
materials, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand;



      (6)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;



      (7)   Chamber pipes;



      (8)   Carburetor pipes;



      (9)   Electric pipes;



      (10)   Air driven pipes;



      (11)   Chillums;



      (12)   Bongs; and



      (13)   Ice pipes or chillers.



(1999 Code, § 48.03)



§ 133.18  DETERMINING FACTORS.



   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia for the purpose
of enforcing this subchapter, the following factors should be considered in
addition to all other logically relevant factors:



   (A)   Statements.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control
of the object concerning its use;



   (B)   Prior convictions.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner,
or of anyone in control of the object under any state or federal law relating
to any controlled substance;



   (C)   Proximity to violation.  The proximity of the object, in time
and space, to a direct violation of the Uniform Controlled Substance Act,
Iowa Code Chapter 124;



   (D)   Proximity to substances.  The proximity of the object to
controlled substances;



   (E)   Residue.  The existence of any residue of controlled
substances on the object;



   (F)   Evidence of intent.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the
intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to
persons whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the
object to facilitate a violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act,
Iowa Code Chapter 124;



   (G)   Innocence of an owner.  The innocence of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Uniform
Controlled Substances Act, Iowa Code Chapter 124, should not prevent a
finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug
paraphernalia;



   (H)   Instructions.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with
the object concerning its use;



   (J)   Descriptive materials.  Descriptive materials accompanying
the object which explain or depict its use;



   (K)   Advertising.  National and local advertising concerning its
use;



   (L)   Displayed.  The manner in which the object is displayed for
sale;



   (M)   Licensed distributor or dealer.  Whether the owner, or anyone
in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items
to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco
products;



   (N)   Sales ratios.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio
of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;



   (O)   Legitimate uses.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses
for the object in the community; and



   (P)   Expert testimony.  Expert testimony concerning its use.



(1999 Code, § 48.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.19  POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use,
drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze,
pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the
Uniform Controlled Substance Act, Iowa Code Chapter 124.



(1999 Code, § 48.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.20  MANUFACTURE, DELIVERY OR OFFERING FOR SALE.



   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, possess with intent to
deliver, manufacture with intent to deliver, or offer for sale drug
paraphernalia, intending that the drug paraphernalia will be used, or
knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that it will
be used, or knowing that it is designed for use to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Iowa Code
Chapter 124.



(1999 Code, § 48.06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 133.21  LEGISLATIVE INTENT.



   It is the purpose and intent of the Council to promote the health,
safety and morals of the citizens of the city. The use or administration of
controlled substances is clearly illegal. The banning of all objects in close
connection and adapted for the use of controlled substances should also be
controlled because of the lack of social or practical purposes of the objects
or paraphernalia, whether the use is by adults or minors. It is also strong
public policy to protect children from the unsupervised exposure and
familiarity of drug paraphernalia. In addition to education about the items
in school and at home, it is also essential to discourage use, possession,
manufacture and commerce of these drug related items.



(1999 Code, § 48.07)



CHAPTER 134:  OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS



Section



   134.01   Curfew



   134.02   Loitering



   134.03   Cigarettes and tobacco



   134.04   Contributing to delinquency



 



   134.99   Penalty



§ 134.01  CURFEW.



   (A)   Purpose.  The Council has determined that a curfew for minors
is necessary to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare
of the city and specifically to achieve the following purposes:



      (1)   Reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of
adults responsible for minors;



      (2)   Protect the public from the illegal acts of minors
committed individually and in groups and/or gangs after the curfew hour; and



      (3)   Protect minors from improper influences and criminal
activity by individuals and groups and/or gangs that prevail in public places
after the curfew hour.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      KNOWINGLY.  Knowledge which a responsible adult should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that
responsible adult’s custody. It is intended to continue to hold the
neglectful or careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable
community standard of adult responsibility through an objective test. It is,
therefore, no defense that an adult responsible for a minor was completely
indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of the minor.



      MINOR.  Any unemancipated person under the age of 18 years.



      NONSECURED CUSTODY.  Custody in an unlocked multipurpose area,
such as a lobby, office or interrogation room which is not designed, set
aside or used as a secure detention area, and the person arrested is not
physically secured during the period of custody in the area; the person is
physically accompanied by a peace officer or a person employed by the
facility where the person arrested is being held; and the use of the area is
limited to providing nonsecured custody only while awaiting transfer to an
appropriate juvenile facility or to court, for contacting of and release to
the person’s parents or other responsible adult or for other administrative
purposes; but not for longer than six hours without the oral or written order
of a judge or magistrate authorizing the detention. A judge shall not extend
the period of time in excess of six hours beyond the initial six-hour period.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes shopping areas, parking lots, parks,
playgrounds, streets, alleys and sidewalks dedicated to public use; and also
includes parts of buildings and other premises whether publicly or privately
owned which are used by the general public or to which the general public is
invited commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the general
public is permitted without specific invitation; or to which the general
public has access.



      RESPONSIBLE ADULT.  A parent, guardian or other adult
specifically authorized by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have
custody or control of a minor.



      UNEMANCIPATED.  Unmarried and/or still under the custody or
control of a responsible adult.



   (C)   Curfew established.  A curfew applicable to minors is
established and shall be enforced as follows:



      (1)   Unless accompanied by a responsible adult, no minor 17
years of age or under shall be in any public place during the following times:



 

Sunday through Thursday
 

10:30 p.m. through 6:00 a.m. each day



Friday and Saturday
 

11:30 p.m. through 6:00 a.m. each day




 



   (D)   Exceptions.  The following are exceptions to the juvenile
curfew:



      (1)   The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult;



      (2)   When the minor is on the sidewalk or property where the
minor resides;



      (3)   The minor is present at or is traveling between home and
one of the following exceptions, allowing reasonable travel time for events
outside of the city:



         (a)   Minor’s place of employment, within one hour
after the end or before the beginning of work;



         (b)   Minor’s place of religious activity, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the religious activity;



         (c)   Governmental or political activity, within one
hour after the end or before the beginning of the activity;



         (d)   Professional entertainment, with proof of
attendance, within one hour after the end of the activity;



         (e)   School activity, within one hour after the end or
before the beginning of the activity; and



         (f)   Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration,
sit-in or meeting of an association for the advancement of economic,
political, religious or cultural matters, or for any other activity protected
by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, within one hour after the
end or before the beginning of the assembly, association meeting or other
activity protected by the First Amendment.



      (4)   The minor is on an emergency life, property or medical
errand for a responsible adult; and



      (5)   The minor’s business, trade or occupation, in which
the minor is permitted by law to be engaged, requires the presence of the
minor in a public place.



   (E)   Responsibility of adults.  It is unlawful for any responsible
adult to allow a minor to be in any public place in the city within the time
periods prohibited by this section unless the minor’s presence falls within
one of the above exceptions.



   (F)   Enforcement procedures.



      (1)   Determination of age.  In determining the age of the
juvenile and in the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth
certificate or driver’s license, a peace officer on the street shall, in
the first instance, use his or her best judgment in determining age.



      (2)   Grounds for arrest; conditions of custody.  Grounds for
arrest are that the person refuses to sign the citation without
qualification; persists in violating the regulations; refuses to provide
proper identification or to identify himself or herself; or constitutes an
immediate threat to the person’s own safety or to the safety of the public.
A law enforcement officer who arrests a minor for a curfew violation may keep
the minor in custody either in a shelter care facility or in any non-secured
setting. The officer shall not place bodily restraints, such as handcuffs, on
the minor unless the minor physically resists or threatens physical violence
when being taken into custody. A minor shall not be placed in detention
following a curfew violation, unless pursuant to an order of the court.



      (3)   Notification of responsible adult.  After a minor is
taken into custody, the law enforcement officer shall notify the adult
responsible for the minor as soon as possible. The minor shall be released to
the adult responsible for the minor upon the promise of the person to produce
the child in court at a time as the court may direct. If a minor is issued a
citation to appear for a violation of this section, a law enforcement officer
shall notify the adult responsible for the minor within such reasonable time
as is necessary to ensure the  responsible adult has adequate time to
arrange the minor’s appearance in court.



      (4)   Citation of responsible adult. On the first offense of
any particular minor, the responsible adult shall be notified in accordance
with division (3) above. On any subsequent offense of any particular minor,
the responsible adult commits a municipal infraction under § 10.99 of the
code of ordinances and may be cited for each separate offense under that
section.



(1999 Code, § 46.01) (Ord. 2601, passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.02  LOITERING.



   It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to loiter on or about
any street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, parking lot, alley, vacant lot, park,
playground or yard, whether public or private, without the consent or
permission of the owner or occupant thereof, during the hours between 12:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult
person over the age of 21 years. As used in this section, LOITER means to
remain idle in essentially one location, to be dilatory, to tarry, to dawdle,
and includes but is not limited to standing around, hanging out, sitting,
kneeling, sauntering or prowling. Any minor under the age of 18 who violates
any of the provisions of this section commits a municipal infraction. Upon
citation, the minor shall be taken and delivered into the hands of the
parent, guardian or other person having the care and custody of the minor, or
the minor may be cited into court and his or her parent or guardian notified
as soon as possible to get the minor.



(1999 Code, § 46.02)  (Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)  Penalty, see §
134.99



§ 134.03  CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO.



   It is unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to smoke, use,
possess, purchase or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco products or
cigarettes.



(Iowa Code § 453A.2)  (1999 Code, § 46.03)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.04  CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY.



   It is unlawful for any person to encourage any child under 18 years of
age to commit any act of delinquency.



(Iowa Code § 709A.1)  (1999 Code, § 46.04)  Penalty, see § 134.99



§ 134.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   General.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter,
for which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 10.99.



   (B)   Curfew.



      (1)   In the case of a first violation by a minor, the Police
Chief or the Chief’s designee shall, by certified mail, send to the adult
responsible for the minor, written notice of the violation with a warning
that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew
regulations against both the responsible adult and minor, with applicable
penalties.



      (2)   For any violation of the provisions of § 134.01 by a
minor person under 18 years of age, the minor commits a municipal infraction,
and upon conviction, the person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$100 or to perform community service as ordered by the court.



(1999 Code, § 46.01) (Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)



CHAPTER 135:  FIREARMS



Section



   135.01   Discharging firearms



   135.02   Throwing and shooting



   135.03   Carrying weapons



§ 135.01  DISCHARGING FIREARMS.



   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person, except as otherwise
authorized by law, to discharge a firearm within the city limits unless the
firearm discharge occurs outside the following outer border within the city:



      Starting from a line in the center of Beaver Slough at its most
northern point proceeding southward to the Clinton corporate city limits,
then following the Clinton corporate city limits to South Thirtieth Street
(Central Steel Road). Proceeding north on South Thirtieth Street (Central
Steel Road) until it crosses U.S. Highway 30, then continuing north on Mill
Creek Parkway to Sixteenth Street northwest. North on Sixteenth Street
northwest to Main Avenue. East on Main Avenue to West Stockwell Lane. North
on West Stockwell Lane then east on North Stockwell Lane to U.S. Highway 67.
North on U.S. Highway 67 to Deer Creek Road. East on East Deer Creek Road to
the Mississippi River and then straight east to the Clinton Corporate limits.



      (2)   The described area is represented by a map appended to
Ordinance No. 2329, on file in the office of the City Clerk, and made a part
hereof by referenced.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person, except as otherwise authorized
by law, to discharge a firearm in the area designated in division (A) above
if it is done within 200 yards of an occupied dwelling place. A dwelling
place is considered to be occupied even though the occupants may be
temporarily absent there from and only those dwelling structures which have
been abandoned may be presumed to be unoccupied.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, except as otherwise authorized
by law, to discharge a firearm on private property without the permission of
the owner thereof.



   (D)   No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a
reckless manner.



(1999 Code, § 41.11)  (Ord. 2329, passed 8-8-2006; Ord. 2357, passed
8-28-2007)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 135.02  THROWING AND SHOOTING.



   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks or
missiles of any kind or to shoot arrows, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles
or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, highway, alley,
sidewalk, public way, public ground or public building, without written
consent of the City Council.



   (B)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the hunting with bow and arrow
of deer during those periods designated annually by the State Department of
Natural Resources for hunting by persons issued licenses by the State
Department of Natural Resources and issued permits by the city.



(1999 Code, § 41.12)  (Ord. 2325, passed 5-23-2006)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 135.03  CARRYING WEAPONS.



   No person shall go armed with a dangerous weapon concealed on or about
his or her person, or shall, within the limits of the city, go armed with a
pistol or revolver, or any loaded firearm of any kind, whether concealed or
not, or shall knowingly carry or transport in a vehicle a pistol or revolver,
provided that this section does not apply to any of the following:



   (A)   Own premises.  A person who goes armed with a dangerous
weapon in his or her own dwelling or place of business, or on land owned or
possessed by the person;



(Iowa Code § 724.4(4)(a))



   (B)   Peace officer.  Any peace officer, when his or her duties
require the person to carry weapons;



(Iowa Code § 724.4(4)(b))



   (C)   Armed forces.  Any member of the armed forces of the United
States or of the National Guard or person in the service of the United
States, when the weapons are carried in connection with his or her duties as
such; 



(Iowa Code § 724.4(4)(c))



   (D)   Within container.  Any person who for any lawful purpose
carries an unloaded pistol, revolver or other dangerous weapon inside a
closed and fastened container or securely wrapped package which is too large
to be concealed on the person;



(Iowa Code § 724.4(4)(e))



   (E)   Within vehicle.  Any person who for any lawful purpose
carries or transports an unloaded pistol or revolver in any vehicle inside a
closed and fastened container or securely wrapped package which is too large
to be concealed on the person or inside a cargo or luggage compartment where
the pistol or revolver will not be readily accessible to any person riding in
the vehicle or common carrier;



(Iowa Code § 724.4(4)(f))



   (F)   Target practice.  Any person while he or she is lawfully
engaged in target practice on a range designed for that purpose or while
engaged in lawful hunting for game in any place designated by local law as a
hunting area;



(Iowa Code § 724.4(4)(g))



   (G)   Valid permit.  Any person who has in his or her possession
and who displays to any peace officer on demand a valid permit to carry
weapons which has been issued to the person, and whose conduct is within the
limits of that permit. No person shall be convicted of a violation of this
section if the person produces at his or her trial a permit to carry weapons
which was valid at the time of the alleged offense and which would have
brought the person’s conduct within this exception if the permit had been
produced at the time of the alleged offense; and



(Iowa Code § 724.4(4)(i))



   (H)   Correctional officer.  Any correctional officer, when the
officer’s duties require, serving under the authority of the State
Department of Corrections.



(Iowa Code § 724.4(4)(d))



(Iowa Code § 724.4)  (1999 Code, § 41.13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



   Chapter



      150.   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



      151.   FIRE PROTECTION CODE



      152.   SMOKE DETECTORS



      153.   BUILDING NUMBERING



      154.   BUILDING AND HOUSING CODES



      155.   MINIMUM HEALTH AND HOUSING STANDARDS



      156.   FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS



      157.   AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS



      158.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



      159.   ZONING REGULATIONS



CHAPTER 150:  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



Section



   150.01   Purpose



   150.02   Definitions



   150.03   Enforcement



   150.04   Abatement of dangerous buildings



   150.05   Right of entry



   150.06   Notices and orders; vacation and demolition



   150.07   Appeals



   150.08   Disposition of appeal



   150.09   Appeal to District Court



   150.10   Recovery of costs



   Appendix A:  Dangerous buildings forms



§ 150.01  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a just, equitable and
practical method whereby buildings or structures may be required to be
repaired, removed, vacated or demolished when the buildings or structures,
from any cause, endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare
of the general public or the occupants of the buildings. The provisions of
this chapter apply to all dangerous buildings, as herein defined, which are
now in existence or which may hereafter become dangerous in the city.



(1999 Code, § 145.01)



§ 150.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, any building or structure which has
any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described is deemed to be
a DANGEROUS BUILDING OR STRUCTURE, provided that conditions or defects exist
to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or
occupants of the building or structure is endangered.



   (A)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, corridor, stairway or
other means of egress in so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as
it would not provide safe and adequate means of egress in case of fire or
panic as defined in the Fire Protection Code of the City Building Code;



   (B)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire,
earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to an extent that the
structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before the catastrophe;



   (C)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is
likely to fail or to become detached or dislodged or to collapse and thereby
injure persons or damage property;



   (D)   Whenever the building or structure or any portion thereof,
because of:



      (1)   Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;



      (2)   The removal, movement or instability or any portion of
ground necessary for the purpose of supporting the building;



      (3)   The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation
beyond repair; or



      (4)   Any other cause is likely to partially or completely
collapse.



   (E)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural
members list, lean or buckle more than two degrees or to an extent that upon
inspection it is determined that it is beyond repair or creates an unsafe
condition;



   (F)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by
fire, wind, earthquake or flood or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated
as to:



      (1)   Become an attractive nuisance;



      (2)   Become a place for vagrants or transients;



      (3)   Enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of
committing unlawful or immoral acts; or



      (4)   Create a haven for rodents or snakes.



   (G)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used
for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities or otherwise, is determined by the Housing Inspector
and, where children are involved, the social services agencies, to be
unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in a condition that is likely to
cause sickness or disease;



   (H)   Whenever any building or structure is in a condition as to
constitute a public nuisance or hazard; or



   (I)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure constituting a
nuisance remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the
building or structure or whenever any building or structure or portion
thereof is abandoned so as to constitute a public nuisance or hazard.



(1999 Code, § 145.02)  (Ord. 2366, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 150.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee
is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Housing
Inspector, the Fire Marshal or any other duly authorized representative is
hereby authorized to make inspections and take actions as may be required to
enforce the provisions of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 145.03)  (Ord. 2366, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 150.04  ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.



   All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection
to be dangerous as defined in this chapter are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or
removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this chapter. It is
unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
convert, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the
same to be done in violation of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 145.04)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.05  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Building and Neighborhood
Services Director or his or her duly authorized representative has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises
unsafe, dangerous or hazardous conditions, the Building and Neighborhood
Services Director or his or her duly authorized representative may enter the
building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to
perform any duty imposed upon the Building and Neighborhood Services Director
or his or her designee by this chapter, provided that if the building or
premises is occupied, the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his
or her designee shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and
if the building or premises are unoccupied, shall first make a reasonable
effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the
building or premises and request entry. Whenever the Building and
Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee has first obtained a
proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no
owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any
building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as
herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Building and
Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee for the purpose of
inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. DULY AUTHORIZED
REPRESENTATIVE includes the officers named in § 150.03 and their authorized
inspection personnel.



(1999 Code, § 145.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.06  NOTICES AND ORDERS; VACATION AND DEMOLITION.



   Whenever the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her
designee has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and found and
determined that the building is a dangerous building, the Building and
Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee shall, with the
approval of the City Attorney, cause the building to be vacated and secured.
The Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee shall
also commence proceedings for the repair or demolition of the building by the
issuance of the appropriate notices and orders as provided in this section.



   (A)   Posting of inspection notice. At the time a complaint is
received on a substandard building and a viewing of the property indicates a
demolition inspection is warranted, a notice as set forth in division (B)
below should be sent to the owner of the property scheduling an inspection.
The notice should advise the owner that a notice of inspection will be placed
on the structure stating that it is scheduled for inspection to determine if
it should be scheduled for demolition. The notice shall also advise the owner
that occupancy of the premises is prohibited until the inspection is
completed and demolition is not recommended. A notice of inspection should be
affixed to the structure near its front door stating it is scheduled for
inspection as a result of a complaint and the inspection will determine if
demolition will be recommended. Upon the completion of the inspection, the
notice of inspection should be removed. If the Inspectors are recommending
demolition, a notice as set forth in division (D) below stating that the
structure has been inspected and is being recommended for demolition should
be affixed to the structure near the front door. If the Inspectors are not
recommending demolition, there will be no notice present on the structure.
The notices should contain the name of the department, contact person,
address and phone number to call to answer any questions raised by the
notices.



   (B)   The Building and Neighborhood Services Director. The Director
shall issue a notice and order directed to the owner of the building. The
notice and order shall contain:



      (1)   The street address and a legal description sufficient
for identification of the premises upon which the building is located;



      (2)   A statement that the building was found to be dangerous
along with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render
the building dangerous under the provisions of § 150.02 of this chapter, or
any other applicable provisions of this code of ordinances;



      (3)   A statement of the action required to be taken:



         (a)   If the building or structure is determined to be
repairable, the order shall require that all required permits be secured
therefor and the work physically commenced within the time (not to exceed 60
days from the date of order) and completed within the time as the Building
and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee determines is
reasonable under the circumstances;



         (b)   If the Building and Neighborhood Services Director
or his or her designee has determined that the building or structure must be
vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure shall be
vacated within a certain time from the date of order as determined by the
Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee to be
reasonable; and



         (c)   If the Building and Neighborhood Services Director
or his or her designee has determined that the building or structure must be
demolished, the order shall require that the building be demolished within
the time as the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her
designee determines is reasonable provided that the reasonable time for the
completion of demolition shall be within 90 days from the date of order.



      (4)   Statements advising that if any required repair or
demolition work is not commenced within the time specified, the Building and
Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee will:



         (a)   Order the building vacated and posted to prevent
further occupancy until the work is completed; and



         (b)   Report to the Council that proceedings to demolish
the building should commence and that demolition of the building should be
done and the cost thereof charged against the property or its owner.



      (5)   Statements advising each owner of record, jointly and
individually, that:



         (a)   The owner may appeal from the notice and order or
any action of the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her
designee to the Council, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided
in this chapter and filed with the Building and Neighborhood Services
Director or his or her designee within ten days from the date of service of
the notice and order;



         (b)   Within 15 days after the filing of a request, a
hearing will be held before the Committee of the Whole of the Council at
which time the owners and/or the owner’s counsel may be present and
participate; and



         (c)   Failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all
rights to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.



   (C)   Vacation and demolition. The following standards shall be
followed by the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her
designee in ordering the vacation or demolition of any dangerous buildings or
structures.



      (1)   Any building declared a dangerous building under this
chapter shall either be repaired or shall be demolished at the option of the
building owner.



      (2)   If the building or structure is in a condition as to
make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the
public or its occupants, it shall be ordered vacated. If the building or
structure, after it is vacated and secured, is still an immediate danger to
the life, limb, property or safety of the public and an emergency exists, the
city may perform any action which may be required to eliminate the immediate
danger without prior notice, and assess the costs, pursuant to Iowa Code §
364.12(3)(h).



      (3)   After a demolition permit has been obtained from the
Building and Neighborhood Services Department, the dangerous building shall
be removed pursuant to Chapter 113 of this code of ordinances and placed in
the county landfill.



      (4)   If the demolition is not completed within the time
determined by the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her
designee, the Council shall advertise for bids for the demolition of the
building, award a contract for the demolition to the lowest responsible
bidder and assess the cost thereof against the property as provided by law.
The Council may advertise for bids for the demolition of more than one
building and may award a single contract for the demolition of more than one
building.



   (D)   Notice to vacate. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to
being served as provided in division (B) above, be posted at or upon each
exit of the building and shall be substantially in the following form:



 


DANGEROUS BUILDING




DO NOT ENTER




UNSAFE TO OCCUPY




It is a municipal infraction to occupy this building or to remove or deface
this notice.




Building and Neighborhood Services Director
City of Clinton, Iowa




 



   (E)   Compliance.  Whenever the notice is posted, the Building and
Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee shall include a
notification thereof in the notice and order issued by the Director, reciting
the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No
person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except
that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove the building under
permit. No person shall remove or deface any notice after it is posted until
the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed.



   (F)   Extensions of time to perform work. Upon receipt of any
application in writing from the person required to conform to the order, an
agreement by the person that he or she will comply with the order if allowed
additional time, the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or
her designee may, at that person’s discretion, grant an extension of time,
not to exceed an additional 90 days, within which to complete the repairs,
rehabilitation or demolition, if the Building and Neighborhood Services
Director or his or her designee determines that an extension of time will not
create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property.
The Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee’s
authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair, rehabilitation or
demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect the time to appeal
the notice and order.



   (G)   Interference prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or
interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or duly authorized
representative of this jurisdiction or with any person who owns or holds any
estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated
or demolished under the provisions of this chapter; or with any person to
whom the building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, whenever the officer, employee, contractor or duly authorized
representative of this jurisdiction, person having an interest or estate in
the building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing,
vacating or demolishing any building, pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to
the work or authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 145.06)  (Ord. 2366, passed 5-27-2008; Ord. 2560, passed
12-12-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.07  APPEALS.



   Any person entitled to service under § 150.06 may appeal from any
notice and order or any action of the Building and Neighborhood Services
Director or his or her designee under this chapter by filing a notice of
appeal at the office of the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or
his or her designee on the form supplied for the filing purposes. The appeal
shall be filed within ten days from the date of service of the order or
action of the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her
designee. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the
Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee shall
present it at the next meeting of the Committee of the Whole.



   (A)   Scheduling appeal. As soon as practicable after receiving the
written appeal, the Committee of the Whole shall fix a date, time and place
for the hearing of the appeal. The date shall be within 15 days from the date
the appeal was filed or at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Committee of the Whole.



   (B)   Failure to appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver of
rights to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order
or any portion thereof.



   (C)   Scope of hearing. Only those matters or issues specifically
raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.



(1999 Code, § 145.07)  (Ord. 2366, passed 5-27-2008)



§ 150.08  DISPOSITION OF APPEAL.



   After hearing all testimony concerning the appeal, the Committee of the
Whole shall have 15 days to issue a finding. The decision shall be in writing
and shall contain findings of fact, a determination of the issues presented
and the requirements to be complied with. The decision shall be mailed to the
person appealing by regular mail. This report will be filed with the Council
at its next regularly scheduled meeting, which shall either approve or reject
the decision.



(1999 Code, § 145.08)



§ 150.09  APPEAL TO DISTRICT COURT.



   Any person may appeal the final decision notice and order of the
Council to the Iowa District Court for the county within 30 days after the
receipt of the decision, notice or order by filing a notice of appeal and
petition stating the basis for the appeal with the District Court.



(1999 Code, § 145.09)



§ 150.10  RECOVERY OF COSTS.



   Any and all costs incurred pursuant to this chapter, for the removal,
repair or dismantling of a dangerous building or structure from private
property shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer and assessed
against the property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.



(1999 Code, § 145.10)



APPENDIX A:  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS FORMS



Note: For a printer-friendly, PDF copy of Appendix A, please click HERE



   SUGGESTED FORM



   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



   FIRST NOTICE



TO:  (Name and address of owner, agent or occupant of the property on which
nuisance is located or the person causing or maintaining the nuisance).



You are hereby notified to abate the nuisance existing at (name location of
nuisance) within ______ days from service of this notice or file written
request for a Council hearing with the undersigned officer within the time
limit.



The nuisance consists of (described the nuisance and cite the law or
ordinance) and shall be abated by (state action necessary to abate the
particular nuisance).



In the event you fail to abate or cause to be abated the above nuisance as
directed, or file written request for hearing within the time prescribed
herein, the city will take steps as are necessary to abate or cause to be
abated the nuisance and the cost will be assessed against you as provided by
law.



Date of Notice: __________________________________



City of Clinton, Iowa



By: _________________________________________



         (Enforcement Officer)



   SUGGESTED FORM



   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



   NOTICE OF HEARING



TO:  (Name and address of owner, agent or occupant of the property on which
nuisance is located or the person causing or maintaining the nuisance).



You are hereby notified that the City Council of Clinton, Iowa, will meet on
the _____ day  of ____________________________, ______, at _____ o’clock
__.m. in the Council Chambers of the City Hall, at (address of City Hall) for
the purpose of considering whether or not the alleged nuisance consisting of
(describe the nuisance) on your property, locally known as
_________________________, _______________________, Iowa, and should be
abated by (state action necessary to abate the particular nuisance).



You are further notified that at the time and place you may appear and show
cause why the alleged nuisance should not be abated.



You are further notified to govern yourselves accordingly.



Date of Notice: __________________________________



 



City of Clinton, Iowa



By: _________________________________________



         (Enforcement Officer)



   SUGGESTED FORM



   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



   RESOLUTION AND ORDER



BE IT RESOLVED, by the City Council of the City of Clinton, Iowa:



WHEREAS, notice has heretofore been served on the _____ day of
____________________, _______, on (property owner’s name), through
(agent’s name or “none”), agent, to abate the nuisance existing at
(legal description and address) within _____ days from service of notice upon
the (name of owner or agent); and



   (EITHER)



WHEREAS, a hearing was requested by the (name of property owner or agent) and
the same was held at this meeting and evidence produced and considered by the
City Council;



   (OR, ALTERNATE TO PRECEDING PARAGRAPH)



WHEREAS, the owner (agent) named above has failed to abate or cause to be
abated the above nuisance as directed within the time set, and after evidence
was duly produced and considered at this meeting, and the owner has failed to
file a written request for hearing, as provided, after being properly served
by a notice to abate;



NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the owner of the property, or his or her
agent (name of owner or agent) is hereby directed and ordered to abate the
nuisance consisting of (describe the nuisance) by (state action necessary to
abate) within _____ days after the service of this order upon him or her; and



BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the enforcement officer be and is hereby directed
to serve a copy of this order upon the property owner or agent named above;
and



BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that in the event the owner, or agent (name the owner
or agent) fails to abate the nuisance within the time prescribed above, then
and in that event the city will abate the nuisance and the cost will be
assessed against the property and/or owner (owner’s name) at (address), as
the law shall provide.



Moved by _______________________________ to adopt.



Adopted this ______ day of __________________________, 20 _____.



                     _____________________________________
_____



                     Mayor



ATTEST:



____________________________________________



City Clerk



Note:  It is suggested by the blank space in the resolution that additional
time be allowed the owner to abate the nuisance after the passage of the
resolution before any action is taken on the part of the city to abate the
same. In some instances, for the sake of public safety, the time element
could be stricken from the resolution and immediate action be taken to abate
the nuisance after the order is given.



(1999 Code, Appendix)



CHAPTER 151:  FIRE PROTECTION CODE



Section



   151.01   Adoption of Uniform Fire Code



   151.02   Amendments, modifications and deletions



   151.03   Amendments, modifications and deletions to the
International Fire Code and the National Fire Protection Association 101: 
Life Safety Code



§ 151.01  ADOPTION OF UNIFORM FIRE CODE.



   Pursuant to notice and public hearing there is hereby adopted for the
purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and
property from fire, hazardous materials or explosion, that certain code and
standards known as the International Fire Code published by the International
Code Council, Inc. being particularly the 2006 Edition thereof and the whole
thereof, save and except the portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or
amended. This code, including the appendices B, C, D, E, F and G to the 2006
International Fire Code, is hereby adopted and incorporated as if set out at
length herein.



(1999 Code, § 146.01)  (Ord. 2335, passed 10-10-2006)



§ 151.02  AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS AND DELETIONS.



   Pursuant to notice and public hearing , there is hereby adopted that
certain code and standards known as the National Fire Protection Association
101: Life Safety Code published by the National Fire Protection Association
being particularly the 2006 Edition thereof and the whole thereof, save and
except the portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. This
code, is hereby adopted and incorporated as if set out at length herein.



(1999 Code, § 146.02)  (Ord. 2335, passed 10-10-2006)



§ 151.03  AMENDMENTS, MODIFICATIONS AND DELETIONS TO THE INTERNATIONAL FIRE
CODE AND THE NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION 101:  LIFE SAFETY CODE.



    The following amendments, modifications and deletions to the Fire
Protection Code are hereby made.



   (A)   Section 101.1 of the IFC is hereby amended to read as follows:



      These regulations shall be known as the Fire Protection Code of
the City of Clinton and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein
as “this code.”



   (B)   Delete § 108 of the IFC and insert in lieu thereof the
following:



      Appeals.  The Housing Board of Appeals as established in the
International Residential Code 2006 R112 is hereby authorized to determine
the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to
provide for reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this code.



   (C)   Delete § 307.1 of the IFC and insert in lieu thereof the
following:



 

TIME:
 
10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.


 
Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.


WHERE:
 
An open fire must be located not less than 50 feet from any structure or
property line. A fire in an approved waste burner must be located not less
than 15 feet from any structure and not less than five feet from any property
line. It is unlawful to burn on city streets or alleys.


WHAT:
 
Waste paper (excluding roofing paper and/or tarpaper), leaves, trees or
anything grown upon the property.


SIZE:
 
Piles for burning must be kept small. If the Fire Department, upon receiving
a complaint, feels the fire is of sufficient size to create a hazard to
nearby buildings or property the fire will be extinguished.


PROTECTION:
 
Open fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person until the fire
is extinguished. This person shall have a garden hose connected to a water
supply or other fire extinguishing equipment available for use.



 



   (D)   Add to § 307.4.1 of the IFC the following:  Recreational
fires shall not require a permit, but the Fire Department shall be notified
in advance.



   (E)   Add to § 307.4.2 of the IFC the following:  Recreational
fires shall not require a permit, but the Fire Department shall be notified
in advance.



   (F)   Add to § 903.2.8 of the IFC the following: Exception #1 –
One- and two-family dwellings.



   (G)   Delete § 24.3.5.1 of the LSC.



   (H)   Amend § 13.3.5.1 of NFPA 101 Life Safety Code 2006 Edition to
reflect the following additions:



      13.3.5.1    Where the occupant load exceeds 100, the following
assembly occupancies shall be protected throughout by an approved, supervised
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with 9.7.1.1(1):



       (1)   Occupancies that serve alcoholic beverages.



         (a)   Existing establishments operating on the first
floor level of discharge that serve alcoholic beverages shall upon change of
ownership with continued occupancy as defined in § 151.03 of the code of
ordinances, install a fire alarm system in accordance with 9.6.1. In
addition, an approved sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with
9.7.1.1(1) following any remodeling of the establishment that exceeds $50,000.



         (b)   Existing establishments with continued ownership
operating above or below the level of exit discharge (sub-floor and/or second
story and above) that serve alcoholic beverages shall be granted a ten-year
period to install an approved sprinkler system in accordance with 9.7.1.1(1).
In addition, an approved sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance
with 9.7.1.1 (1) following any change of ownership and/or any remodeling of
the establishment that exceeds $50,000.



         (c)   Bars with live entertainment.



         (d)   Discotheques.



         (e)   Nightclubs.



         (f)   Assembly occupancies with festival seating.



      (2)   The term CONTINUED OCCUPANCY or CONTINUOUS OCCUPANCY
shall mean to operate with the same business purpose within a 365-day period
during which a liquor license has been maintained for at least 24 hours.



(Ord. 2339, passed 11-14-2006; Ord. 2373, passed 6-10-2008; Ord. 2593, passed
9-25-2018)



CHAPTER 152:  SMOKE DETECTORS



Section



   152.01   Purpose



   152.02   Smoke detectors required



   152.03   Enforcement



§ 152.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to require the installation of approved
smoke detectors in all new dwellings within the city for the public safety,
health and welfare through the protection of people by providing an early
alarm of fire and thereby preventing death or injury by fire.



(1999 Code, § 148.01)



§ 152.02  SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED.



   (A)   New single-family and new two-family dwellings. Every new
single-family and new two-family dwelling shall have installed therein an
approved smoke detector in each sleeping room, outside each sleeping area, in
every room or hall in the path of the means of egress from the sleeping area
to the door leading from the sleeping unit and in each story within the
sleeping unit, including basements. Bedrooms or other sleeping areas
separated by other use areas such as kitchen or living room shall be
considered a separate group of sleeping rooms.



   (B)   New multi-family dwellings. Every new building constructed for
multi-family (three or more dwelling units), residential occupancies shall
have installed therein an approved supervised fire detection, products of
combustion, system in each sleeping room, outside each sleeping area, in
every room or hall in the path of the means of egress from the sleeping area
to the door leading from the sleeping unit and in each story within the
sleeping unit, including basements. Bedrooms or other sleeping areas
separated by other use areas such as a kitchen or living room shall be
considered a separate group of sleeping rooms.



   (C)   New commercial/residential dwellings. New structures used for
commerce with sleeping quarters in the same building (such as apartments over
stores) shall conform to the requirements of single-family dwellings, except
that if there are three or more apartments, the apartment area shall conform
to requirements for multi-family dwellings.



   (D)   Power source. For all new construction the required detectors
shall be powered by an A.C. primary source with interconnected wiring.



   (E)   Approved smoke detectors. Smoke detectors acceptable under
this chapter shall be dual sensor detectors meeting all requirements and
shall be sensitive to any products of combustion except that detectors
sensitive to heat only are not acceptable. The smoke alarm signaling devices
shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms and other areas used for sleeping
when intervening doors are closed. No signal system used for any purpose
other than fire warning meets the requirements of this regulation. For the
purpose of installation and maintenance, only the applicable sections of the
publication National Fire Protection Association No. 74, Standard for the
Installation, Maintenance and Use of a House Fire Warning System, shall be
considered accepted practice, and a copy of the standard is on file in the
office of the Clerk.



   (F)   Occupancy. All new single-family, two-family and multi-family
dwelling units cannot be occupied until the installation of a smoke detector
pursuant to this chapter is completed and approved.



(1999 Code, § 148.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 152.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   The Fire Chief or an authorized representative shall inspect, at least
once each year, the detectors in all multi-family dwellings to determine
their operability and condition of maintenance.



(1999 Code, § 148.03)



CHAPTER 153:  BUILDING NUMBERING



Section



   153.01   Definitions



   153.02   Owner requirements



§ 153.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OWNER. The owner of the principal building.



   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. The main building on any lot or subdivision thereof.



(1999 Code, § 150.01)



§ 153.02  OWNER REQUIREMENTS.



   Every owner shall comply with the following numbering requirements.



   (A)   Building identification location. The owner of every building
and residence shall obtain and have conspicuously placed a standard type
number on the front entryway of the structure, plainly visible from the
street or, in the case of rural areas, the number should be attached to the
rural mailbox at the street location for identification purpose.



   (B)   Number standard. The type of number should be a standard
four-inch high block letter with a color in contrast to the building wall. On
rural type street mailboxes, a three-inch number is permitted.



   (C)   Failure to comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as
herein provided, or fails to do so after being notified in writing by the
city to do so, the city may proceed to place the assigned number on the
principal building and assess the costs against the property for collection
in the same manner as a property tax.



(1999 Code, § 150.02)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 154:  BUILDING AND HOUSING CODES



Section



Building Code



   154.01   Adoption of State Building Code



   154.02   Amendments and exceptions to adopted Fire and Building Codes



   154.03   Inspections



   154.04   Fees



   154.05   Adoption of standard codes references in State Building Code



Housing Code



   154.20   Adoption



   154.21   Provisions for variances



BUILDING CODE



§ 154.01  ADOPTION OF STATE BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   Pursuant to Iowa Code § 103A.12, the 2012 State Building
Code, promulgated pursuant to Iowa Code Chapter 103A, is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated as if set out at length herein, save and except
the portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. This chapter
shall apply only to newly constructed buildings and structures as specified
in I.A.C. § 491-5.4(18) for land-based gaming facilities and in Iowa Code §
103A.10A(3), which states in part newly constructed buildings and structures,
the construction of which is paid for in whole or in part with monies
appropriated by the state but not wholly owned by the state are subject to
the plan review and construction requirements as provided for in this
division.



(Ord. 2516, passed 12-9-2014)



§ 154.02  AMENDMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS TO ADOPTED FIRE AND BUILDING CODES.



   (A)   The 2012 Iowa State Building Code is adopted with the
following amendments, modifications, additions and deletions: 



      (1)   The City of Clinton is inserted as the name of the
municipality in those parts of the code where the insertions are necessary or
appropriate.



      (2)   All references to the building line and zoning are void,
and the subject matter of the zoning ordinance of the city shall be
applicable.



      (3)   Replace all references to "Building Official" and
replace with "Director of Building and Neighborhood Services or his or her
designee."



      (4)   The city shall by ordinance contemporaneous with this
enactment, create a Housing Board of Appeals.  Add to Section 112.3 of the
International Building Code the following sentence:  "In the selection of
members, the Mayor may seek input from persons qualified by experience and
training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction.  The City
Council shall have the same prerogative in its review and approval of
members."



   (B)   Amendment to R112.3 of the International Residential Code 2012.



      Qualifications.  The Board of Appeals shall consist of seven
members appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council who are
qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to
building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction.



   (C)   Amendment to R112 of International Residential Code of 2012.



      Duties.  The duties and powers of the Housing Board of Appeals
shall also include the authority to consider and determine appeals filed
pursuant to Chapter 90 of this code regarding request for hearing for
nuisance abatement.  Any member of the Board who is a landlord or lessor
shall recuse themselves from the discussion or voting on any nuisance
abatement appeal that involves a landlord/tenant situation.



   (D)   Delete Section R313.2 (One and Two Family Dwellings Automatic
Fire System) of International Residential Code of 2012.



   (E)   Burn rules as published in Chapter 103 of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Clinton shall remain in full force and effect and
shall not be superseded by rules to the contrary set forth in the
International Fire Code 2012, section 307. 



(Ord. 2516, passed 12-9-2014)



§ 154.03  INSPECTIONS.



   All required inspections shall be performed by Clinton Fire Department,
Building and Neighborhood Services Division or by an individual or agency
approved by the City of Clinton Fire Chief or his or her designee. The
Director of Building and Neighborhood Services or his or her designee shall
have the authority to accept and approve reports of inspection by approved
agencies or individuals. Reports of inspections shall be in writing and be
certified by the approved individual or the responsible officer of the
approved agency. The owner of the building or structure being inspected shall
bear all costs of the inspection.



(Ord. 2516, passed 12-9-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 154.04  FEES.



   For work requiring a building permit, the fees shall be adopted by
resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 2516, passed 12-9-2014)



§ 154.05  ADOPTION OF STANDARD CODES REFERENCES IN STATE BUILDING CODE.



   (A)   Pursuant to published notice and public hearing, the city
hereby adopts the following standard codes by reference as the Clinton
Building Code:



      (1)   International Building Code 2012 Edition and all
appendices (published by the International Code Council, Inc.)



      (2)   International Mechanical Code 2012 Edition (published by
the International Code Council, Inc.)



      (3)   National Electrical Code 2011 Edition (published by
National Fire Protection Agency)



      (4)   International Residential Code 2012 Edition and all
appendices (published by the International Code Council, Inc.)



      (5)   International Existing Building Code 2012 Edition
(published by the International Code Council, Inc.)



      (6)   Uniform Plumbing Code 2012 Edition (published by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials)



      (7)   International Energy Conservation Code 2012 Edition
(published by the International Code Council, Inc.) International Fire Code
2012 Edition and all appendices (published by the International Code Council,
Inc.)



   (B)   The standard codes are hereby adopted in full except for the
portions as may be deleted, modified or amended in this or subsequent
ordinances. If any conflict exists between the adopted codes, the more
restrictive code requirement applies. The provisions of the codes shall be
controlling in the construction of buildings and other structures and in all
matters covered by the code within the corporate limits of the city and shall
be known as the "Clinton Building Code."



(Ord. 2516, passed 12-9-2014)



HOUSING CODE



§ 154.20  ADOPTION.



   The Housing Quality Standards promulgated by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for use in assisted housing
programs, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk, are adopted
as a Housing Code pursuant to the Iowa Code § 364.17. The Housing Code shall
be used in conjunction with the minimum health and housing standards
contained in Chapter 155 of this code of ordinances. In any case where a
provision of the Housing Code conflicts with the minimum health and housing
standards, the provision which establishes the higher standard shall prevail.



(1999 Code, § 155.01)



§ 154.21  PROVISIONS FOR VARIANCES.



   Reasonable variances for existing structures which cannot practicably
meet the standards of either the Housing Code or Chapter 155 but are not
unsafe for habitation may be granted by the Housing Inspector or, upon
appeal, by the Housing Board of Appeals.



(1999 Code, § 155.02)



CHAPTER 155:  MINIMUM HEALTH AND HOUSING STANDARDS



Section



   155.01   Short title



   155.02   Legislative finding



   155.03   Purpose



   155.04   Scope



   155.05   Exemption for owner-occupied single-family dwellings



   155.06   Definitions



   155.07   Office of Housing Inspection Services



   155.08   Authority of Housing Inspector



   155.09   Access by owner or operator



   155.10   Right of entry



   155.11   Order to allow inspection



   155.12   Owner or occupant to permit entry



   155.13   Evidence



   155.14   Serving notice



   155.15   Appeals



   155.16   Inspection; frequency



   155.17   Inspection fees



   155.18   Filing of lien for nonpayment



   155.19   Maintenance of owned and rental dwellings



   155.20   Maintenance of dwellings and rooming units



   155.21   Rooming houses



   155.22   Rental units



   155.23   Legal procedure for condemnation of unfit dwellings



 



   155.99   Penalty



§ 155.01  SHORT TITLE.



   The ordinance codified in this chapter is known and shall be cited as
the “Minimum Health and Housing Standards” of the city.



(1999 Code, § 156.01)



§ 155.02  LEGISLATIVE FINDING.



   It is found that there exist and may in the future exist, within the
city, premises, dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units or parts thereof
which, by reason of their structure, equipment, sanitation, maintenance, use
or occupancy, affect or are likely to affect adversely the public health
(including the physical, mental and social well-being of persons and
families), safety and general welfare. To correct and prevent the existence
of adverse conditions, and to achieve and maintain levels of residential
environmental quality as will protect and promote public health, safety and
general welfare, it is further found that the establishment and enforcement
of minimum housing standards are required.



(1999 Code, § 156.02)



§ 155.03  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to protect, preserve and promote the
physical and mental health and social well-being of the people, to prevent
and control the incidence of communicable diseases, to reduce environmental
hazards to health, to regulate privately and publicly owned dwellings for the
purpose of maintaining adequate sanitation and public health and to protect
the safety of the people and to promote the general welfare by legislation
which shall be applicable to all dwellings now in existence or hereafter
constructed. It is also the purpose of this chapter to ensure that the
quality of the housing is adequate for protection of public health, safety
and general welfare, including:  establishment of minimum standards for
basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, and thermal conditions
for safety from fire and accidents, and for an adequate level of maintenance,
determination of the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of
dwellings; and provisions for the administration and enforcement thereof.



(1999 Code, § 156.03)



§ 155.04  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this chapter apply uniformly to the alteration,
repair, equipment, use and occupancy and maintenance of all existing
residential buildings and structures within the jurisdiction of the city
irrespective of the date of construction unless an exception or exemption is
specifically made in this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 156.04)



§ 155.05  EXEMPTION FOR OWNER-OCCUPIED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS.



    Owner-occupied single-family dwellings are subject to the following
provisions of this chapter:  §§ 155.01 through 155.19 and 155.23; but the
dwellings shall be inspected only upon receipt of a signed complaint from two
different households, objecting to the condition of the dwelling or upon the
request of the owner.



(1999 Code, § 156.05)



§ 155.06  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A detached structure which is not used or
not intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.



      APPROVED. Approved by or in accordance with regulations
established by the Housing Inspector.



      BATH. A bathtub or shower stall properly connected with both hot
and cold water lines.



      DWELLING. Any building or structure which is wholly or partly
used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants and
includes any appurtenances attached thereto.



      DWELLING UNIT. Any habitable room or group of adjoining habitable
rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single unit with facilities
which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating of meals.



      EGRESS. An arrangement of exit routes to assure a safe means of
exit from buildings.



      EMERGENCY. A condition which has arisen suddenly and
unexpectedly, and which immediately and materially threatens the health or
safety of occupants of a dwelling or dwelling unit. Emergencies may include,
but are not limited to, structural collapse or failure; flood; fire; or
failure of a supplied utility.



      EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harboring places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Housing Inspector.



      FAMILY. One person or two or more persons occupying a living unit
as an individual, housekeeping organization.



      GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of food; and also means combustible waste
material. The term also includes paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings and other
combustible materials.



      HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used, or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, toilet rooms, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets, storage spaces and stairways.



      HOUSING INSPECTOR. The official or officials of the city
appointed to administer the provisions of this chapter.



      INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.



      LAVATORY BASIN. A hand washing basin which is properly connected
with both hot and cold water lines and which is separate and distinct from a
kitchen sink.



      OCCUPANT. Any person, including owner or operator, living,
sleeping, cooking in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling
unit or a rooming unit.



      OPERATOR. Any person who rents to another or who has custody or
control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming
units are let, or who has custody or control of the premises.



      OWNER. Any person who has legal title or equitable title, or has
custody or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit as
executor/executrix, administrator/administratrix, trustee or guardian of the
estate of the owner.



      PERMIT. A certificate certifying that the unit for which it is
issued was in compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter when
last inspected. The permit shall authorize the operation of the rental unit
or rooming unit until suspended or revoked pursuant to this chapter.



      PLUMBING. Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment:  gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal
units, waste pipes, toilets, sinks, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths,
installed dishwashers and clothes washing machines, water heating devices,
catchbasins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures together
with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.



      PREMISES. A platted or unplatted lot or part thereof, either
occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or accessory structure.



      PRIVACY. The existence of conditions which will permit a person
or persons to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or
interference by unwanted persons.



      REFUSE. Waste materials (except human waste) including garbage,
rubbish, ashes and dead animals.



      RENTAL UNIT. A dwelling unit which is rented or leased to an
occupant.



      ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling containing one or more rooming units.



      ROOMING HOUSE OPERATOR. Any person who rents to another or who
has custody or control of a building, or part thereof, in which that person
resides and in which rooming units are let.



      ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living or sleeping, but not
for cooking purposes or preparation of food.



      RUBBISH. Inorganic waste material consisting of combustible
and/or noncombustible materials.



      SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished, provided by or under the control
of the owner or operator.



      TOILET. A water closet, with a bowl and trap made in one piece,
which is of the shape and form and which holds a sufficient quantity of water
so that no fecal matter will collect on the surface of the bowl and which is
equipped with flushing rims which permit the bowl to be properly flushed and
scoured when water is discharged through the flushing rim.



      U.L. APPROVED. Listed or approved by Underwriters’ Laboratories.



      WRITTEN APPLICATION FOR PERMIT. A request in writing filed by an
owner or operator with the Housing Inspector seeking issuance of a permit.



   (B)   Whenever the words DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, ROOMING HOUSE,
ROOMING UNIT or PREMISES are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as
if they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”



(1999 Code, § 156.06)



§ 155.07  OFFICE OF HOUSING INSPECTION SERVICES.



   There is established an Office of Housing Inspection Services. The
staffing and funding of this office shall be pursuant to resolution of the
Council.



(1999 Code, § 156.07)



§ 155.08  AUTHORITY OF HOUSING INSPECTOR.



   The Housing Inspector is authorized to administer and enforce the
provisions of this chapter and to make inspections to determine the condition
of all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, rental units, structures and
premises located within the city, in order that the Housing Inspector may
perform the duty of safeguarding the safety and welfare of the occupants of
dwellings and of the general public. No Housing Inspector shall inspect a
property that the Inspector has financial interest in or which is owned by
someone related to the Inspector.



(1999 Code, § 156.08)



§ 155.09  ACCESS BY OWNER OR OPERATOR.



   Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or rental
unit shall give the owner or operator thereof access to any part of the
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, rental unit or its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of effecting the maintenance, making the
repairs or making the alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted
or any lawful notice or order issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.



(1999 Code, § 156.09)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.10  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this chapter, or whenever the Housing Inspector has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit, rental unit, structure or premises any condition which makes the unit
or premises in violation of any provisions of this chapter, or in response to
a complaint that an alleged violation of the provision of this chapter or of
applicable rules or regulations pursuant thereto may exist, the Housing
Inspector must, before attempting to inspect any dwelling unit, obtain
consent to conduct an inspection from the owner and/or any person lawfully
entitled to possession of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, rental
unit, structure or premises. Consent is not effective to authorize an
inspection unless obtained from both the owner and the person lawfully
entitled to possession. In seeking to obtain consent to conduct an
inspection, the Housing Inspector shall:



   (A)   Identify himself or herself and his or her position;



   (B)   Explain why entry is sought;



   (C)   Explain that the owner or other person having charge or
control of the premises may refuse, without penalty, entry without an order
to allow inspection; and



   (D)   Explain that if entry is refused, the Housing Inspector may
apply to a magistrate for an order to allow inspection.



(1999 Code, § 156.10)



§ 155.11  ORDER TO ALLOW INSPECTION.



   The Housing Inspector is authorized to conduct consensual inspections
of any dwelling within the city, on a reasonable and regular basis or upon
request or complaint, in order to perform the duty of safeguarding the health
and safety of the occupants or the public. If consent to inspect the building
is withheld by any person or persons from whom consent must be obtained to
conduct a consensual inspection, the Housing Inspector may apply to a
magistrate of the State District Court in and for the county for an order to
allow inspection of the building. No order to allow inspection shall be
issued until the Housing Inspector files with the Clerk of the District Court
an affidavit signed by the Housing Inspector attesting to the fact that the
Housing Inspector has attempted to obtain consent to conduct an inspection,
but has failed to obtain the consent, and further naming the party or parties
who refused to consent to the inspection.



(1999 Code, § 156.11)



§ 155.12  OWNER OR OCCUPANT TO PERMIT ENTRY.



   No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care of or
control of any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, rental unit, structure
or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of an order to allow
inspection or a search warrant, to properly permit entry therein by the
Housing Inspector for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to
this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 156.12)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.13  EVIDENCE.



   Evidence obtained by use of an order to allow inspection may be used to
effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter in any ensuing action
brought by the city for a violation of this chapter; provided, that no
evidence obtained by use of an order to allow inspection may be used for any
purpose if the Housing Inspector did not first make reasonable effort to
obtain consent to conduct the inspection as required by § 155.10.



(1999 Code, § 156.13)



§ 155.14  SERVING NOTICE.



   Whenever the Housing Inspector determines that there has been a
violation, or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has
been a violation of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the Housing Inspector shall give the
notice of the violation or alleged violation to the owner and person legally
entitled to possession of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or rental
unit. The notice shall:



   (A)   Be put in writing;



   (B)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;



   (C)   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being
issued;



   (D)   Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires; in no event to exceed 60 days, unless sufficient evidence is
produced to require a time extension;



   (E)   Be served upon the owner or the operator, provided that the
notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner or the operator
by means of regular United States mail. The notice shall contain an outline
of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.



   (F)   Be effective to anyone having an interest in the property
whether recorded or not at the time of giving the notice; and shall be
effective against any subsequent owner of the premises as long as the
violation exists and there of housing inspection services.



(1999 Code, § 156.14)  (Ord. 2253, passed 2-12-2002)



§ 155.15  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person affected by any notice which has been issued by the
Housing Inspector pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or any rule or
regulation pursuant thereto, may request, and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Housing Board of Appeals as established in the
International Residential Code; provided that the person shall file with the
Housing Inspector a written petition requesting the hearing and specifying
the grounds therefor within 15 days after the date the notice was served.
Upon receipt of the petition, the Housing Inspector shall set a time, date
and place for the hearing within the time as shall be prescribed by general
rule of the Housing Board of Appeals as established in the International
Residential Code. The Housing Inspector shall give the petitioner written
notice of the hearing and shall take no further enforcement action pending
the outcome of the hearing. The Housing Inspector shall forthwith transmit to
the Housing Board of Appeals as established in the International Residential
Code all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from was taken. The hearing shall be commenced not later than 30 days after
the date on which the petition was filed provided that upon application of
the petitioner, the Housing Inspector may postpone the date of the hearing
for a reasonable time beyond the 30-day period if in the Inspector’s
judgment, the petitioner has submitted a justified and sufficient reason for
the postponement.



   (B)   At the hearing the petitioner, authorized agent or attorney,
shall be given the opportunity to be heard and to show why the notice should
be modified or withdrawn. The proceedings at the hearing, including the
findings of fact and decision of the Housing Board of Appeals as established
in the International Residential Code, shall be summarized, reduced to
writing and entered within five days as a matter of public record in the
office of the Housing Inspector. The record shall also include a copy of
every notice, order or correspondence issued by the Housing Inspector in
connection with this matter. The Housing Board of Appeals as established in
the International Residential Code shall render a decision on the appeal
without unreasonable delay.



   (C)   After the hearing, the Housing Board of Appeals as established
in the International Residential Code shall sustain, modify or withdraw the
notice, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this
chapter and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been
complied with. If the Housing Board of Appeals as established in the
International Residential Code sustains or modifies the notice, it shall be
deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to § 155.14 shall
automatically become an order if a written petition for hearing is not filed
with the Housing Inspector within 15 days after the notice is served. After a
hearing in the case of any notice suspending any permit required by this
chapter or by any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, when the
notice has been sustained by the Housing Board of Appeals as established in
the International Residential Code, the permit shall be deemed to have been
revoked. Any permit which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed
automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed with the Housing
Inspector within 15 days after the notice is served.



   (D)   Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any
decision of the Housing Board of Appeals as established in the International
Residential Code, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department board or bureau
of the city shall have recourse to the relief therefrom in any court of
competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of the state.



   (E)   Whenever the Housing Inspector finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public, the Inspector may call
for an emergency meeting of the Housing Board of Appeals as established in
the International Residential Code. The meeting may be held as soon as
possible but in no event shall the meeting be held sooner than 24 hours after
notice has been given to the owner of the premises of the time and place of
the meeting, and the situation or conditions which created the emergency. At
the meeting, the Board shall take action as it deems necessary to meet the
emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this chapter, the order
shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom the order is directed
shall comply therewith immediately, but nothing in this section shall be
construed so as to deny any person affected by the order any remedy otherwise
available.



(1999 Code, § 156.15)



§ 155.16  INSPECTION; FREQUENCY.



   Every dwelling unit shall be inspected upon receipt of a written
application for permit or upon receipt of a signed complaint from members of
two different households. Upon issuance of a valid permit, the dwelling unit
should thereafter be inspected at least once in every 24-month period.



(1999 Code, § 156.16)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.17  INSPECTION FEES.



   Inspection fees and, if needed, reinspection fees, as established City
Council resolution, shall be paid within 90 days after initial billing. In
the event the rental inspection fees are not paid within 90 days after the
initial billing date, a penalty in the amount of the inspection/reinspection
fee due and payable, will be assessed to the property owner.



(1999 Code, § 156.17)  (Ord. 2253, passed 2-12-2002)  Penalty, see §
155.99



§ 155.18  FILING OF LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT.



   Each inspection fee/penalty and filing fee levied pursuant to this
chapter shall be a lien against the property. In the event the rental housing
inspection fee is not paid within 90 days after the original billing date, a
penalty in the amount of the inspection fee due and payable will be assessed
to the property owner and certified to the County Auditor, with the sum of $4
added thereto as a filing fee, and the Clerk so certifying the charges to the
County Auditor, shall specify the amount thereof, the period covered, the
description of the premises, the name of the owner thereof, and the amount so
certified shall be entered upon the tax lists against the premises in the
same manner as other taxes and collected by the County Treasurer and paid to
the city, along with other taxes.



(1999 Code, § 156.18)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.19  MAINTENANCE OF OWNED AND RENTAL DWELLINGS.



   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for
occupancy, any dwelling unit, or portion thereof, for the purpose of living
therein, which does not comply with the requirements set forth in this
section.



   (A)   Maintenance of structure.



      (1)   Every foundation, roof, floor, wall, ceiling, stair,
step, sidewalk and every window, door and other aperture covering shall be
maintained in good condition.



      (2)   Every door, door hinge, door latch and door lock leading
to the exterior, shall be in good condition and every door, when closed,
shall fit reasonably well within its frame. There shall be no exposed cracks
or openings in or around door frame. All windows and exterior doors and their
frames shall be constructed and maintained in weatherproof condition.



      (3)   Every doorway providing egress or ingress from any
dwelling unit, rooming unit or habitable room shall be of the height and
width so as to provide reasonable access to the dwelling unit, rooming unit
or habitable room. All entrance doorways to dwelling units and rooming units
shall be equipped with doors which effectively close the doorway.



      (4)   Every interior partition, wall, floor and ceiling shall
be capable of affording visual privacy and maintained so as to permit them to
be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.



      (5)   Every foundation, exterior wall, exterior door and roof
shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, rodent-proof and insect-proof.



   (B)   Rainwater drainage. All eaves, troughs, downspouts and other
roof drainage equipment of the dwelling and its accessory structures shall be
maintained in a good state of repair and so installed as to direct rainwater
away from the structure or adjoining property.



   (C)   Chimneys and smokepipes. Every chimney, every supplied
smokepipe and fireplace shall be adequately supported, reasonably clean and
maintained in a reasonably good state of repair, so as to not be a health,
fire or safety hazard.



   (D)   Grading, drainage and landscaping. Every premises shall be
graded and drained so no stagnant water will accumulate or stand on the
premises and premises shall be continuously maintained in a sanitary,
erosion-free and dust-free condition by suitable landscaping with grass,
trees, shrubs or other planted ground cover or by paving with asphalt,
concrete or by other suitable means as shall be approved by the Housing
Inspector.



   (E)   Protection of exterior wood surfaces. All exterior wood
surfaces, other than decay-resistant wood, shall be protected from the
elements and decay by paint or other protective covering or treatment.



   (F)   Electrical system. The electrical system of every dwelling
shall not by reason of overloading, dilapidation, lack of insulation or
improper fusing, or for any other cause, expose the occupants to hazards of
electrical shock or to the hazards of fire.



   (G)   Gas appliances and facilities.



      (1)   Every gas appliance shall be connected to a gas line
with approved solid metal piping except that listed metal appliance
connectors or semi-rigid tubing may be used if approved by the Housing
Inspector.



      (2)   Every gas pipe shall be sound and tightly put together
and shall be free of leaks, corrosion or obstruction so as to reduce gas
pressure or volume.



      (3)   Gas lines shall be adequate to permit a proper flow of
gas from all open gas valves at all times. Each gas appliance shall have a
gas shutoff valve which leads directly to it.



   (H)   Supplied plumbing fixtures.



      (1)   Every supplied plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe
shall be properly installed and maintained in good, sanitary working
condition.



      (2)   All plumbing shall be so designed and installed as to
prevent contamination of the water supply through backflow, back siphonage,
cross connection and any other method of contamination.



      (3)   Water lines shall be adequate to permit a proper flow of
water from all open outlets at all times.



   (I)   Supplied facilities. No owner or operator shall cause any
service, facility, equipment or utility which is required to be supplied
under the provisions of the housing standards to be removed from or shut off
from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling or dwelling unit or occupied
by the person except for the temporary interruption as may be necessary while
actual repairs, replacements or alterations are being made.



   (J)   Covered  cisterns. All cisterns or similar water storage
facilities shall be safely covered or filled in a way as not to create a
hazard to life or limb.



   (K)   Sealed passage. All pipe passages, chutes and similar openings
through walls or floors shall be adequately enclosed or sealed to prevent the
spread of fire or passage of vermin.



   (L)   Pest extermination. Every owner of a dwelling containing two
or more dwelling units shall be responsible for the extermination of insects,
rodents or other pests on the premises. Whenever infestation exists in two or
more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts
of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof
shall be the responsibility of the owner.



   (M)   Prohibited animals. No horses, cows, calves, swine, sheep,
goats, chickens, rabbits, geese or ducks shall be kept in any dwelling or
part thereof. No animal shall be kept on the same lot or premises with a
dwelling except under the conditions as may be prescribed by the Housing
Inspector.



   (N)   Cleaning of vacant dwelling units required. No owner shall
permit occupancy of any vacant dwelling unit or rooming unit unless it is
clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.



   (O)   Public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a safe and sanitary
condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.



   (P)   Fences. Every fence shall be kept in a reasonably good state
of maintenance and repair or shall be removed.



   (Q)   Accessory structures. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof,
window, exterior door, basement hatchway and every other entranceway of every
accessory structure shall be so maintained as to prevent the structure from
becoming a harborage of rats and shall be kept in a reasonably good state of
repair.



   (R)   Alterations. All structural alterations of dwellings and
accessory structures shall be done in accordance with all applicable
provisions of this code of ordinances and with all rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto.



   (S)   Heating facilities. All rental units shall be equipped with
safe heating facilities capable of heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
water closet compartments to at least 68 degrees at a distance of 18 inches
above the floor.



   (T)   Early warning fire detection systems. Every rental unit shall
be provided with smoke detectors as provided in this division. In new
construction, detectors shall be hard wired to separate circuits mounted on
the ceiling or wall centrally located in the corridor or area giving access
to rooms used for sleeping purposes in existing units, any U.L. approved
detector, properly installed and maintained, shall be deemed to be in
compliance with this division. In an efficiency rental unit, the detector
shall be centrally located on the ceiling of the main room. Where sleeping
rooms are on an upper level, the detector shall be placed at the center of
the ceiling directly above the stairway. All wall mounted detectors shall be
located between six inches and 12 inches of the ceiling. Care should be
exercised to ensure that the installation will not interfere with the
operating characteristics of the detector. When actuated, the detector shall
provide an alarm in the rental unit. Smoke detectors shall be maintained by
the owner.



   (U)   Sanitary maintenance. The owner of every rental unit shall be
responsible for the maintenance and sanitary condition of all public areas
therein.



   (V)   Hand railings.



      (1)   Stairways having four or more risers will require one
hand railing except that the stairways open on one the or both sides shall
have hand railings provided on the open side or sides. Hand railings shall be
placed not less than 30 inches nor more than 34 inches above the nosing of
the treads. They shall be continuous the full length of the run of the stairs.



      (2)   Hand railings projecting from a wall shall have a space
of a standard bracket or a minimum of one and one-half inches between the
wall and the hand railing. The hand railing portion of the hand rails shall
be not less than one and one-quarter inches nor more than two inches in
cross-sectional dimension and shall have a smooth surface with no sharp
corners.



(1999 Code, § 156.20)  (Ord. 2253, passed 2-12-2006)  Penalty, see §
155.99



§ 155.20  MAINTENANCE OF DWELLINGS AND ROOMING UNITS.



   (A)   Occupant responsible for controlled area.



      (1)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep
in a clean, safe and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling
unit and premises thereof that person occupies and controls.



      (2)   The floor and floor covering shall be kept reasonably
clean and sanitary.



      (3)   Every wall and ceiling shall be reasonably clean and
free of dirt or greasy film.



      (4)   No dwelling or the premises thereof shall be used for
the storage or handling of refuse.



      (5)   No occupant shall keep or store property of any kind in
any shared or public area of the dwelling and premises thereof, nor shall any
occupant place any garbage, refuse or rubbish in any shared or public area.



   (B)   Plumbing fixtures. The occupants of a dwelling unit shall keep
all supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the use and
operation thereof.



   (C)   Extermination of pests. Every occupant of a dwelling
containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination
of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises; and every
occupant of a dwelling containing one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
the extermination within the unit occupied by that person whenever the
dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding, the foregoing
provisions of this section, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the
owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonably rodent-proof or reasonably
insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner.



   (D)   Storage and disposal of garbage. Storage and disposal of
garbage and rubbish shall comply with the requirements of the provisions of
this code of ordinances concerning the same and the Housing Inspector shall
enforce the requirements contained therein.



   (E)   Supplied heating facilities. Every occupant of a dwelling unit
shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care, proper use and
proper operation of supplied heating facilities.



   (F)   Electrical wiring. No temporary wiring or extension cords
shall be used except extension cords which run directly from portable
electric fixtures to convenience outlets and which do not lie beneath floor
coverings or extend through doorways, transoms or similar apertures in
structural elements or attached thereto.



   (G)   Smoke detectors. No tenant shall remove or disconnect any
smoke detecting device.



   (H)   Prohibited animals. No horses, cows, calves, swine, sheep,
goats, chickens, rabbits, geese or ducks shall be kept in any dwelling or
part thereof. No animal shall be kept on the same lot or premises with a
dwelling except under the conditions as may be prescribed by the Housing
Inspector.



(1999 Code, § 156.21)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.21  ROOMING HOUSES.



   No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to
another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house except in
compliance with the provisions of this section.



   (A)   Toilets and lavatory basins. At least one toilet, and one
lavatory basin in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight
persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including
members of the rooming house operator’s family wherever they share the
facilities; provided, that in a rooming house where rooms are let only to
males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half of the
required number of toilets.



   (B)   Baths. At least one bath, in good working condition, shall be
supplied for each eight persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming
house, including members of the rooming house operator’s family whenever
they share the use of the facilities.



   (C)   Location of sanitary facilities. Every toilet, lavatory basin
and bath shall be located within a room or rooms which afford privacy to a
person within the room or rooms. All facilities shall be so located within
the rooming house as to be accessible to the occupants of each rooming unit
sharing facilities without going outside of the dwelling and without going
though a dwelling unit or through a rooming unit of another occupant.



   (D)   Sanitary maintenance. The rooming house operator of every
rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls,
floors and ceilings and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every
other part of the rooming house; and shall be further responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or
building within which the rooming house is contained, is leased or occupied
by the owner. The occupant of every rooming unit shall keep personal
belongings contained within the unit in a clean, neat and orderly condition
so as to facilitate the ability of the operator to discharge responsibilities
for sanitary maintenance within every rooming unit as set forth in this
section.



(1999 Code, § 156.22)  Penalty, see § 155.99



§ 155.22  RENTAL UNITS.



   No person shall operate a rental unit or rooming unit or let to another
for occupancy any dwelling unit in any rental unit except in compliance with
the requirements set forth in this section.



   (A)   Permit required. It is illegal for any owner or operator to
rent or offer for rent any rental unit or rooming unit for use in whole or in
part for human habitation unless a written application for a permit has been
filed for the rental unit or rooming unit or a permit has been issued for the
rental unit or rooming unit. Each written application for permit shall
contain the address or addresses of the rental unit(s) or rooming unit(s),
and the name, address and telephone number of the owner or the owner’s
authorized agent. Only one written application for permit is required per
dwelling. After a written application for permit has been filed, or after a
permit has been issued, the owner or operator shall be authorized to rent or
offer for rent the rental unit or rooming unit until a time as the Housing
Inspector denies a permit for the rental unit or rooming unit or the permit
is revoked or suspended pursuant to the terms of this section. A permit to
operate a rental unit or rooming unit shall not be denied on the ground that
other rental units or rooming units located in the same dwelling are not in
compliance with this section.



   (B)   Issuance of permit implies conformance with this chapter. The
issuance of a rental permit to any rental unit shall signify or imply that
the rental unit conforms with the minimum health and housing standards
contained in this chapter and with the zoning regulations contained in
Chapter 159 hereof. No person shall operate a rental unit unless all of the
requirements for rental units as previously set forth in this chapter are
complied with.



   (C)   Hearing on denial of permit. Any person whose application for
a permit to operate a rental unit has been denied may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Housing Board of Appeals as
established in the International Residential Code.



   (D)   Suspension of permit. Whenever, upon inspection of any rental
unit, the Housing Inspector finds that conditions or practices exist which
are in violation of any provisions of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto the Housing Inspector shall give notice
in writing to the owner of the rental unit that unless the conditions or
practices are corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined by the
Housing Inspector, the rental permit will be suspended. At the end of the
period, the Housing Inspector shall reinspect the rental unit and, if the
Inspector finds that the conditions or practices have not been corrected,
shall suspend the permit and give notice in writing to the operator that the
permit has been suspended. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
authorize the Housing Inspector to suspend a permit for any rental unit or
rooming unit which is in compliance with this chapter on the ground that the
rental unit or rooming unit is located in a dwelling in which is located a
noncomplying rental unit or rooming unit.



   (E)   Hearing on suspension of permit. Any person whose permit to
operate a rental unit has been suspended or who has received notice from the
Housing Inspector that the permit is to be suspended unless existing
conditions or practices at the rental unit are corrected, may request and
shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Housing Board of Appeals
as established in the International Residential Code, provided, that if no
petition for the hearing is filed within 15 days following the day on which
the permit was suspended, the permit shall be deemed to be automatically
revoked. Upon receipt of notice of permit revocation, the operator shall
cease operation of the rental unit and after the elapse of a reasonable
period of time, to be determined by the Housing Inspector, no person shall
occupy for sleeping or living purposes any rental unit or rooming unit
therein. Any notice of permit suspension or revocation shall be effective
only as to noncomplying rental or rooming units, and shall not affect the
operation of rental or rooming units in compliance with this chapter even
though other rental or rooming units in the dwelling are not in compliance.
The Housing Inspector shall reinspect work completed by or at the direction
of the owner or occupant within two working days after being notified.



(1999 Code, § 156.23)  (Ord. 2253, passed 2-12-2002)  Penalty, see §
155.99



§ 155.23  LEGAL PROCEDURE FOR CONDEMNATION OF UNFIT DWELLINGS.



   (A)   Generally.  No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let
to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of
living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein which shall be found to have any
of the following defects and which shall have been condemned as unfit for
human habitation and shall have been so designated and placarded by the
Housing Inspector:



      (1)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated,
unsanitary, unsafe or vermin infested, that it creates a serious hazard to
the health and safety of the occupants or of the public;



      (2)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation
facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of
the public; and



      (3)   One which because of its general condition or location,
is unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants
or the public.



   (B)   Order to vacate. Any dwelling or dwelling unit or any portion
thereof, condemned as unfit for human habitation and so designated and
placarded by the Housing Inspector shall be vacated within 30 days as ordered
by the Housing Inspector or may be appealed in accordance with division (E)
below of this section.



   (C)   Conditions for reinhabiting.  No dwelling or dwelling unit or
any portion thereof which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human
habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is
secured from, and the placard is removed, by the Housing Inspector. The
Housing Inspector shall remove the placard whenever the defect or defects
upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been
eliminated.



   (D)   Removal of placard prohibited.  No person shall deface or
remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit, or any portion
thereof, which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded
as such, except as provided in division (C) above.



   (E)   Appeal.  Any person affected by any notice or order relating
to the condemnation and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit
for human habitation may request, and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Housing Board of Appeals as established in the
International Residential Code under the procedure set forth in § 155.15.



   (F)   Demolition or repair of condemned building. When the Housing
Inspector determines that the building or structure or portion thereof is
unsafe or unfit for human habitation and condemns such pursuant to this
section, the Inspector shall notify the Council. The Council may order and
direct the owner to demolish or repair the building or structure or portion
thereof. In the event that the owner fails to comply with the order, the
Council may order the demolition of a building or structure or portion
thereof. The Inspector shall then certify the cost of the demolition to the
City Council, which cost shall be paid by the city and shall then be assessed
against the property by the Council and certified to the County Treasurer for
collection as other taxes, except that the materials of any building or
structure, fences or other things that may be removed as a nuisance may be
first levied upon and sold by the city, and if any of the proceeds remain
after satisfying the expense of the removal, the balance must be paid by the
city to the defendant, or to the owner of the property levied upon, within 30
days following the date of sale; and if the proceeds are not sufficient to
pay the expenses, the city must collect the residue thereof as provided in
this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 156.24)  (Ord. 2253, passed 2-12-2002)  Penalty, see §
155.99



§ 155.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter commits a
municipal infraction. In addition to the standard penalty, any owner who
permits the occupancy of a dwelling unit after it has been found unfit for
human habitation and placarded, as set forth in § 155.23, shall commit a
municipal infraction and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of $10
per day for each day the dwelling unit is occupied in violation of this
chapter. In addition to the standard penalty, any occupant who occupies a
dwelling unit after it has been found unfit for human habitation and
placarded as set forth in § 155.23 shall be deemed to commit a municipal
infraction  and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of $10 per day
for each day the dwelling unit is occupied in violation of this chapter



(1999 Code, § 156.25) (Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)



CHAPTER 156:  FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS



Section



   156.01   Legal authority; findings of fact; purpose



   156.02   Definitions



   156.03   Lands to which chapter applies



   156.04   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries



   156.05   Compliance



   156.06   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   156.07   Interpretation



   156.08   Warning and disclaimer of liability



   156.09   Establishment of zoning (overlay) districts



   156.10   Floodway District (FW)



   156.11   Floodway Fringe District (FF)



   156.12   General Floodplain District (FP)



   156.13   Shallow Flooding District (SF)



   156.14   Administration



   156.15   Floodplain development permit required



   156.16   Application for permit



   156.17   Action on application



   156.18   Construction and use to be as provided in application and
plans



   156.19   Conditional uses; appeals and variances



   156.20   Hearings and decisions of the Board of Adjustment



   156.21   Factors upon which the decision to grant variances shall be
based



   156.22   Conditions attached to variances



   156.23   Appeals to the court



   156.24   Nonconforming uses



   156.25   Amendments



   156.26   Severability



 



   156.99   Penalty



§ 156.01  LEGAL AUTHORITY; FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE.



   (A)   Legal authority. Iowa Code Ch. 364 grants cities the
authority, except as expressly limited by the constitution and if not
inconsistent with the laws of the general assembly, to exercise any power and
perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights,
privileges, and property of the city or of its residents, and to preserve and
improve the peace, safety, health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its
residents.



   (B)   Findings of fact.



      (1)   The flood hazard areas of Clinton are subject to
periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the peace, safety,
health, welfare, comfort, and convenience of its residents.



      (2)   These flood losses, hazards, and related adverse effects
are caused by:



         (a)   The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses
vulnerable to flood damages which create hazardous conditions as a result of
being inadequately elevated or otherwise unprotected from flooding, and



         (b)   The cumulative effect of obstructions on the
floodplain causing increases in flood heights and velocities.



      (3)   This chapter relies upon engineering methodology for
analyzing flood hazards which includes the extensive study on flood drainage
undertaken by the city. This approach is consistent with the standards
established by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.



   (C)   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this chapter to protect and
preserve the rights, privileges and property of the city and its residents
and to preserve and improve the peace, safety, health, welfare and comfort
and convenience of its residents by minimizing flood losses with provisions
designed to:



      (1)   Reserve area. Reserve sufficient floodplain area for the
conveyance of flood flows so that flood heights and velocities will not be
increased substantially;



      (2)   Restrict use. Restrict or prohibit uses which are
dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood or which cause
excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;



      (3)   Vulnerable uses protected. Require that uses vulnerable
to floods, including public facilities which serve the uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction or substantial
improvement;



      (4)   Unsuitable land purchases. Protect individuals from
buying lands which may not be suited for intended purposes because of flood
hazard; and



      (5)   Flood insurance. Assure that eligibility is maintained
for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance through the
National Flood Insurance Program.



(Ord. 2539, passed 7-12-2016)



§ 156.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASE FLOOD. The flood having 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. (See 100-YEAR FLOOD.)



   BASEMENT. Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest
level below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see LOWEST FLOOR.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.



   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION. Any structure for which the start of
construction commenced before the effective date of the community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map. May also be referred to as EXISTING STRUCTURE.



   EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A factory-built home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed
before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations.



   EXPANSION OF EXISTING FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).



   FACTORY-BUILT HOME. Any structure designed for residential use which is
wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a
building site. For the purpose of this chapter, FACTORY-BUILT HOMES include
mobile homes, manufactured homes and modular homes and also includes
recreational vehicles which are placed on a site for greater than 180
consecutive days and not fully licensed for and ready for highway use.



   FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided
into two or more factory-built home lots for sale or lease.



   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of streams
or rivers or from the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any
source.



   FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevation floodwaters would reach at a particular
site during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the 100-year
flood elevation is the elevation of floodwaters related to the occurrence of
the 100-year flood.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map prepared as part of
(but published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates
both the flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. A study initiated, funded and published by the
Federal Insurance Administration for the purpose of evaluating in detail the
existence and severity of flood hazards; providing the city with the
necessary information to adopt a floodplain management program; and
establishing actuarial flood insurance rates.



   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a
result of a flood.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. An overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of
floodplains, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, floodproofing and floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures, including utility and
sanitary facilities which will reduce or eliminate flood damage to the
structures.



   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the
floodplains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to
the floodway area will not cumulatively increase the water surface elevation
of the base flood by more than one foot.



   FLOODWAY DISTRICT. Any area with a defined floodway of a delineated
floodplain area and usually includes the main channel of the river or stream,
as well as the bank and overbank areas necessary to convey the floodwaters.



   FLOODWAY FRINGE. Those portions of the floodplain, other than the
floodway, which can be filled, leveed or otherwise obstructed without causing
substantially higher flood levels or flow velocities.



   FLOODWAY FRINGE DISTRICT. Any area between the floodway and the
delineated floodplain area and is generally utilized for storage of the
floodwaters rather than conveyance.



   GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT. An area in which the general floodplain
area is defined, but in which the boundary between the floodway and the
floodway fringe is not delineated.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places, maintained by the Department of Interior, or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing in the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of the Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified by either:



         (a)   An approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   LEVEE. A man made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.



   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.



   LOWEST FLOOR.



      (1)   The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building
including a basement except when all the following criteria are met:



         (a)   The enclosed area is designed to flood to equalize
hydrostatic pressure during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the
provisions of §156.11(D)(1);



         (b)   The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted,
drywalled and the like) and used solely for low damage potential uses such as
building access, parking or storage;



         (c)   Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water
heater, furnace, electrical service) contained in the enclosed area are
located at least one foot above the 100-year flood level; and



         (d)   The enclosed area is not a basement as defined in
this section.



      (2)   In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies
criteria in divisions (1)(a), (b), (c) and (d) above, the lowest floor is the
floor of the next highest enclosed area that does not satisfy the criteria
above.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For the purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP), the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) 1988, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are
referenced.



   MINOR PROJECTS. Small development activities (except for filling,
grading and excavating) valued at less than $500.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION (NEW BUILDINGS, FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARKS). Those
structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map.



   NEW FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A factory-built home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the factory-built homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or
after the effective date of these floodplain management regulations.



   ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD. A flood, the magnitude of which has a 1% chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will
be equaled or exceeded at least once every 100 years.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
seasonal use.



   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES. Repairs
necessary to keep a structure in a safe and habitable condition that do not
trigger a building permit, provided they are not associated with a general
improvement of the structure or repair of a damaged structure. Such repairs
include:



      (1)   Normal maintenance of structures, such as re-roofing,
replacing roofing tiles and replacing siding.



      (2)   Exterior and interior painting, papering, tiling,
carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.



      (3)   Basement sealing.



      (4)   Repairing or replacing damaged or broken window panes.



      (5)   Repairing plumbing systems, electrical systems, heating
or air conditioning systems and repairing wells or septic systems.



   SHALLOW FLOODING DISTRICT.  An area outside the channel of a river,
stream, creek, or tributary which is likely large and flat, with little
distinguishing features to identify flow paths, but is subject to shallow
flooding (generally depths less than three feet) during periods of heavy
runoff.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The land within a community subject to the
100-year flood. This land is identified as Zone A on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the
date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pile, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a factory-built home on a foundation. Permanent construction
does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to
the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds,
cabins, factory-built homes, storage tanks and other similar uses.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.



      (1)   Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.



      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period
for which the cost of repairs at the time of such flood event, on the
average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any improvement to a structure which satisfies
either of the following criteria:



      (1)   (a)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure either:



            1.    Before the start of construction of the
improvement; or



            2.   If the structure has been substantially
damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.



         (b)   The term does not, however, include any project
for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure
safe conditions for the existing use. The term also does not include any
alteration of an historic structure, provided the alteration will not
preclude the structure’s designation as an historic structure.



      (2)   Any addition which increases the original floor area of
a building by 25% or more. All additions constructed after the effective date
of the FIRM shall be added to any proposed addition in determining whether
the total increase in original floor space would exceed 25%.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of the
floodplain management regulations.



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations.



(1999 Code, § 160.02)  (Ord. 2442, passed 4-26-2011)



§ 156.03  LANDS TO WHICH CHAPTER APPLIES.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands within the
jurisdiction of the city shown on the official floodplain zoning map as being
within the boundaries of the Floodway, Floodway Fringe, General Floodplain
and Shallow Flooding (Overlay) Districts. The Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
for Clinton County and Incorporated Areas, City of Clinton, Panels
19045C0340D, 0345D, 0480D, 0481D, 0482D, 0483D, 0484D, 0486D, 0487D, 0491D,
0492D, 0501D, 0512D, 0516D, dated July 18, 2011, and Panels 19045C0343E,
0502E, 0503E, 0504E, 0506E, 0508E, 0511E, dated November 4, 2016 which were
prepared as part of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Clinton County, is
(are) hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Floodplain
Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with
the Flood Insurance Study are also declared to be part of this chapter.



(Ord. 2539, passed 7-12-2016)



§ 156.04  RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   The boundaries of the zoning district areas shall be determined by
scaling distances on the official floodplain zoning map. When an
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of a boundary, the Building
and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee shall make the
necessary interpretation. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and
decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement,
decision or determination made by the Building and Neighborhood Services
Director or his or her designee in the enforcement or administration of this
chapter.



(1999 Code, § 160.04)



§ 156.05  COMPLIANCE.



   No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance
with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations which apply
to uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 160.05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.06  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this chapter shall
prevail. Any ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.



(1999 Code, § 160.06)



§ 156.07  INTERPRETATION.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the Council and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other powers granted by state statutes.



(1999 Code, § 160.07)



§ 156.08  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The standards required by this chapter are considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the
designated Floodplain (Overlay) District areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.



(1999 Code, § 160.08)



§ 156.09  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING (OVERLAY) DISTRICTS.



   (A)   The floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of this chapter
are hereby divided into the following districts:



      (1)   Floodway District (FW);



      (2)   Floodway Fringe District (FF);



      (3)   General Floodplain District (FP); and



      (4)   Shallow Flooding District (SF).



   (B)   The boundaries are shown on the Official Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FEMA) and the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map, which are derived from
said DFIRM map. Within these districts all uses not allowed as permitted uses
or permissible as conditional uses are prohibited unless a variance to the
terms of this chapter is granted after due consideration by the Board of
Adjustment.



(1999 Code, § 160.09)  (Ord. 2442, passed 4-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.10  FLOODWAY DISTRICT (FW).



   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the
Floodway District to the extent they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance or underlying zoning district regulation and provided they do not
require placement of structures, manufactured homes, fill or other
obstruction, the storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration
of a watercourse.



      (1)   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture,
grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting;



      (2)   Industrial/commercial uses such as loading areas,
parking areas and airport landing strips;



      (3)   Private and public recreational uses such as golf
courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game
farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet
ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails;



      (4)   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas
and play areas; and



      (5)   Other open space uses similar in nature to the above
uses.



   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses which involve structures
(temporary or permanent), fill, storage of materials or equipment, excavation
or alteration of a watercourse may be permitted only upon issuance of a
conditional use permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided for in §
156.19. The uses must also meet the applicable provisions of the Floodway
District performance standards.



      (1)   Uses or structures accessory to open space uses;



      (2)   Circuses, carnivals and similar transient amusement
enterprises;



      (3)   Drive-in theatres, new and uses car lots, roadside
stands, signs and billboards;



      (4)   Extraction of sands, gravel and other materials;



      (5)   Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers and wharves;



      (6)   Utility transmission lines, underground pipelines; and



      (7)   Other uses similar in nature to uses described in this
division and in division (A) above which are consistent with the provisions
of division (C) below and with the general spirit and purpose of this chapter.



   (C)   Performance standards. All Floodway District uses allowed as a
permitted or conditional use shall meet the following standards:



      (1)   No use shall be permitted in the Floodway District that
would result in any increase in the 100-year flood level. Consideration of
the effects of any development on flood levels shall be based upon the
assumption that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands;



      (2)   All uses within the Floodway District shall:



         (a)   Be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;



         (b)   Use construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage; and



         (c)   Use construction materials and utility equipment
that are resistant to flood damage.



      (3)   No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the
channel or floodway or any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or
any other drainage facility or system;



      (4)   Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems,
if permitted, shall meet the applicable performance standards of the Flood
Fringe District and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum
possible resistance to flood flows;



      (5)   Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage
potential and shall not be for human habitation;



      (6)   Storage of materials or equipment that is buoyant,
flammable, explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is
prohibited. Storage of other material may be allowed if readily removable
from the Floodway District within the time available after flood warning;



      (7)   Watercourse alterations or relocation (channel charges
and modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion. In addition, the alterations or
relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources;



      (8)   Any fill allowed in floodway must be shown to have some
beneficial purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary; and



      (9)   Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in
the streambed and banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent
rupture due to channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of
flood flows.



(1999 Code, § 160.10)   (Ord. 2442, passed 4-26-2011)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 156.11  FLOODWAY FRINGE DISTRICT (FF).



   All uses within the Floodway Fringe District shall be permitted to the
extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or underlying
zoning district regulations and provided they meet applicable performance
standards of the Floodway Fringe District. All uses must be consistent with
the need to minimize flood damage and shall meet the following applicable
performance standards.



   (A)   Generally. All structures shall:



      (1)   Be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure;



      (2)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that
are resistant to flood damage; and



      (3)   Use construction methods and practices that will
minimize flood damage.



   (B)   Residential buildings. All new or substantially improved
residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level. Construction
shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than one
foot above the 100-year flood level and extend at an elevation at least 18
feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon. Alternate methods of
elevating (such as piers) may be allowed, subject to favorable consideration
by the Board of Adjustment and issuance of a conditional use permit, where
existing topography, street grades or other factors preclude elevating by
fill. In these cases, the methods used must be adequate to support the
structure as well as withstand the various forces and hazards associated with
flooding. All new residential structures shall be provided with a means of
access which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.



   (C)   Nonresidential buildings. All new or substantially improved
nonresidential buildings shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level, or together
with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be floodproofed to a level. When
floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer registered in the state
shall certify that the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand
the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other
factors associated with the 100-year flood; and that the structure, below the
100-year flood level, is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water. A record of the certification indicating the specific
elevation (in relation to North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988) to
which any structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Building and
Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee.



   (D)   All new and substantially improved structures.



      (1)   Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (not
including basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:



         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area
of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided;



         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade; and



         (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. The areas shall be used solely for parking of
vehicles, building access and low damage potential storage.



      (2)   New and substantially improved structures must be
designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.



      (3)   New and substantially improved structures must be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



   (E)   Manufactured homes.



      (1)   All manufactured homes including those placed in
existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation so that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum
of one foot above the 100-year flood level.



      (2)   All manufactured homes including those placed in
existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring
requirements for resisting wind forces.



      (3)   The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
not less than 36 inches in height above grade.



   (F)   Utility and sanitary systems.



      (1)   On-site waste disposal and water supply systems shall be
located or designed to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from
the system during flooding.



      (2)   All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters. Wastewater
treatment facilities (other than on-site systems) shall be provided with a
level of flood protection equal to or greater than one foot above the
100-year flood elevation.



      (3)   New or replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system. Water supply treatment facilities other than on-site systems shall be
provided with a level of protection equal to or greater than one foot above
the 100-year flood elevation.



      (4)   Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system
and the risk associated with flood damaged or impaired systems.



   (G)   Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable.



      (1)   Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless
elevated a minimum of one foot above the 100-year flood level.



      (2)   Other material and equipment must either be similarly
elevated or:



         (a)   Not be subject to major flood damage and be
anchored to prevent movement due to flood waters; or



         (b)   Be readily removable from the area within the time
available after flood warning.



   (H)   Flood control structural works.  Flood control structural
works such as levees, flood-walls and the like, shall provide, at a minimum,
protection from a 100-year flood with a minimum of three feet of design
freeboard and shall provide for adequate interior drainage. In addition,
structural flood control works shall be approved by the Department of Natural
Resources.



   (I)   Watercourse alterations or relocations.  Watercourse
alterations or relocations must be designed to maintain the flood within the
altered or relocated portion.



   (J)   Subdivisions.  Subdivisions (including factory-built home
parks and subdivisions) shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damages and shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage. Development associated with subdivision proposals (including the
installation of public utilities) shall meet the applicable performance
standards of this chapter. Subdivision proposals intended for residential use
shall provide all lots with a means of access which will be passable by
wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood. Proposals for subdivisions
greater than five acres or 50 lots (whichever is less) shall include 100-year
flood elevation data for those areas located within the Floodplain District.



   (K)   Accessory structures.



      (1)   Newly constructed of and substantial improvements to
fully enclosed areas that are used solely for parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to
flooding shall satisfy the following criteria:



         (a)   The structure shall not be used for human
habitation;



         (b)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent
flotation which may result in damage to other structures;



         (c)   The structure’s service facilities such as
electrical and heating equipment shall be elevated or flood-proofed to at
least one foot above the 100-year flood level;



         (d)   The structure shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential. Its size shall not exceed 600 square feet in size. Those
portions of the structure located less than one foot above the BFE must be
constructed of flood-resistant materials;



         (e)   The structure shall be used solely for low flood
damage potential purposes such as vehicle parking and limited storage; and



         (f)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on
the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters.



      (2)   Exemption from the 100-year flood elevation requirements
for a structure may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
coverage of the structure and its contents.



      (3)   The structure shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or
exceed the following criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no
higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.



   (L)   Recreational vehicles.



      (1)   Recreational vehicles are exempt from the requirements
of division (E) above regarding anchoring and elevation of manufactured homes
when the following criteria are satisfied:



         (a)   The recreational vehicle shall be located on the
site for less than 180 consecutive days; and



         (b)   The recreational vehicle must be fully licensed
and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if
it is on its wheels or jacking system and is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently
attached additions.



      (2)   Recreational vehicles that are located on the site for
more than 180 consecutive days and are not ready for highway use must satisfy
requirements of division (E) above regarding anchoring and elevation of
factory-built homes.



   (M)   Pipeline river and stream crossings.  Pipeline river and
stream crossings shall be buried in the stream bed and banks or otherwise
sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to channel degradation and
meandering.



(1999 Code, § 160.11)  (Ord. 2442, passed 4-26-2011; Ord. 2539, passed
7-12-2016; Ord. 2556, passed 10-24-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.12  GENERAL FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT (FP).



   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within
the General Floodplain District to the extent they are not prohibited by any
other ordinance or underlying zoning district regulations and provided they
do not require placement of structures, manufactured homes, fill or other
obstruction, the storage of materials or equipment, excavation or alteration
of a watercourse.



      (1)   Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture,
grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming,
forestry, sod farming and wild crop harvesting;



      (2)   Industrial/commercial uses such as loading areas,
parking areas and airport landing strips;



      (3)   Private and public recreational uses such as golf
courses, tennis courts, driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat
launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game
farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet
ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails;



      (4)   Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas
and play areas; and



      (5)   Such other open space uses similar in nature to the
above uses (same as § 156.10(A)(5).



   (B)   Conditional uses. Any use which involves placement of
structures, manufactured homes, fill or other obstructions, the storage of
materials or equipment, excavation or alteration of a watercourse may be
allowed only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the Board of
Adjustment as provided for in § 156.19. All such uses shall be reviewed by
the Department of Natural Resources to determine whether the land involved is
either wholly or partly within the floodway or floodway fringe and the
100-year flood level. The applicant shall be responsible for providing the
Department of Natural Resources with sufficient technical information to make
the determination.



   (C)   Performance standards. All conditional uses, or portions
thereof, to be located in the floodway as determined by the Department of
Natural Resources, shall meet the applicable provisions and standards of the
Floodway District. All conditional uses or portions thereof to be located in
the Floodway Fringe as determined by the Department of Natural Resources
shall meet the applicable standards of the Floodway Fringe District.



(1999 Code, § 160.12)  (Ord. 2442, passed 4-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Floodway District (FW), see § 156.10



   Floodway Fringe District (FF), see § 156.11



§ 156.13  SHALLOW FLOODING DISTRICT (SF).



   (A)   Permitted uses. All uses within the Shallow Flooding District
shall be permitted to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other
ordinance or underlying zoning district regulations and provided they meet
the applicable performance standards of the Shallow Flooding District.



   (B)   Performance standards. The performance standards for the
Shallow Flooding District are the same as the performance standards for the
Floodway Fringe District with the following exceptions:



      (1)   In shallow flooding areas designated as “AO Zones”
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection
elevation shall be equal to the number of feet as specified on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (or a minimum of 2.0 feet if no number is specified) above
the highest natural grade adjacent to the structure; and



      (2)   In shallow flooding areas designated as “AH Zones”
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the minimum floodproofing/flood protection
elevation shall be equal to the elevation as specified on the Rate Map.



      (3)   In shallow flooding area designated as Zones AH and AO,
require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.



(1999 Code, § 160.13)  (Ord. 2442, passed 4-26-2011)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.14  ADMINISTRATION.



   The City Engineer shall administer and enforce this chapter and is
herein referred to as the Administrator. The Planning Department may assist
the City Engineer in the performance of the duties and responsibilities of
this chapter. Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include,
but not necessarily be limited to, the following:



   (A)   Review all floodplain development permit applications to
assure that the provisions of this chapter will be satisfied;



   (B)   Review all floodplain development permit applications to
assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state and
local governmental agencies including approval when required from the
Department of Natural Resources for floodplain construction;



   (C)   Record and maintain a record of the elevation (in relation to
North American Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all new or substantially improved buildings, or the elevation to which new or
substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed;



   (D)   Notify adjacent communities and/or counties and the Department
of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of the notifications to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency;



   (E)   Keep a record of all permits, appeals and other transactions
and correspondence pertaining to the administration of this chapter;



   (F)   Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report
concerning the community’s participation, utilizing the annual report form
supplied by the Federal Insurance Administration;



   (G)   Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any annexations
or modifications to the community’s boundaries; and



   (H)   Review subdivision proposals to insure the proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this chapter and advise the Council of
potential conflicts.



(1999 Code, § 160.14)  (Ord. 2442, passed 4-26-2011; Ord. 2539, passed
7-12-2016)



§ 156.15  FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.



   A floodplain development permit issued by the Administrator shall be
secured prior to any floodplain development (any manmade change to improved
and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations) including the placement of factory-built homes.



(1999 Code, § 160.15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.16  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made on forms
supplied by the Administrator and shall include the following information:



   (A)   Work to be done. Description of the work to be covered by the
permit for which application is to be made;



   (B)   Location. Description of the land on which the proposed work
is to be done (i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar
description) that will readily identify and locate the work to be done;



   (C)   Use or occupancy. Indication of the use or occupancy for which
the proposed work is intended;



   (D)   Flood elevation. Elevation of the 100-year flood;



   (E)   Floor elevation. Elevation (in relation to National Geodetic
Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of
the level to which a building is to be floodproofed;



   (F)   Cost of improvement. For buildings being improved or rebuilt,
the estimated cost of improvements and market value of the building prior to
the improvements; and



   (G)   Other.  Other information as the Administrator deems
reasonably necessary (e.g., drawings or a site plan) for the purpose of this
chapter.



(1999 Code, § 160.16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.17  ACTION ON APPLICATION.



   The Administrator shall, within a reasonable time, make a determination
as to whether the proposed floodplain development meets the applicable
standards of this chapter and shall approve or disapprove the application.
For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in writing, of the
specific reasons therefor. The Administrator shall not issue permits for
conditional uses or variances except as directed by the Board of Adjustment.



(1999 Code, § 160.17)



§ 156.18  CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATION AND PLANS.



   Floodplain development permits, issued on the basis of approved plans
and applications, authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set
forth in the approved plans and applications and no other use, arrangement or
construction. Any use, arrangement or construction at variance with that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. The applicant shall
be required to submit certification by a professional engineer or land
surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the state, that the finished fill,
building floor elevations, floodproofing or other flood protection measures
were accomplished in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to
the use or occupancy of any structure.



(1999 Code, § 160.18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 156.19  CONDITIONAL USES; APPEALS AND VARIANCES.



   (A)   Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear
and decide applications for conditional uses upon which the Board is
authorized to pass under this chapter, appeals and requests for variances to
the provisions of this chapter and shall take any other action which is
required of the Board.



   (B)   Conditional uses. Requests for conditional uses shall be
submitted to the Administrator, who shall forward such to the Board of
Adjustment for consideration. The requests shall include information
ordinarily submitted with applications, as well as any additional information
deemed necessary by the Board of Adjustment.



   (C)   Appeals. Where it is alleged there is any error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in
the enforcement of this chapter, the aggrieved party may appeal the action.
The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment and with the
official from whom the appeal is taken and shall set forth the specific
reason for the appeal. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall
transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken.



   (D)   Variances. The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request
in specific cases the variances from the terms of this chapter that will not
be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a
literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in
unnecessary hardship. Variances granted must meet the following applicable
standards:



      (1)   Prohibited.  Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the 100-year flood
would result. Consideration of the effects of any development on flood levels
shall be based upon the assumption that an equal degree of development would
be allowed for similarly situated lands.



      (2)   Cause.  Variances shall only be granted upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and



         (c)   A determination that the granting of the variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local codes or
ordinances.



      (3)   Required to afford relief.  Variances shall only be
granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.



      (4)   Notice to applicant.



         (a)   In cases where the variance involves a lower level
of flood protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this
chapter, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of the
Administrator that:



            1.   The issuance of a variance will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for
$100 of insurance coverage; and



            2.   The construction increases risks to life and
property.



         (b)   All variances granted shall have the concurrence
or approval of the Department of Natural Resources.



(1999 Code, § 160.19)



§ 156.20  HEARINGS AND DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   Upon the filing with the Board of Adjustment of an appeal, an
application for a conditional use permit or a request for a variance, the
Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to parties
in interest. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or
attorney and present written or oral evidence. The Board may require the
appellant or applicant to provide information as is reasonably deemed
necessary and may request the technical assistance and/or evaluation of a
professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including the
Department of Natural Resources. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an
appeal, conditional use or variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon
an appeal, the Board may, so long as the action is in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part or modify
the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and it shall
make its decision, in writing, setting forth the findings of fact and the
reasons for its decision. In granting a conditional use or variance, the
Board shall consider factors as contained in § 156.21 and all other relevant
sections of this chapter and may prescribe the conditions as contained in §
156.22.



(1999 Code, § 160.20)



§ 156.21  FACTORS UPON WHICH THE DECISION TO GRANT VARIANCES SHALL BE BASED.



   In passing upon applications for variances, the Board shall consider
all relevant factors specified in other sections of this chapter and:



   (A)   The danger to life and property due to increased flood heights
or velocities caused by encroachments;



   (B)   The danger that materials may be swept on to other lands or
downstream to the injury of others;



   (C)   The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination and unsanitary
conditions;



   (D)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents
to flood damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner;



   (E)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



   (F)   The requirements of the facility for a floodplain location;



   (G)   The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use;



   (H)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable future;



   (I)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for the area;



   (J)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;



   (K)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood water expected at the site;



   (L)   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
(sewer, gas, electrical and water systems), facilities, streets and bridges;
and



   (M)   Other factors which are relevant to the purpose of this
chapter.



(1999 Code, § 160.21)



§ 156.22  CONDITIONS ATTACHED TO VARIANCES.



   (A)   Upon consideration of the factors listed in § 156.21, the
Board may attach conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purpose of this chapter. The conditions may include,
but not necessarily be limited to:



   (A)   Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities;



   (B)   Limitation of periods of use and operation;



   (C)   Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed
restrictions;



   (D)   Requirements for construction of channel modifications, dikes,
levees and other protective measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the only practical alternative
to achieving the purposes of this chapter; and



   (E)   Floodproofing measures. Floodproofing measures shall be
designed consistent to the flood protection elevation for the particular
area, flood velocities, durations, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
forces and other factors associated with the regulatory flood. The Board of
Adjustment shall require that the applicant submit a plan or document
certified by a registered professional engineer that the floodproofing
measures are consistent with the regulatory flood protection elevation and
associated flood factors for the particular area. Floodproofing measures may
include, but are not necessarily limited to the following:



      (1)   Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement;



      (2)   Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads and
shutters, or similar methods of construction;



      (3)   Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures;



      (4)   Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce seepage of
water through walls;



      (5)   Additional of mass or weight structures to resist
flotation;



      (6)   Installation of pumps to lower water levels in
structures;



      (7)   Construction of water supply and water treatment systems
so as to prevent the entrance of flood waters;



      (8)   Pumping facilities or comparable practices for
subsurface drainage systems for building to relieve external foundation wall
and basement flood pressures;



      (9)   Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by
water pressure or floating debris;



      (10)   Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and
storm drains which will permit the drains to be closed to prevent backup of
sewage and stormwaters into the buildings or structures; and



      (11)   Location of all electrical equipment, circuits and
installed electrical appliances in a manner which will assure they are not
subject to flooding.



(1999 Code, § 160.22)



§ 156.23  APPEALS TO THE COURT.



   Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision
of the Board of Adjustment may present to a court of record a petition, duly
verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part,
specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition shall be presented to
the Court within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of
the Board.



(1999 Code, § 160.23)



§ 156.24  NONCONFORMING USES.



   A structure or the use of a structure or premises which was lawful
before the passage or amendment of this chapter, but which is not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, may be continued subject to
the following conditions.



   (A)   If the use is discontinued for 12 consecutive months, any
future use of the building premises shall conform to this chapter. The
assessor shall notify the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his
or her designee, in writing, of instances of nonconforming uses which have
been discontinued for 12 consecutive months.



   (B)   If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any
means, including floods, to an extent of 50% or more of its value prior to
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall
not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.



   (D)   Except as provided in division (C) above, any use which has
been permitted as a conditional use or variance shall be considered a
conforming use.



(1999 Code, § 160.24)



§ 156.25  AMENDMENTS.



   The regulations and standards set forth in this chapter may from time
to time be amended, supplemented, changed or repealed. No amendment,
supplement, change or modification shall be undertaken without prior approval
from the Department of Natural Resources.



(1999 Code, § 160.25)



§ 156.26  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, provision or part of this chapter shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall have no effect on the
validity of this chapter as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof
not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.



(Ord. 2442, passed 4-26-2011)



§ 156.99  PENALTY.



   Any person who fails to perform an act required by this chapter or who
commits an act prohibited by this chapter shall be deemed to be in violation
of this chapter and shall be guilty of a municipal infraction  punishable by
a civil penalty as provided in § 10.99 of this code. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the City of Clinton from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. 2442, passed 4-26-2011; Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)



CHAPTER 157:  AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS



Section



   157.01   Introduction



   157.02   Authority



   157.03   Statement of purpose and findings



   157.04   Short title



   157.05   Applicability



   157.06   Definitions



   157.07   Air space obstruction zones



   157.08   Land use safety zones



   157.09   Airport overlay zoning maps



   157.10   Ordinance administration



   157.11   Airport overlay zoning permits



   157.12   Hazardous markings and lighting



   157.13   Height limitations



   157.14   Board of Adjustment



   157.15   Variances



   157.16   Appeals



   157.17   Judicial review



   157.18   Conflicting regulations



 



   157.99   Penalty



§ 157.01  INTRODUCTION.



   The Clinton Municipal Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Zoning
Ordinance is hereby created by the City of Clinton.  This ordinance shall
regulate and restrict the height of structures, objects, and growth of
natural vegetation, as well as land uses; otherwise regulating the use of
property, within the vicinity of the Clinton Municipal Airport.  Creation of
appropriate zones and establishing the boundaries thereof, as well as
providing for changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones is
vested in this ordinance.  Clinton Municipal Airport Land Use & Height
Zoning Maps are incorporated into and made part of this ordinance.  The
ordinance also provides for the enforcement of the ordinance, the
establishment of a Board of Adjustment; and imposition of penalties related
to the implementation of the ordinance.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.02  AUTHORITY.



   Iowa Code § 329.3 Airport Zoning empowers local municipalities to zone
airports including height restrictions and land uses.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   The Clinton Municipal Airport is acknowledged as an essential
public facility to the State of Iowa and the local community.



   (B)   The creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public
nuisance and poses a potential concern to the surrounding individuals and
businesses served by the Clinton Municipal Airport.



   (C)   There shall be no creation or establishment of a hazard that
endangers public health, safety, welfare, and impacts an individual's quality
of life or prevents the safe movement of aircraft at the Clinton Municipal
Airport.



   (D)   For the protection of the public health, safety, and general
welfare, and for the promotion of the most appropriate use of land, it is
necessary to prevent the creation or establishment of airport hazards.



   (E)   The prevention of airport hazards shall be accomplished, to
the extent legally possible, by proper exercise of the police power.



   (F)   The prevention of new airport hazards, and the elimination,
removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting of existing airport
hazards, are considered to be a public purpose for which the City of Clinton
may raise and expend public funds, as an incident to the operation of
airports, or to acquire property interest therein.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.04  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Clinton Municipal
Airport Zoning Ordinance, and it is referred to as "the ordinance" within the
following sections.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.05  APPLICABILITY.



   This ordinance encompasses a general area around the Clinton Municipal
Airport.  Specific dimensions associated with the zoning boundary are shown
in the Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Zoning Maps.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.06  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AIR TRAFFIC. (FAA FAR Sec. 1.1)  Aircraft operating in the air or on
an airport surface, exclusive of loading ramps and parking areas.



   AIRPORT. (FAA FAR Sec. 152.3)  Any areas of land or water that is
used, or intended for use, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft. Any
appurtenant areas that are used, or intended for use, for airport buildings,
other airport facilities, or rights-of-way; and all airport buildings and
facilities located on the areas specified in this definition.  The Clinton
Municipal Airport owned by the City of Clinton.



   AIRPORT ELEVATION. (FAA AC 150/5190-4A)  The highest point on an
airport's usable landing area measured in feet from sea level.



   AIRPORT ENVIRONS.  The land use and people in the areas surrounding an
airport which can be directly affected by the operation of the airport.



   AIRPORT HAZARD. (FAA FAR Sec. 152.3)  Any structure or object of
natural growth located on or in the vicinity of a public airport, or any use
of land near a public airport that obstruct the airspace required for the
flight of aircraft landing or talking off at the airport; or is otherwise
hazardous to aircraft landing or taking off at the airport.



   AIRPORT LAYOUT PLAN (ALP). (FAA FAR Sec. 152.3)  The plan of an
airport showing the layout of existing and proposed airport facilities.



   AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONES.  A zone intended to place additional land use
conditions on land impacted by the airport while retaining the existing
underlying zone.  The FAR Part 77 Surfaces and RPZs have been combined to
create five airport overlay zones.  The five specific zones create a
comprehensive area focused on maintaining compatible land use around airports.



      Zone A- is intended to provide a clear area that is free of above
ground obstructions and structures.  This zone is closest to the individual
runway ends. 



      Zone B- is a critical overlay surface that reflects the approach
and departure areas for each runway at an airport.  The size of Zone B is
predicated upon the type of approach (visual, non-precision, or precision)
that a specific runway has and the type/size of aircraft utilizing the runway.



      Zone C- includes those areas that are parallel to the runway
pavement and extend 1,050' from the edge of the primary surface.



      Zone D- is typically elliptical in shape, depending upon the
runway types and configurations at an individual airport.



      Zone E- is the outermost zone of the overlay areas and has the
least number of land use restriction considerations.  The zone begins at the
edge of the horizontal surface and is 4,000 feet in width paralleling the
horizontal surface. 



   AIRPORT REFERENCE CODE (ARC). (FAA Web site)  The ARC is an FAA coding
system used to relate airport design criteria to the operational and physical
characteristics of the airplanes intended to operate at the airport.



   AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT (ARP). (FAA AC 150/5300-13)  The latitude and
longitude of the approximate center of the airport.



   AIRPORT ZONING PERMIT.  Airport zoning permit allowing new development
or alteration or expansion of a nonconforming use.



   AIRSIDE. (FAA Web site)  That portion of the airport facility where
aircraft movements take place, airline operations areas, and areas that
directly serve the aircraft, such as taxiway, runway, maintenance and fueling
areas.



   AIRSPACE. (FAA Web site)  The space lying above the earth or above a
certain area of land or water that is necessary to conduct aviation
operations.



   APPROACH AND RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE MAP.  The approach and Runway
Protection Zone Map is compiled from the criteria in FAR Part 77, "Objects
Affecting Navigable Airspace."  It shows the area affected by the Airport
Overlay Zoning Ordinance, and includes the layout of runways, airport
boundaries, elevations, and area topography. Applicable height limitation
areas are shown in detail.



   APPROACH SLOPES. (FAR Part 77) The ratios of horizontal to vertical
distance indicating the degree of inclination of the Approach Surface. The
various ratios include:



      20:1. For all utility and visual runways extended from the
primary surface a distance of 5,000 feet.



      34:1. For all non-precision instrument runways extended from the
primary surface for a distance of 10,000 feet.



      50:1/40:1. For all precision instrument runways extending from
the primary surface for a distance of 10,000 feet at an approach slope of
50:1 and an additional 40,000 feet beyond this at a 40:1 approach slope.



   APPROACH SURFACE. (FAA AC 150/5190-4A)  A surface longitudinally
centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from
the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone
height limitation slope set forth in this ordinance.  In plan the perimeter
of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.



   AVIATION EASEMENT. (FAA Web site) A grant of a property interest in
land over which a right of unobstructed flight in the airspace is established.



   BUILDING CODES. (The Practice of Local Government Planning)  Codes,
either local or state, that control the functional and structural aspects of
buildings and/or structures. Local ordinances typically require proposed
buildings to comply with zoning requirements before building permits can be
issued under the building codes.



   COMMERCIAL USES.  A use category including land uses or activities
involving the production, processing, manufacturing, or sale of goods or
services for financial gain, including uses that provide merchandise to the
general public.  Accessory uses may include offices, storage, food service,
or other amenities primarily for the use of employees and parking.



   COMPATIBILITY.  The degree to which land uses or types of development
can coexist or integrate.



   EASEMENT. (FAA AC 5020-1)  The legal right of one party to use a
portion of the total rights in real estate owned by another party.  This may
include the right of passage over, on, or below property; certain air rights
above the property, including view rights; and the rights to any specified
form of development or activity, as well as any other legal rights in the
property that may be specified in the easement document.



   FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (FAA). (FAA Web site)  A federal
agency charged with regulating air commerce to promote its safety and
development; encourage and develop civil aviation, air traffic control, air
navigation; and promoting the development of a national system of airports.



   FEDERAL AVIATION REGULATIONS (FAR). (FAA FAR)  Regulations established
and administered by the FAA that govern civil aviation and aviation-related
activities.



      FAR Part 36. (FAA FAR Sec. 36.1)



      Regulation establishing noise standards for the civil aviation
fleet.



      FAR Part 91. (FAA FAR Sec. 91.1)



      Regulation pertaining to air traffic and general operating rules,
including operating noise limits.



      FAR Part 150. (FAA FAR Sec. 150.1)



      Regulation pertaining to airport noise compatibility planning.



      FAR Part 161. (FAA FAR Sec. 161.1)



      Regulation pertaining to notice and approval of airport noise and
access restrictions.



      FAR Part 77. (FAA FAR Sec. 77.1)



      Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace - Part 77 (a) establishes
standards for determining obstructions in navigable airspace; (b) defines the
requirements for notice to the FAA Administrator of certain proposed
construction or alteration; (c) provides for aeronautical studies of
obstructions to air navigation to determine their effect on the safe and
efficient use of airspace; (d) provides for public hearings on the hazardous
effect of proposed construction or alteration on air navigation; and (e)
provides for establishing antenna farm areas.



   GENERAL AVIATION AIRPORT.  Any airport that is not an air carrier
airport or a military facility.



   HEIGHT.  Height is utilized for the purpose of determining the height
limits in all zones set forth in this ordinance and shown on the Official
Height Zoning Map; height shall be measured as the highest point of a
structure, tree, or other object of natural growth, measured from the mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.



   HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT.  An agreement which holds airport sponsors or
jurisdictions harmless for alleged damages resulting from airport
operations.  Such agreements are recorded in deeds or permits as a condition
of approval of a regulatory land use decision.



   IMAGINARY SURFACES. (FAA FAR Part 77.25)  Those areas established in
relation to the airport and to each runway consistent with FAR Part 77 in
which any object extending above these imaginary surfaces, by definition, is
an obstruction.



      Transitional surface.  The transitional surface extends outward
and upward at right angles to the runway centerline and extends at a slope of
seven feet horizontally for each one foot vertically (7:1) from the sides of
the primary and approach surfaces.  The transitional surfaces extend to the
point at which they intercept the horizontal surface at a height of 150 feet
above the established airport elevation. 



      Horizontal surface.  The horizontal surface is a horizontal
plane located 150 feet above the established airport elevation and
encompasses an area from the transitional surface to the conical surface. 
The perimeter is constructed by generating arcs from the center of each end
of the primary surface and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to
those arcs.



      Conical surface.  The conical surface extends upward and outward
from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet
horizontally for every one foot vertically (20:1) for a horizontal distance
of 4,000 feet. 



      Approach surface.  The approach surface is longitudinally
centered on the extended runway centerline and extends outward and upward
from the end of the runway primary surface.  The approach slope of a runway
is a ratio of 20:1, 34:1, or 50:1, depending on the approach type.  The
length of the approach surface varies from 5,000 to 50,000 feet and also
depends upon the approach type. 



   INCOMPATIBLE LAND USE. (FAA FAR Sec. 150.7)  The use of land which is
normally incompatible with the aircraft and airport operations (such as, but
not limited to, homes, schools, nursing homes, hospitals, and libraries).



   INDUSTRIAL, WHOLESALE TRADE, AND STORAGE USES. A use category including
the following use types:



      (a)   Industrial development or uses involved in the research,
design, manufacturing, processing, fabrication, packaging, or assembly of
goods.  Natural, man-made, raw, secondary, or partially completed materials
may be used.  Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally
made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for
firms or customers.  Goods are generally not displayed or sold on site, but
if so, they are a subordinate part of sales (typically 10% or less of the
total gross floor area).  Relatively few customers come to the site.



      (b)   Industrial, manufacturing, wholesale trade, and
warehouse/storage uses including uses that produce goods from raw or finished
materials, uses that distribute goods in large quantities to primarily
wholesale customers, or provide for storage or warehousing of goods, either
in enclosed buildings or outdoors.  Few customers, especially the general
public, come to the site.  Accessory activities may include sales, offices,
parking, and storage.



   INSTRUMENT APPROACH PROCEDURE. (FAA Pilot/Controller Glossary)  A
series of predetermined maneuvers for the orderly transfer of an aircraft
under instrument flight conditions from the beginning of the initial approach
to a landing or to a point from which a landing may be made visually.  It is
prescribed and approved for a specific airport by competent authority.



   INSTRUMENT FLIGHT RULES (IFR). (FAA Pilot/Controller Glossary)  Rules
governing the procedure for conducting instrument flight.  In addition, it
is a term used by pilots and controllers to indicate a type of flight plan.



   INSTRUMENT LANDING SYSTEM (ILS). (FAA Pilot/Controller Glossary)  A
precision instrument approach system which normally consists of the following
electronic components and visuals aids: localizer, glideslope, outer marker,
middle marker, and approach lights. 



   ITINERANT OPERATION. (FAA AC 150/5325-4B)  Takeoff or landing
operations of airplanes going from one airport to another airport that
involves a trip of at least 20 miles.  Local operations are excluded.



   LAND USE COMPATIBILITY. (FAA Web site)  The coexistence of land uses
surrounding the airport with airport-related activities.



   LIGHTING AND MARKING OF HAZARDS TO AIR NAVIGATION.  Installation of
appropriate lighting fixtures, painted markings or other devices to such
objects or structures that constitute hazards to air navigation.



   MITIGATION. (FAA Web site)  The avoidance, minimization, reduction,
elimination or compensation for adverse environmental effects of a proposed
action.



   NAVIGABLE AIRSPACE.  The airspace above minimum altitude for safe
flight, and includes the airspace needed to ensure safety in take-off and
landing of aircraft.



   NAVIGATION AIDS (NAVAID). (FAA Web site) Any facility used by an
aircraft for guiding or controlling flight in the air or the landing or
take-off of an aircraft.



   NOISE EXPOSURE CONTOURS. (FAA Web site)  Lines drawn around a noise
source indicating constant energy levels of noise exposure.  DNL is the
measure used to describe community exposure to noise.



   NOISE IMPACT.  A condition that exists when the noise levels that
occur in an area exceed a level identified as appropriate for the activities
in that area.



   NOISE SENSITIVE AREA. (FAA AC 91-36D)  Defined as an area where noise
interferes with normal activities associated with the area's use.  Examples
of noise-sensitive areas include residential, educational, health, and
religious structures and sites, and parks, recreational areas (including
areas with wilderness characteristics), wildlife refuges, and cultural and
historical sites where a quiet setting is a generally recognized feature or
attribute.



   NON-CONFORMING USE. (FAA Web site)  Any pre-existing structure, tree,
or use of land that is inconsistent with the provisions of the local land use
or airport master plans.



   NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. (FAA AC 150/5190-4A)  A runway having
an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities
with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a
straight-in non precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or
planned.



   OBJECT. (FAA AC 150/5300-13)  Includes, but is not limited to, above
ground structures, NAVAIDSs, people, equipment, vehicles, natural growth,
terrain, and parked aircraft.



   OBSTACLE FREE ZONE (OFZ). (FAA 150/5300-13)  The OFZ is the airspace
below 150 feet (45 m) above the established airport elevation and along the
runway and extended runway centerline that is required to be clear of all
objects, except for the frangible visual NAVAID's that need to be located in
the OFZ because of their function, in order to provide clearance protection
for the aircraft landing or taking off from the runway, and for missed
approaches.



   OBSTRUCTION. (FAA AC 150/5190-4A)  Any structure, growth, or other
object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height, specific
to its geographic location relative to the runway/airport.



   OFF-AIRPORT PROPERTY. (FAA Web site) Property that is beyond the
boundary of land owned by the airport sponsor.



   ON-AIRPORT PROPERTY. (FAA Web site)  Property that is within the
boundary of land owned by the airport sponsor.



   OVERLAY ZONE. (FAA Web site) A mapped zone that imposes a set of
requirements in addition to those of the underlying zoning district.



   PART 150 STUDY. (FAA Web site)  Part 150 is the abbreviated name for
the airport noise compatibility planning process outlined in Part 150 of the
Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) that allows airport owners to voluntarily
submit noise exposure maps and noise compatibility programs to the FAA for
review and approval. See "Noise Compatibility Plan."



   PRIMARY RUNWAY. (FAA AC 150/5325-4B General Definition)  The runway
used for the majority of airport operations.  Large, high-activity airports
may operate two or more parallel primary runways.



   PRIMARY SURFACE. (FAA AC 150/5190-4A)  A surface longitudinally
centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface,
the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for
military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface,
or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that
runway.  The width of the primary surface is set forth in FAR Part 77.  The
elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of
the nearest point on the runway centerline.



   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USE.  A structure or outdoor facility where
concentrations of people gather for purposes such as deliberation, education,
shopping, business, entertainment, amusement, sporting events, or similar
activities, but excluding air shows.  PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USE does not include
places where people congregate for relatively short periods of time, such as
parking lots and bus stops, or uses approved by the FAA in an adopted airport
master plan.



   PUBLIC USE AIRPORT. (FAA AC 150/5190-6) Either a publicly owned airport
or a privately owned airport open for public use.



   RESIDENTIAL AND ACCOMMODATION USES.  A use category that includes the
following use types:



      (a)   Residential uses that provide living accommodations,
including sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitary facilities, to one or more
persons, and where tenancies typically last longer than 30 days.



      (b)   Accommodation uses characterized by visitor-serving
facilities that provide temporary lodging in guest rooms or guest units, for
compensation, and with an average length of stay of less than 30 days. 
Accessory uses may include pools and other recreational facilities for the
exclusive use of guests, limited storage, restaurants, bars, meeting
facilities, and offices.



   RUNWAY PROTECTION ZONE (RPZ). (FAA AC 150/5300-13)  An area off the
runway end designed to enhance the protection of people and property on the
ground.



   RUNWAY SAFETY AREA. (FAA AC 150/5300-13)  A defined surface
surrounding the runway prepared or suitable for reducing the risk of damage
to airplanes in the event of an overshoot, or excursion from the runway.



   STRUCTURE.  Any object constructed or installed by humans, including,
but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead
transmission lines, including the poles or other structures supporting the
same.



   UTILITY RUNWAY.  A utility runway constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds gross weight or less.



   VARIANCE. (FAA Web site)  An authorization for the construction or
maintenance of a building or structure, or for the establishment or
maintenance of a use of land that is prohibited by a zoning ordinance.  A
lawful exception from specific zoning ordinance standards and regulations
predicated on the practical difficulties and/or unnecessary hardships on the
petitioner being required to comply with those regulations and standards from
which an exemption or exception is sought.



   VISUAL APPROACH. (FAA Web site)  An approach to an airport conducted
with visual reference to the terrain.



   VISUAL FLIGHT RULES (VFR). (FAA FAR Sec. 170.3)  Rules that govern the
procedures for conducting flight under visual conditions.  The term "VFR" is
also used in the United States to indicate weather conditions that are equal
to or greater than minimum VFR requirements. In addition, "VFR" is used by
pilots and controllers to indicate the type of flight plan.



   VISUAL RUNWAY. (FAA AC 150/5300-13)  A runway without an existing or
planned straight-in instrument approach procedure.



   WETLAND.  Land on which water covers the soil or is present either at
or near the surface of the soil or within the root zone, all year or for
varying periods of time during the year, including during the growing
season.  (FAA AC 150/5200-33A) Wetlands provide a variety of functions and
can be regulated by local, state, and federal laws.  Normally, wetlands are
attractive to many types of wildlife, including many which rank high on the
list of hazardous wildlife species.



   WILDLIFE ATTRACTANTS.  Any human-made structure, land-use practice, or
human-made or natural geographic feature that can attract or sustain
hazardous wildlife within the landing or departure airspace or the airport's
air operations area.  These attractants include, but are not limited to,
architectural features, landscaping, waste disposal sites, wastewater
treatment facilities, agricultural or aquaculture activities, surface mining,
or wetlands.



   WILDLIFE HAZARDS.  Species of wildlife (birds, mammals, reptiles),
including feral animals and domesticated animals not under the control, that
are associated with aircraft strike problems, are capable of causing
structural damage to airport facilities, or act as attractants to other
wildlife that pose a strike hazard.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.07  AIR SPACE OBSTRUCTION ZONES.



   The Airport Height Overlay Zoning Districts established by an ordinance
adopted on February 24, 2015 is illustrated on the official Clinton Municipal
Airport Height Overlay Zoning Map consisting of ONE sheet, prepared by CM&T,
and dated 141024, attached as Exhibit A to Ord. 2517.  Such Official Height
Overlay Zoning Map, may be amended, and all notations, references,
elevations, data, zone boundaries, and other information thereon, is hereby
adopted as part of this ordinance.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.08  LAND USE SAFETY ZONES.



   FAR Part 77 Surfaces and RPZs have been combined to create five airport
overlay zones.  These five zones are designed to maintain compatible land
uses around the Clinton Municipal Airport.  The zones shall be evaluated for
compatible land uses. 



8.A. Definition of Zones



Five airport overlay zoning districts are prescribed within this ordinance. 
Specific dimensions for the individual zones for each runway end are noted in
the following tables and text. 



The Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Zoning Maps should be evaluated to
determine the specific area of impact associated with each zone.



Zone A - Runway Protection Zone (RPZ)



Zone A is intended to provide a clear area that is free of above-ground
obstructions and structures.  This zone is closest to the individual runway
ends.  The dimensional standards for this zone are the same as those
described in the Airport Design AC (AC 150/5300-13 Change 11) and are shown
in the following table.



   Table Zone A Dimensional Requirements



 


Runway Ends

 
Approach Visibility Minimums 1
 
Dimensions


Length 
L feet
 
Inner Width W1 feet
 
Outer Width W2 feet
 
RPZ acres


Runway 3
 
Lower than ¾ mile
 
2,500
 
1,000
 
1,750
 
78.914


Runway 14
 
Visual and not lower than 1-mile
 
1,700
 
500
 
1,010
 
29.465


Runway 21
 
Visual and not lower than 1-mile
 
1,700
 
1,000
 
1,510
 
48.978


Runway 32
 
Visual and not lower than 1-mile
 
1,000
 
500
 
700
 
13.770



 



1   The RPZ dimensional standards are for the runway end with the
specified approach visibility minimums.  The departure RPZ dimensional
standards are equal to or less than the approach RPZ dimensional standards. 
When an RPZ begins other than 200 feet (60m) beyond the runway end, separate
approach and departure RPZs should be provided.  Refer to FAA AC
150/5300-13, Change 11, and Appendix 14 for approach and departure RPZs.



Source: FAA AC 150/5300-13, Change 11, Airport Design Standards



Zone B - Approach Surface



Zone B is a critical airport overlay zoning surface that reflects the
approach and departure areas for each runway at an airport.  The size of
Zone B is predicated upon the type of approach (visual, non-precision, or
precision) that a specific runway has and the type/size of aircraft utilizing
the runway.  The following table illustrates the various sizes of Zone B
based upon the specific runway criteria.  A portion of Zone B is overlain by
Zone A because the approach surface and RPZ overlap the entire length of the
RPZ.  Consequently, the length of Zone B begins at the inner edge of the RPZ.



   Table Airport Overlay Zones B-D Dimensional Standards



 


Item

 
Runway Dimensional Standards (Feet)


Runway 3
 
Runway 14
 
Runway 21
 
Runway 32




Primary surface width and Zone B inner width
 
1,000
 
500
 
500
 
500


Zone B end width
 
16,000
 
3,500
 
3,500
 
3,500


Zone B length
 
10,000
 
10,000
 
10,000
 
10,000


Zone C width
 
1,050
 
1,050
 
1,050
 
1,050


Zone D radius
 
10,000
 
10,000
 
10,000
 
10,000


Zone E width
 
4,000
 
4,000
 
4,000
 
4,000




 



Zone C - Transitional Surface



Zone C includes those areas that are parallel to the runway pavement and
extend 1,050' from the edge of the primary surface paralleling the runway and
extended runway centerline until they reach the end of Zone A at a 90 degree
angle.  The specific dimensions for Zone C are based upon various options
for the primary surface that is predicated upon the type of approach and
critical aircraft.



Zone D - Horizontal Surface



Zone D is typically elliptical in shape, depending upon the runway types and
configurations at individual airports. 



Zone E - Conical Surface



Zone E is the outermost zone of the airport overlay zoning areas and has the
least number of land use restriction considerations.  The zone begins at the
edge of the horizontal surface and is 4,000 feet in width paralleling the
horizontal surface. 



8.B. Zone Compatibility



The following tables shall be utilized to evaluate land use compatibility for
various land use classifications. 



   (A)   Uses identified as compatible shall not require additional
review, however, consideration should be given to the following five areas of
concerns:



      (1)   Noise sensitive related issues



      (2)   High concentrations of people



      (3)   Tall structures



      (4)   Visual obstructions



      (5)   Wildlife and bird attractants



   (B)   Uses found to be NOT compatible shall be precluded from
development within the specific zones. 



   (C)   Uses found to require additional review shall be evaluated for
general compatibility utilizing the Compatible Land Use Planning Checklist
and the five primary areas of concern noted above.



 


Clinton Municipal Airport Zone Chart



C = Compatible      AR = Additional Review Required      NC = Not
Compatible


Land Uses
 
Zone
 
Zone
 
Zone
 
Zone
 
Zone


A
 
B
 
C
 
D
 
E




   Residential Activities


Single-Family Uses (1 dwelling per lot)


   Detached Single Family Dwelling (i.e. farm dwelling, detached single
family house, manufactured/ modular/ mobile homes if converted to real
property and taxed)
 
NC
 
AR
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


   Detached Zero Lot Line Dwelling (i.e. condominium)
 
NC
 
AR
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


   Attached Single Family Dwelling (i.e. townhouses)
 
NC
 
AR
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


Two Family Uses (i.e. two principal dwelling units within one building on the
same parcel)
 
NC
 
AR
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


Multi-Family Uses (i.e. three or more principal dwelling units within a
single building on the same parcel, apartments such as condominium, elder,
assisted living, townhouse-style)


   Low-Rise (1-3 Levels)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


   Mid-Rise (4+ Levels)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


Group Living Uses (i.e. assisted living, group care facilities, nursing and
convalescent homes, independent group living)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


Manufactured Housing Parks
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


   Commercial Activities


Eating and Drinking Establishments (i.e. restaurants, cafes, coffee shops,
fast food restaurants, bars, nightclubs, taverns, cocktail lounges)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


Quick Vehicle Servicing Uses (i.e. full-serve and mini-serve gas station,
unattended card key service stations, car washes)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


Office Uses (i.e. business, government, professional, medical, or financial)


   General Office (i.e. professional offices, financial businesses,
government offices)


      Low-Rise (1-3 Levels)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


      Mid-Rise (4+ Levels)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


   Medical/Dental Office (i.e. medical and dental clinics, chiropractic
clinics, physical therapy clinics)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


      Low-Rise (1-3 Levels)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


      Mid-Rise (4+ Levels)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


Retail Uses (i.e. sale, lease, or rent of new or used products)


   Sales-Oriented (i.e. appliances, convenience stores, bakeries,
electronics, furniture, garden supplies,  gas stations, groceries, hardware,
malls, strip malls, videos)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


   Personal Service-Oriented (i.e. retail service-banking establishments,
laundromats/dry cleaning, quick printing services, beauty/tanning salons,
funeral homes)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


   Repair-Oriented (i.e. consumer goods-electronics, office equipment,
appliances)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


   Hospitality-Oriented (hotels, motels, convention centers, meeting
halls, event facilities)


      Low-Rise (1-3 Levels)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


      Mid-Rise (4+ Levels)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


   Outdoor Storage and Display-Oriented (i.e. outdoor storage-lumber
yards, vehicles sales, landscape material and nursery product sales, farm
supply and equipment sales)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


Surface Passenger Services (i.e. passenger terminals for buses, rail
services, local taxi and limousine services)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


Vehicle Repair Uses (i.e. vehicle repair or service shops, alignment shops,
tire sales)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


   Industrial/Manufacturing Activities


Industrial Service Uses (i.e. machine shops, tool repair, towing and vehicle
storage, building supply yards, heating/ plumbing/ electrical contractors,
exterminators, janitorial services, fuel oil distributors, solid fuel yards)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


Manufacturing and Production Uses (i.e. manufacturing, processing,
fabrication, packaging or assembly of goods)


   Technical/Light Manufacturing (i.e. electrical components, engineering,
scientific and research, office, computer hardware/software, optical,
pharmaceuticals, printing/photo facilities, publishing)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


   General Manufacturing (i.e. manufacturing, compounding, assembling or
treatment of most articles, materials, or merchandise)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


   * Heavy Manufacturing (i.e. concrete and asphalt plants, meat packing
plants, wet corn milling, manufacturing of animal feed, paper/paperboard
mills, ethanol plants)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


Mining and Extraction Uses
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


Salvage Operations (i.e. firms that collect, store, and dismantle damaged or
discarded vehicles, machinery, appliances, and building material)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


Self-Service Storage Uses (i.e. mini-warehouses/storage facilities)
 
NC
 
C
 
AR
 
C
 
C


Warehouse and Freight Uses (i.e. major wholesale distribution centers,
general freight storage, railroad switching yards, bus/rail car storage lots,
parcel service, grain terminals)
 
NC
 
C
 
AR
 
C
 
C


Waste-Related Uses (i.e. recycling centers, sanitary landfills, waste
transfer stations, composting, energy recovery plants, sanitary and water
treatment facilities, sanitary collection/pumping facilities, hazardous waste
collection sites)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR


Wholesale Sales Uses (i.e. sale, lease, or rental of products to retailers
for industrial, institutional, or commercial business users)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


Basic Utility Uses (i.e. utility substation facilities, electrical
substations, water and sewer lift stations, water towers)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


College and Universities (i.e. public or private colleges and universities,
technical colleges, seminaries)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


Community Service Uses (i.e. public, nonprofit, or charitable nature
providing a local service to the people)


   General Community Service (i.e. libraries, museums, transit centers,
park and ride facilities, senior/community/neighborhood centers, police and
fire stations)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


   Community Service-Shelter (i.e. transient housing)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


Daycare Uses (i.e. childcare centers, adult daycare, preschools, after school
programs)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


Detention Facilities (i.e. prisons, jails, probation centers, juvenile
detention homes, halfway houses)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


Educational Facilities (i.e. public and private schools)


   General Educational Facilities (i.e. public and private elementary,
middle, junior, and senior high schools including religious, boarding,
military schools)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


   Specialized Education Facilities (i.e. specialized trade, business, or
commercial courses, nondegree-granting schools)
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


Hospitals (i.e. hospitals, medical centers)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C


Religious Assembly Uses (i.e. churches, temples, synagogues, mosques,
Masonic, eagles, moose, or elk lodges)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


   Infrastructure Activities


Communication Transmission Facility Uses (i.e. broadcast, wireless, point to
point, emergency  towers and antennae)
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR


Parking Uses (i.e. ground lots, parking structures)
 
AR
 
C
 
AR
 
C
 
C


Transportation Uses (i.e. highways, interstates, local and county roads)
 
AR
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


Utility Uses (i.e. solar power generation equipment, wind generators, wind
farms)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR


   Infrastructure Activities


Agricultural Uses (i.e. commercial cultivation of plants, livestock
production)


   Plant-related (i.e. crop farming, vegetable, fruit, and tree, wholesale
plant nurseries)
 
AR
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


   Animal-related (i.e. livestock operations, dairy farms, horse farms)
 
AR
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C


   Resident-related (i.e. single-family home, mobile home if converted to
real property and taxed)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


   Facility-related (i.e. fuel bulk storage/pumping facility, grain
elevator, livestock/seed/grain sales)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR


Floodplains
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


Water Bodies (i.e. open bodies containing water)


   Man-made resources (i.e. mining and extraction, water detention ponds,
wetlands)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR


   Naturally occurring (i.e. lakes, ponds, prairie pot holes, rivers,
streams, wetlands)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


Wildlife Preservation Areas (i.e. petting zoos, wildlife rehabilitation
centers, zoos)
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


   Parks and Recreation Activities


Commercial Recreational Uses (i.e. facilities used for physical exercise,
recreation, or culture)


   Outdoor (i.e. campgrounds, tennis/swimming facilities, drive-in
theaters, skating rinks, pavilions, amphitheaters)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


   Indoor (i.e. physical fitness centers, health clubs, bowling alleys,
skating rinks, billiard halls, arcades, indoor theaters)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
C


   Golf (i.e. golf driving ranges, outdoor miniature golf, 9+ hole courses)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


Utility Uses (i.e. amusement/theme parks, fairgrounds, racetracks, sports
arenas)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR
 
AR



   Clinton Municipal Airport Zone Chart



Parks (i.e. aquatic, mini, private, sports, neighborhood, school, community)
 
NC
 
AR
 
AR
 
C
 
C


Casino
 
NC
 
NC
 
NC
 
AR
 
C




 



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.09  AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING MAPS.



   The Airport Land Use & Height Overlay Zoning Districts established by
this ordinance are shown on the Clinton Municipal Airport Land Use & Height
Overlay Zoning Maps consisting of ONE sheet, prepared by CM&T, and dated
141024, attached as Exhibit A to Ord. 2517.  Such Official Airport Land Use
& Height Overlay Zoning Maps may be amended, and all notations, references,
elevations, data, zone boundaries, and other information thereon, is hereby
adopted as part of this ordinance.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.10  ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION.



   It shall be the duty of the Clinton Municipal Airport Manager referred
to herein as the "Airport Zoning Administrator", to administer the
regulations prescribed herein.  Applications for permits and variances shall
be made to the Airport Zoning Administrator upon forms furnished by the
Airport Zoning Administrator.  Applications for action by the Board of
Adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the Airport Zoning Administrator
should an applicant request review.  Permit applications shall be either
granted or denied by the Airport Zoning Administrator according to the
regulations prescribed herein.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.11  AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING PERMITS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the applicant to provide the Airport
Zoning Administrator with sufficient information to evaluate the proposed
action.  This information shall include but not be limited to the following
as noted in the Compatible Land Use Planning Checklist:



      (1)   Contact information



      (2)   Structure information



      (3)   Site information



      (4)   Drawing information



      (5)   Certification



      (6)   Identify current and potential compatibility concerns



   (B)   The Airport Zoning Administrator shall evaluate the proposal
based upon information provided by the applicant.  The Airport Zoning
Administrator shall approve the permit if after evaluation, the proposed
project is found to be adequately compatible.  Should the proposed project
be found to be incompatible after review, the Airport Zoning Administrator
shall deny the permit.  Should the permit be denied, the applicant shall
have the right to request a variance or an appeal as prescribed in this
ordinance.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.12  HAZARDOUS MARKINGS AND LIGHTING.



   Lighting and marking requirements will be determined through an FAA
7460-1 airspace analysis.



The owner of any structure, object, natural vegetation, or terrain is hereby
required to install, operate, and maintain such markers, lights, and other
aids to navigation necessary to indicate to the aircraft operators in the
vicinity of an airport the presence of an airport hazard.  Hazardous markers
and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the
property owner. 



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.13  HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   No structure, object, natural vegetation, or terrain shall be
erected, altered, allowed to grow or be maintained within any airport zoning
district established by this ordinance to a height in excess of the
applicable height limitations set forth in this ordinance.  The permitted
height shall not exceed the difference between the grade elevation and the
height limitation numbers illustrated on the "Official Clinton Municipal
Airport Height Overlay Map" within the various airport zoning districts
encompassed by this ordinance.  The Clinton Municipal Airport Height Overlay
Map is located in the Airport Manager’s office.



   (B)   An FAA 7460-1 airspace review shall provide a portion of the
information necessary to evaluate potential height impacts.  However, it
shall not be the sole source of review.



   (C)   In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there
are hereby created and established certain zones which are depicted on the
municipal airport height zoning map. A structure located in more than one
zone of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the
more restrictive height limitations. The various zones are hereby established
and defined as follows.



      (1)   Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is the land lying
under a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation,
the perimeter of which is constructed by:



         (a)    Swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the
center of each end of the primary surface of runways 14 and 32 and connecting
the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs;



         (b)    1.   Swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from
the center of each end of the primary surface of runways 3 and 21, and
connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs; and



            2.   No structure shall exceed 150 feet above the
established airport elevation in the horizontal zone, as depicted on the
municipal airport height zoning map.



      (2)   Conical zone. The conical zone is the land lying under a
surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal
surface at a slope of 20 feet to one for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
No structure shall penetrate the conical surface in the conical zone, as
depicted on the municipal airport height zoning map.



      (3)   Approach zone. The approach zone is the land lying under
the surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and
extending outward and upward from each end of the primary surface.  An
approach surface is applied to each end of each runway based upon the type of
approach available or planned for that runway end.



         (a)   The inner edge of the approach surface is:



            1.   Five hundred feet wide for runways 14, 21,
and 32. (Visual other than utility runway and nonprecision instrument
runway); and



            2.   1,000 feet wide for runway 3 (precision
instrument runway).



         (b)   The outer edge of the approach zone is:



            1.   3,500 feet for runway 32 (visual other than
utility runways);



            2.   3,500 feet for runway 14 (nonprecision
instrument utility runways);



            3.   3,500 for runway 21 (nonprecision instrument
utility runways); and



            4.   16,000 thousand feet for runway 3 (precision
instrument runways).



         (c)   The approach zone extends for a horizontal
distance of:



            1.   10,000 feet at a slope of 34 to 1 for runways
14 and 32 (all visual and nonprecision instrument utility runways);



            2.   10,000 feet at a slope of 34 to 1 for runway
21 (nonprecision instrument other than utility runways);



            3.   A.   10,000 feet at a slope of 50 to 1,
and then 12,000 feet at a slope of 40 to 1, and then restricted to 500 feet
above airport elevation for 28,000 feet for runway 3 (precision instrument
runways); and



               B.   No structure shall exceed the approach
surface to any runway, as depicted on the municipal airport height zoning map.



      (4)   Transitional zone. The transitional zone is the land
lying under those surfaces extending outward and upward at right angles to
the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven
to one from the sides of the primary surface and from the sides of the
approach surfaces. The transitional surfaces extend to the point at which
they intercept the horizontal surface at a height of 150 feet above the
established airport elevation.  Transitional surfaces for those portions of
the precision approach surface which project through and beyond the limits of
the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally
from the edge of the approach surface and at right angles to the runway
centerline. The transitional surface for the precision approach extends
upward and outward at a slope of seven to one until it intersects a place 500
feet above the airport elevation, at which time it becomes a plane 500 feet
above airport elevation. No structures shall exceed the transitional surface,
as depicted on the municipal airport height zoning map.



      (5)   Structural height limitations. No structure shall be
erected in Clinton County or Scott County (together referred to in this
chapter as "the county") that raises the published minimum descent altitude
for an instrument approach to any runway, nor shall any structure be erected
that causes the minimum obstruction clearance altitude or minimum en route
altitude to be increased on any federal airway in the county.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.14  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   The existing City of Clinton Zoning Board of Adjustment is
granted the authority to exercise the following powers:



      (1)   Appeals.  To hear and decide appeals from any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the Planning Commission or
Airport Zoning Administrator or his or her designee in the enforcement of
this chapter;



      (2)   Special exemptions.  To hear and decide special
exemptions to the terms of this chapter upon which the Board of Adjustment
under the regulations may be required to pass; and



      (3)   Variances.  To hear and decide specific variances.



   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall use the existing rules for its
governance and in harmony with the provisions of this chapter. Meetings of
the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at other times as
the Board of Adjustment may determine. The Chairperson, or in his or her
absence, the acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be
open to the public. The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating the fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations, and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be
filed in the office of the Airport Zoning Administrator or his or her
designee, and on due cause shown.



   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall have the powers established in
the Iowa Code § 414.12.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.15  VARIANCES.



   Any person desiring to erect, alter, or increase the height of any
structure, object, or to permit the growth of any natural vegetation, or
otherwise use his or her property in violation with any section of this
ordinance, may apply to the Board of Adjustment for variance from such
regulation.  No application for variance to the requirements of this
ordinance may be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of the
application has been submitted to the Clinton Municipal Airport Manager for
an opinion as to the aeronautical effects of the variance.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.16 APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person, property owner, or taxpayer impacted by any
decision of this ordinance may appeal to the Board of Adjustment.



   (B)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board
of Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of any administrative official or to decide in favor of the
applicant, on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter, or to effect variations of this chapter.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.17  JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
Board of Adjustment, may appeal to the Court of Record as provided in Iowa
Code § 414.15.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.18  CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or
limitations prescribed in this chapter and any other regulations applicable
to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to height or
structures, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent
limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015)



§ 157.99  PENALTY.



   Each violation of this chapter or of any regulation, order or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a municipal infraction, and each day a
violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. 2517, passed 2-24-2015; Ord. 2560, passed 12-12-2017)



CHAPTER 158:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   158.01   Title, purpose and application



   158.02   Definitions



   158.03   Platting required; Council approval required



   158.04   Preliminary plats



   158.05   Final plats



   158.06   Design standards and specifications



   Appendix A:  Subdivision Forms



§ 158.01  TITLE, PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall be known, referred to and cited as the land
subdivision chapter of the city. This chapter is to provide for the
harmonious development of the city and vicinity, for the coordination of
streets within subdivisions with other existing or planned streets, or with
other features of the city comprehensive plan of the city, for adequate open
spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air and for a distribution of
population and traffic which will tend to create conditions favorable to
health, safety, convenience and prosperity. Under the authority of Iowa Code
§ 354.9, every owner of any tract or parcel who has or shall hereafter
subdivide or plat the tract or parcel into three or more parts, for the
purpose of laying out an addition, subdivision, building lot or lots, acreage
or suburban lots within the city or within one mile of its corporate limits,
shall cause plats of the area to be made in the form and containing the
information as hereinafter set forth before selling any lots therein
contained or placing the plat on record. Requirements of this chapter also
apply to the resubdivision or replatting of a record plat.



(Ord. 2389, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2536, passed 4-12-2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY. A permanent serviceway providing a secondary means of access to
abutting lands.



   ARTERIAL STREETS. Those streets designated in the street plan for large
volumes of traffic movement. Certain arterial streets may be classified as
business streets to serve congested business sections, and others as limited
access highways to which entrances and exits are provided only at controlled
intersections, which access is denied to abutting properties.



   BLOCK. A unit of property lying between the two nearest intersecting
and intercepting streets or between the nearest intersecting and intercepting
streets or railroad right-of-way, waterway or other definite barrier.



   BLOCK FRONTAGE. Property abutting on one side of a street, and lying
between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or railroad
right-of-way, waterway or other definite barrier.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line on a plat between which line and a street
right-of-way no building or structure may be erected.



   CIRCLE DRIVE. A residential street of a closed circular shape, which
has one entrance open to traffic and intersects or intercepts no street other
than the entrance.



   COMMISSION. The City Plan Commission.



   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The complete plan, or any of its parts, for the
development of the city, prepared by the Commission and adopted in accordance
with state law.



   CUL-DE-SAC, COURT or DEAD END STREET. A residential street having one
end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turnaround.



   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner of the use, for a specific
purpose, of a strip of land by the general public, utilities, a corporation
or a certain person or persons.



   FEEDER STREETS. Those designated as important streets to facilitate the
collection of traffic from residential streets, to permit circulation within
neighborhood areas and to provide convenient ways for traffic to reach
arterial streets.



   FIFTY-YEAR STORM. Five and six-tenths inches of rain falling in a
24-hour period.



   FIVE-YEAR STORM. Six and three-tenths inches of rain falling in a
24-hour period.



   LOOP. A residential street that begins and ends at two spaced points on
the same street and which intersects and intercepts no other street.



   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a
unit for transfer of ownership or development.



   MAJOR ARTERIAL STREETS. Streets which are designed and intended to move
large volumes of vehicles between cities or parts of the city.



   MINOR ARTERIAL STREETS. Streets which provide a function similar to the
major arterial, but are primarily intra-city in nature, and operate at lower
speeds than major arterials.



   ONE HUNDRED-YEAR STORM. Seven and three-tenths inches of rain falling
in a 24-hour period.



   PLACE or PRIVATE DRIVE. An open, unoccupied, officially designated,
privately owned space, other than a street or alley, permanently reserved for
use as the principal means of access to one or more abutting properties as
specifically authorized under this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter,
a PLACE or PRIVATE DRIVE shall be subject to the same requirements,
conditions, restrictions and connotations as streets. For single-family and
two-family dwellings, not more than three lots or three principal structures
may be served by a PRIVATE DRIVE.



   PLAT. A map or chart indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of
land, intended to be filed for record.



   PRIVATE SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. A sewer owned, controlled and maintained
by property owners, a subdivider or a duly constituted homeowner association.



   PRIVATE SEWAGE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM. All equipment and
materials needed to properly treat and dispose of sewage from a single
residential, commercial or industrial use.



   PRIVATE WATER WELL SYSTEM. Any excavation that is drilled, bored,
driven or dug in the earth to provide a source of water for a single
residential, commercial or industrial use.



   PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER OUTLET. A public sanitary sewerage system which
conveys sewage to a public wastewater treatment facility.



   PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. A sewer owned, controlled, maintained and
subject to the jurisdiction of the city.



   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. Those water systems owned, controlled and
maintained in accordance with the franchise between the provider and the city.



   QUASI-PUBLIC SEWAGE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM. All equipment and
materials needed to properly treat and dispose of sewage from more than one
residential, commercial or industrial user, and other than a public sanitary
sewer system.



   QUASI-PUBLIC WATER WELL SYSTEM. Any excavation that is drilled, bored,
driven or dug in the earth to provide a source of water for more than one
residential, commercial or industrial user, and other than a public water
supply.



   REPLAT. A subdivision or plat, the site of which has heretofore been
platted or subdivided with lots of parcels of land. It may include all or any
part of a previous subdivision or plat.



   RESIDENTIAL STREETS. Streets which are to provide access to individual
properties.



   STREET. A right-of-way, dedicated to and accepted for the public use,
which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. A STREET
may be designated as a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, boulevard, road,
avenue, lane, drive, place or other appropriate name. A STREET may also be
identified according to type of use.



   STREET PLAN. The part of the comprehensive plan which sets forth the
location, alignment, dimensions, identification and classification of
existing and proposed public streets, highways and other thoroughfares.



   SUBDIVIDERS. Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, estate, trust or any other group including any agent thereof or
combination acting as a unit, engaged in developing or improving a tract of
land which complies with the definition of a “subdivision” as defined
herein.



   SUBDIVISION. For the purpose of this chapter, a SUBDIVISION of land is
either:



      (1)   The division of land into three or more tracts, sites or
parcels;



      (2)   Establishment or dedication of a road, highway, street,
alley, place or private drive through a tract of land regardless of area;



      (3)   Resubdivisions or replats of land heretofore divided or
platted into lots, sites or parcels; however, the sale or exchange of small
parcels of land to or between adjoining property owners, where the sale or
exchange does not create additional lots, nor place the lots in
nonconformance with the provisions of the zoning regulations or this chapter,
shall not be considered as a SUBDIVISION of land; or



      (4)   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for
residential, commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures
involving the allocation of land for common use by owners, occupants or
leaseholders.



   TEN-YEAR STORM. Four and five-tenths inches of rain falling in a
24-hour period.



   TWENTY-FIVE-YEAR STORM. Five and five-tenths inches of rain falling in
a 24-hour period.



   TWO-YEAR STORM. Three and one-tenth inches of rain falling in a 24-hour
period.



(Ord. 2389, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2536, passed 4-12-2016; Ord. 2556, passed
10-24-2017)



§ 158.03  PLATTING REQUIRED; COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   (A)   Plat required. It is unlawful for any owner, agent or person
having control of any land within the corporate limits of the city or within
one mile of its corporate limits to subdivide or lay out the land into
blocks, lots, streets, avenues, alleys, public ways and grounds unless by
plat in accordance with the laws of the state and the provisions of this
chapter. A development or subdivision solely for agricultural purposes, i.e.,
farming, is excluded from this requirement. The Council may, by resolution,
waive its right to review subdivisions located within one mile of its
corporate limit. In order to secure approval of a proposed subdivision, the
owner and subdivider shall submit to the city plats and other information as
required by this chapter. The owner and subdivider of any subdivision shall
comply with the requirement for a preliminary plat and the requirements for a
final plat.



   (B)   Planning consultation; factors for consideration.



      (1)   In order to make the most of the opportunities related
to the subdivision and to conserve time, effort and expense, the owner or
subdivider should consult with the Commission, the City Engineer and other
public officials prior to the preparation of the tentative plan of the
subdivision. The comprehensive plan should be reviewed to determine how the
proposed plan will fit into the comprehensive plan.



      (2)   Requirements of the street plan; school and recreational
sites; shopping centers, community facilities; sanitation; water supply,
drainage and erosion; and, relationship to other developments, existing and
proposed in the vicinity, should be determined in advance of the preparation
of the subdivision plan. Consultation should also be held with those familiar
with the economic factors affecting the subdivision. A thorough estimate of
the situation will result in sound decisions with respect to the form,
character and extent of the proposed subdivision.



      (3)   No land shall be subdivided for residential use unless
adequate access to the land over improved streets or thoroughfares exists or
will be considered by the Commission to be unsuitable for each use by reason
of flooding or improper drainage, objectionable earth and rock formation,
topography or any other feature harmful to the health and safety of possible
residents and the community as a whole.



   (C)   Variances; basis for consideration; justification.



      (1)   Where the subdivider can show that a provision of this
chapter would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where, in
the opinion of the Zoning Board of Adjustments, because of topographical or
other conditions peculiar to the site or density, a departure may be made in
accordance with existing legal standards without destroying the intent of the
provision, then the Zoning Board of Adjustments may authorize a variance. Any
variance recommended by the Zoning Board of Adjustments is required to be
entered in writing in the minutes of the Zoning Board of Adjustments and the
reasoning on which the departure was justified shall be set forth.



      (2)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, no design provision
of Chapter 158 shall necessarily be applied to plats developed under planned
unit zoning § 159.021 of the zoning regulations or of plats developed under
planned residential overlay districts unless cross referenced or unless
specifically approved as part of a particular planned project.



   (D)   Failure to comply with chapter; building permits; exceptions.
The Building Inspector shall not issue building, repair, temporary occupancy
or permanent occupancy permits for any structure located on a lot in any
subdivision within the city, the plat of which has not been approved in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, except:



      (1)   Agricultural building improvements to agricultural
property zoned A-1 Agricultural District;



      (2)   Residential lots zoned R-1 or R-2 Single-Family
Residence District, where the lots were created prior to October 28, 2008 and
the original boundaries of the lots have not been changed, except by
condemnation;



      (3)   Upon the findings and determination by the City Council
that none of the public benefits or need intended by this chapter or by the
Iowa Code Ch. 354 would be gained by requiring compliance with the terms of
this chapter; and



      (4)   The Council may authorize the issuance of a building
permit for a tract prior to the Council’s final approval of the plat
thereof where the applicant provides a restrictive covenant that the
applicant will obtain final Council approval of the plat prior to any
temporary or final occupancy or use of the building authorized by the permit.
The covenant shall be in a form suitable for recording and be approved by the
City Attorney.



   (E)   Public improvements not to be made in nonconforming
subdivisions. The Council shall not permit public improvements over which it
has any control to be made or any money expended for improvements in any area
that has been subdivided or upon any street that has been platted after
October 28, 2008, unless the subdivision or street has been approved in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter except as provided for in
division (D)(2) above.



   (F)   Acceptance of street dedications. No street in any subdivision
that has been approved by the Council after October 28, 2008, shall be
officially accepted by the Council for the improvement and maintenance
thereof until the minimum improvements required by this chapter have been
made either by the subdivider or by the abutting property owners, except as
provided for in division (D)(2) of this section.



(Ord. 2389, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2536, passed 4-12-2016)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 158.04  PRELIMINARY PLATS.



   (A)   When required; submission generally.



      (1)   Whenever the owner of any tract or parcel of land within
the corporate limits of the city or within one mile of its corporate limits
wishes to make a subdivision of the property, he or she shall cause to be
prepared a preliminary plat of the subdivision and shall submit six copies of
the preliminary plat along with other information prescribed in this chapter
to the clerical staff of the Engineering Department who upon receipt shall
place the request on the next scheduled Plan Commission agenda for its
preliminary study and action.



      (2)   The Commission may waive in full or in part the
requirements that a preliminary plat be filed under any of the following
conditions:



         (a)   A plat consisting of one lot;



         (b)   A plat where the subdivider’s entire tract is
included within a final plat filed with the Commission; and



         (c)   A replat.



   (B)   Application for preliminary approval; submission; contents;
fee. A subdivider desiring preliminary approval of a plat of a subdivision of
any land lying within the city, shall submit a written application therefor
to the Commission. The application form provided by the city shall be
accompanied by six copies of the following information and plans:



      (1)   A location map which need not be a special drawing; the
date may be shown on available city maps. The location map shall show:



         (a)   The subdivision name and its location;



         (b)   Major thoroughfares related to the subdivision;



         (c)   Title, scale, north point and date.



      (2)   A site map showing:



         (a)   Contours at intervals of two feet, if the general
slope of the site is less than 10%, and at vertical intervals of five feet if
the general slope is greater than 10%; and



         (b)   Terrain features, wooded areas, buildings and
other natural or artificial features which would affect the plan of the
subdivision;



         (c)   Tract boundary lines, showing dimensions,
bearings, angles and references to section, township and range lines or
corners;



         (d)   Streets and right-of-way on or adjoining the site,
including dedicated widths, roadway widths, approximate gradients, types and
width of pavements, curbs, driveways, location of streetlights, sidewalks,
tree planting and other pertinent data;



         (e)   Easements, including locations, widths and
purposes;



         (f)   Utilities, including sanitary and storm sewers,
other drainage facilities; water lines; gas mains; electric utilities and
other facilities. The size or capacity of each should be shown and the
locations of distance to each existing utility indicated;



         (g)   The location of street light standards;



         (h)   The zoning of the site and adjoining property;



         (i)   Existing or proposed platting of adjacent land
within 200 feet of the subdivision;



         (j)   Other features or conditions which would affect
the subdivision favorable or adversely;



         (k)   Title, scale, north point and date; and



         (l)   Location and elevation of all benchmarks. All
vertical datum shall be based on the 1912 Geodetic Survey. Benchmarks are
available at the City Engineer’s office. The 1929 Geodetic Survey shall be
used to establish elevation certificates.



      (3)   A preliminary plat of the subdivision, drawn to scale of
50 feet to one inch or 100 feet to one inch; however, if the resulting
drawing would be over 36 inches in shortest dimension, a scale as recommended
by the City Engineer or the Commission may be used. The preliminary plan
shall show:



         (a)   The proposed name of the subdivision;



         (b)   The names and addresses of owner, the subdivider
and the city planner, land planning consultant, engineer or surveyor, who
prepared the plan;



         (c)   A street pattern showing the names, which shall
not duplicate names of other streets in the community except in cases of
extensions of existing streets, and the widths of rights-of-way of streets,
and widths of crosswalks, easements or alleys;



         (d)   The layout of the lots, showing dimensions and
numbers. The square foot area of each lot with irregular sides and are not
rectangular; the block number, if required and distances, radii and chords;



         (e)   The parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or
reserved for schools, parks, playgrounds or other public, semipublic or
community purposes;



         (f)   The building setback or front yard lines;



         (g)   The key plan legend and notes; and



         (h)   The scale, north point and date.



      (4)   The information called for in divisions (B)(2) and (3)
of this section may be submitted as one or two maps or plans;



      (5)   Preliminary exterior elevations showing design and
specifying exterior materials;



      (6)   Preliminary engineering plans showing:



         (a)   Profiles, typical cross sections and
specifications for proposed street improvements;



         (b)   Profiles, locations and other explanatory data
concerning the installation of storm sewer systems, and public, quasi-public
or private sanitary sewerage and/or water distribution systems; and



         (c)   All private sanitary sewer systems shall have the
prior approval of the City Engineer that the system will be compatible for
connection to a public sanitary sewer outlet when available;



      (7)   A description of the protective covenants or private
restrictions to be incorporated in the plat of the subdivision;



      (8)   Information as to any agreements which have been entered
into with the owners of other property within the neighborhood in which the
proposed subdivision is located, as to general plans for the entire
neighborhood. Reference should be made to the comprehensive plan for
suggestions as to the general street pattern and design of the neighborhood.
Wherever possible all of the property owners within the neighborhood should
endeavor to agree upon a general plan for its development, in order that the
subdivision may be designed as an integral part of a well-considered overall
plan; and



      (9)   The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee
(certified check or money order) payable to the city in the amount of $250. A
review fee shall also be charged to compensate the city for actual time and
material costs incurred to review and approve the preliminary plat. No part
of these fees shall be returnable to the applicant. The City Administrator
shall have the ability to waive the filing fee for any 501(c)(3), non-profit
entity.



   (C)   Submission of preliminary plat. Whenever the owner of any
tract or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city or within one
mile of its corporate limits wishes to make a subdivision of the property, he
or she shall cause a preliminary plat of the subdivision to be prepared and
shall submit six copies of the preliminary plat along with the other
information prescribed in this chapter to the clerical staff of the
Engineering Department who upon receipt shall place the request on the next
scheduled Planning Commission agenda for its preliminary study and actions.



   (D)   Time limit on preliminary approval. Approval of the
preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of 18 months unless, upon
request of the applicant, the Council grants and extension. The final plat
shall be submitted to the Clerk and, if it is not received within 18 months,
all previous actions by the Council with respect to the plat shall be deemed
to be null and void.



   (E)   Conformance required. The preliminary plat of the subdivision
shall conform to the principles and standards of design established in this
chapter, including plats located within one mile of the city corporate limits.



   (F)   Comprehensive plan. The subdivision plan shall conform to the
principles and standards which are generally exhibited in the comprehensive
plan.



   (G)   Street and alleys.



      (1)   Proposed streets should be adjusted to the contour of
the land so as to produce usable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.



      (2)   The street and alley layout shall conform to the street
plan for the development of the neighborhood in which the proposed
subdivision is located and shall provide access to all lots and parcels of
land within the subdivision. Where streets cross other streets, jogs shall
not be created. The minimum distance between centerlines of parallel, or
approximately parallel, streets intersecting a cross street should be 125
feet.



      (3)   Certain proposed streets, where appropriate, shall be
extended to the boundary line of the tract to be subdivided so as to provide
for normal circulation of traffic within the vicinity.



      (4)   Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of
a street or alley adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the remainder of the
street or alley to the prescribed width shall be platted within the proposed
subdivision.



      (5)   (a)   The widths of streets shall conform to the
widths specified in this chapter according to type of use. The minimum
right-of-way widths of arterial and collector streets being 80 feet. The
paved width for arterial and collector streets shall be determined by the
City Engineer. Residential streets, which have a paved width of 31 feet or
more approved by the Council, shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 50
feet. Any exceptions will need the approval from the Planning Commission and
the City Council. Cul-de-sacs shall have a minimum right-of-way radius of 60
feet and shall be paved a minimum of 50 feet measured back of curb to center
point of the turnaround.



         (b)   In areas zoned exclusively for single-family
residences, cul-de-sacs not more than 1,000 feet in length and loop streets
or circle drives not more than 1,000 feet in length may be paved a minimum of
31 feet in width, measured back of the curb to back of curb, if there is
adequate off-street parking and the Council approves. All measurements shall
be made along the centerline of the cul-de-sac, circle drive or loop street
right-of-way. Length shall be determined by measuring from the centerline of
an intersecting street to the centerline of the intersecting street for a
loop street or circle drive, or from the centerline of the intersecting
street to the center of the cul-de-sac.



      (6)   Alleys shall be discouraged in residential districts,
but should be included in commercial and industrial areas where needed for
loading, unloading or access purposes. Where platted, alley right-of-way
widths shall be at least 25 feet.



      (7)   The centerlines of streets should intersect as nearly at
right angles as is possible.



      (8)   Where an alley intersects a street property line,
corners shall be rounded by arcs of at least 20 feet radii or by chords of
the arcs.



      (9)   At intersections of streets, the property line corners
shall be rounded by arcs with radii of not less than 15 feet, or by chords of
the arcs. Back of curb radii shall be not less than 25 feet.



      (10)   If the smaller angle of intersection of two streets is
less than 60 degrees, the radius of the arc at the intersection of property
lines and back of curb shall be increased as deemed advisable by the
Commission.



      (11)   Intersections of more than two streets at one point
shall be avoided.



      (12)   Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is
adjacent to a highway designated as a controlled access highway by the
appropriate highway authorities, provisions shall be made for a marginal
access street, a parallel street at a distance acceptable for the appropriate
use of the land between the highway and the parallel street, to the limiting
of access, where possible and practical, to the street by restrictive
covenant. Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a
street designated as a secondary street or as a primary street in the street
plan, provisions may be made of limiting access, where possible and
practical, to the street by restrictive covenant.



      (13)   The minimum length of vertical curves, expressed in
feet, to permit adequate stopping sight distance on all streets shall be
established along the centerline of the streets as follows:



 


On arterial streets

 
76 multiplied by the percent algebraic difference of grades


Feeder or collector streets
 
40 multiplied by the percent algebraic difference of grades


Residential streets
 
29 multiplied by the percent algebraic difference of grades



 



      (14)   Curvature measured along the centerline shall have a
minimum radius as follows:



 


Limited access highways

 
1,846 feet


Arterial streets
 
930 feet


Parkways
 
710 feet


Feeder streets
 
525 feet


Residential streets
 
100 feet



 



      (15)   An option is open to use superelevation with reduced
curve radii on curves, subject to the review and approval of the City
Engineer.



      (16)   Between reversed curves on arterial streets a tangent
of not less than 200 feet shall be provided and on feeder and residential
streets a tangent shall be not less than 100 feet.



      (17)   Maximum or minimum grades.



         (a)   Arterial streets, not greater than 4%;



         (b)   Feeder and residential streets, not greater than
8%;



         (c)   The minimum grade of any street gutter and alley
inverted crown shall not be less than 0.5%, unless a lesser grade is
specifically authorized in writing by the City Engineer;



         (d)   In approaching intersections, there shall be a
suitable leveling of the street at the grade, generally not exceeding 4% and
for a distance of generally not less than 100 feet from the nearest line of
the intersecting street. The grade within the intersection shall be as level
as possible permitting proper drainage;



      (18)   The design of the intersection shall be such that a
clear sight distance will be maintained in accordance with the Iowa
Department of Transportation Design Manual, Chapter 6A-4, Horizontal Sight
Distance at Intersections.



      (19)   Street names. Streets that are obviously in alignment
with others already existing and named shall bear the name of existing
streets. The names of new streets shall be shown on the final plat and the
names shall not duplicate or sound similar to existing street names. The City
Engineer shall determine house numbers.



      (20)   Roundabouts may be used at intersections to control
traffic as well as to calm traffic. Roundabouts should be considered during
design of any new street intersection as part of a subdivision. If expected
future traffic loads are large enough to warrant a roundabout, it may be
required as part of the subdivision improvements. Operational and safety
characteristics of roundabouts should be compared with those of signalized
and un-signalized intersections on all projects and be used if deemed
appropriate. Proposed designs should be based on Federal Highway
Administration Publication Number FHWA-RD-00-067, Roundabouts: An
Informational Guide. Minimum dimensions for a roundabout are as follows:



         (a)   One hundred-foot inscribed circle diameter;



         (b)   Sixteen-foot wide entry lanes;



         (c)   Twenty-foot circulatory lane width.



   (H)   Blocks.



      (1)   Blocks shall not be less than 500 feet or longer than
1,000 feet in length.



      (2)   Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers
of lots of appropriate depth, except where and interior street parallels a
limited access highway or arterial street.



   (I)   Lots.



      (1)   All lots shall abut on a street or place.



      (2)   Side lines of lots shall be at approximately right
angles to straight streets and on radial lines on curved streets. Some
variation from this rule is permissible, but pointed or very irregular lots
should be avoided.



      (3)   Double frontage lots should not be platted, except that
where desired along arterial, limited access highways or streets, lots may
face on an interior street and back on the thoroughfares. In that event a
planting strip is used for a screen, at least 20 feet in width shall be
provided along the back of the lot.



      (4)   Prior to the approval of a preliminary plat of an area
where a public sanitary sewer outlet and/or a public water supply are not
available, the Commission shall receive certification from a professional
engineer, registered in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Iowa
Code, that lot size, soil conditions, area and topography within the
subdivision are suitable for the installation of private or quasi-public
sewage treatment and disposal systems and/or water well systems in accordance
with the applicable state and county Board of Health laws, rules and
regulations governing the installation of the systems. The certification
shall provide proof that the county Board of Health has reviewed and approved
the methods and determination of the certification. Where a public sanitary
sewer outlet and a public water supply are available to the entire
subdivision, the widths and areas of lots shall be not less than provided in
the zoning regulations of the city for the district in which the subdivision
is located.



      (5)   The depth-to-width ratio of the usable area of a lot
shall be at a maximum of three to one.



      (6)   Corner residential lots shall be wider than normal in
order to permit appropriate setbacks from both streets.



      (7)   No strip of land shall be reserved by the subdivider
unless the tract is of sufficient size and shape to be of some practical use
or service as determined by the Commission and Council.



      (8)   The land contour of all lots shall contain a building
site with an elevation of sufficient height to permit construction of the
lowest habitable floor of a building one foot above a 100-year flood level.



   (J)   Easements.



      (1)   Easements for utilities. Where alleys are not provided,
easements for utilities shall be provided. The easements shall have minimum
widths of 15 feet, and where located along lot lines, one-half the width
shall be taken from each. Before determining the location of easements, the
plan shall be approved by the local public utility companies to assure the
proper placement of the easements for the installation of the services.



      (2)   Easements along streams and watercourses. Whenever any
stream or surface watercourse is located in an area that is being subdivided,
the subdivider shall, at his or her own expense, make adequate provisions for
the proper drainage of surface water and shall also provide and dedicate to
the city an easement along the streams and watercourses meeting the approval
of the Plan Commission.



   (K)   Building setback lines. Building setback lines shall be
established as required by the zoning regulations of the city.



   (L)   Land for public purposes. Where sites for parks, schools,
playgrounds or other public uses are located within the subdivision area as
shown on the comprehensive plan, or where the sites appear to be desirable,
the Commission may request their dedication for the purposes, or their
reservation for a period of one year following the date of the approval of
the plat.



   (M)   Areas subject to 100-year flood frequency. All subdivisions
located or partially located below the 100-year flood frequency elevation
which contain three acres or two lots, whichever is less, shall note the
location of the 100-year flood frequency area and the elevation.



   (N)   Watercourses. Flood-carrying capacity within an altered or
relocated portion of any watercourses shall be maintained. The applicant will
notify adjacent communities and the state coordinating office prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse.



   (O)   Maintenance of improvements outside corporate limits. Where a
subdivision outside the corporate limits contains sewers, sewage treatment
plants, water supply systems, park areas, street trees or other physical
facilities necessary or desirable for the welfare of the area and which are
of common use or benefit and which the city does not desire to or cannot
maintain, provision shall be made by trust agreements, made a part of the
deed restrictions acceptable to the Council for the proper and continuous
maintenance and supervision of the facilities by the lot owners in the
subdivision.



(Ord. 2389, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2489, passed 3-26-2013; Ord. 2536, passed
4-12-2016)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 158.05  FINAL PLATS.



   (A)   Requirements.



      (1)   Extent of plat. The final plat may include all or only a
part of the approved preliminary plat.



      (2)   Format. The original drawing of the final plat of the
subdivision shall be drawn to a scale of 50 feet to one inch; however, if the
resulting drawing would be over 36 inches in shortest dimension, a scale of
100 feet to one inch may be used or a scale as recommended by the City
Engineer or the Commission. Ten black or blue line prints shall be submitted
with the original final plat.



      (3)   Engineering plans. Detailed engineering drawings and
construction plans, prepared by and certified to by a registered professional
engineer, in accordance with the provisions of the latest revision of the
city’s standard specifications and standard drawings for construction and
including the standards of improvements contained herein, shall be submitted
to the city for review. The engineering plans shall be approved by the Public
Works Director or the Director’s designee. The approval must be obtained
prior to construction of the improvements.



      (4)   Data on plat. The following basic information shall be
shown on the final plat:



         (a)   Accurate exterior boundary lines of the
subdivision and the lots, with dimensions and bearings which provide a survey
of the same closing with and error of not more than one foot in10,000 feet
for the subdivision and one foot in 5,000 feet for any lot;



         (b)   Accurate distances and bearings from the
subdivision to some corner of the congressional division of which the
addition is a part. Reference corners shall be accurately described on the
plat;



         (c)   Accurate distances and bearings of all existing,
recorded or proposed streets and alleys intersecting or within the boundaries
of the subdivision;



         (d)   Identification of all adjoining properties by
subdivision name or name of property owner;



         (e)   Signature blocks for the approval signature of the
Mayor and City Clerk, the Chairperson of the Planning Commission and the
utility companies;



         (f)   Street names;



         (g)   Complete curve notes for all curves in the
subdivision including radius, central angle, tangent, length of curve, length
of chord and chord bearing information;



         (h)   Street and alley lines with accurate dimensions in
feet and hundredths of feet, with angles to street, alley and lot lines;



         (i)   Lot numbers, dimensions and areas (in acres);



         (j)   The purpose of, accurate location of and any
limitation on easements for utilities including streetlights;



         (k)   Drainage easements.



            1.   Drainage easements shall be provided for all
conduits and those bypass channels where the 100-year runoff exceeds one
cubic foot per second.



            2.   Whenever any stream or water course is
located in an area that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall dedicate a
public right-of-way or drainage easement conforming substantially with the
lines of the stream or water course and shall include the additional area
adjoining both edges of the stream or water course that has been affected by
damaging flood waters and/or inundated by the 100-year flood waters, as
determined by the City Engineer. Maintenance of the stream and banks shall be
the responsibility of the landowners upon which the stream is located. This
maintenance responsibility shall be clearly defined in a recorded document.
The subdivider shall also provide reasonable public easements for access.



            3.    It shall be noted on the final plat,
“Owners of lots on which a drainage easement has been established as a
stormwater passageway shall maintain the easement as a lawn, planted in grass
and free of structures, fences, fill, bushes, trees, shrubs or other
landscaping that would impede the flow of water.” In the event that the
area established as a drainage easement is reshaped or otherwise restricted
for use as a drainage easement, the city will cause the restrictions to be
removed at the expense of the parties causing the restrictions;



         (l)   The application shall be accompanied by a filing
fee (certified check or money order) payable to the city in the amount of
$250. A review fee shall also be charged to compensate the city for actual
time and material costs incurred to review and approve the final plat. The
City Administrator shall have the right to waive the filing fee for a
501(c)(3), non-profit entity;



         (m)   Building setback lines and dimensions;



         (n)   Location, type, material and size of all monuments
and markers;



         (o)   The subdivision name and number designated in bold
letters at the top of each plat;



         (p)   The name and address of the owner and subdivider;



         (q)   The north point, scale (illustrated by a bar
scale), date and acreage of the tract;



         (r)   Certification by a state registered land surveyor
that the plat is a true and correct representation of the lands surveyed, the
certification being accompanied by the surveyor's signature, seal and
registration number;



         (s)   Private restrictive covenants and their period of
existence, which may be attached thereto and by reference be made a part
thereof; and



         (t)   The accurate outline, dimensions and purposes of
all property which is offered for dedication or is to be reserved for
acquisition for public use or is to be reserved by deed covenant for the
common use of the property owners in the subdivision.



   (B)   Documents to be submitted with final plat. When the final plat
is submitted to the Council, it shall be accompanied by the following
instruments, which will be current within 30 days prior to the date of the
Council’s approval:



      (1)   An attorney’s legal opinion placing the fee title,
free from encumbrances, in the owner. The attorney shall also identify the
name or holder of any mortgage lien, judgment or other encumbrances on the
land being platted. No dedication of public way shall be accepted by the city
until the persons identified in the attorney’s certificate to the city has
either agreed to release any encumbrance on the land to be dedicated, or the
owner submits an irrevocable bond payable to the city in an amount equal to
twice the value of the encumbrance, to guarantee the release of the
encumbrance at the time the city chooses. Utility easements shall not be
construed to be encumbrances for the purpose of this section. In the event
the subdivision plat contains no land for public use other than utility
easements, the Treasurer’s certificate listed in division (B)(4) below need
not include a statement on special assessments;



      (2)   A statement from the mortgage holders and lien holders,
if any, that the plat is prepared with their free consent and in accordance
with their desires, signed and acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take the acknowledgment of deeds. In lieu of consent, the owner may provide
an affidavit and bond as provided in the Iowa Code § 354.12. When a mortgage
or lien holder consents to the subdivision, a release of mortgage or lien
shall be recorded for any areas conveyed to the city or dedicated to the
public;



      (3)   A certificate by the owner by the owner of the property
and spouse, if any, that the subdivision as it appears on the plat is with
free consent, and is in accord with the desire of the owner and spouse,
dedicating the streets and other public ways shown on the plat, agreeing to
abide by the setbacks required in the city code at the time any building
permit is obtained, declaring the limitation on easements and providing for
and restrictive covenants needed of requested;



      (4)   A certificate from the County Treasurer that the land is
free from certified taxes and that the certified special assessments are
secured by a bond in compliance with the Iowa Code § 354.12;



      (5)   One of the following:



         (a)   A certificate bearing the approval of the City
Engineer, stating that all improvements and installations to the subdivision
required by this section have been made or installed in accordance with
specifications;



         (b)   1.   With the exception of subdividers
constituting political subdivisions of the State of Iowa, a performance bond
or bonds with the city, which will ensure the city that the subdivision
improvements will be completed by the subdivider within two years after
Council acceptance of the plat.



            2.   The form and type of a performance bond or
bonds shall be approved by the City Attorney and the City Administrator, and
the amount of any bond shall not be less than the estimated cost of the
improvements, and the amount of any performance bond shall be approved by the
City Engineer. If the improvements are not completed within the specified
time, the Council may use the bond or bonds or any necessary portion thereof
to complete the improvements;



         (c)   A waiver to the Council to provide the subdivision
improvements required with the final plat and to assess the cost thereof
against the subdivided property in accordance with the law regarding special
assessments. However, the subdivider or property owners shall be responsible
for any difference between the cost of the improvements and the amount that
can be legally assessed by the city against the subdivided property, and they
shall furnish the necessary waivers to permit the assessment of the entire
cost of the improvement. Notwithstanding the assessment waiver, the
subdivider or property owner may elect to construct the subdivision
improvements, in which case all their contractors shall file with the city a
performance bond or bonds as set forth in division (B)(5)(b)2. above;



      (6)   A certificate from a registered land surveyor, including
an accurate metes and bounds description of the addition;



      (7)   A resolution and certificate for approval by the Council;



      (8)   The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee
(certified check or money order) payable to the city in the amount of $250. A
review fee shall also be charged to compensate the city for actual time and
material costs incurred to review and approve the final plat. The City
Administrator shall have the right to waive the filing fee for a 501(c)(3),
non-profit entity; and



      (9)   The application shall be made with an appropriate
application form provided by the city.



   (C)   Referral to Commission; action by Commission; Council action.
Upon receipt of the final plat by the clerical staff of the Engineering
Department, it shall be referred to the Commission for its review and
recommendations. The recommendation shall be in writing and referred to the
Council by the clerical staff of the Engineering Department. If the
Commission does not approve the final plat of the subdivision, the Council
may approve the plat only by a three-fourths vote of the entire membership pf
the Council. Council approval of the final plat shall be by resolution. The
Council shall direct the Mayor and the City Clerk to certify the resolution
and affix it to the final plat. If the Council rejects the final plat, it
shall state, in the Council minutes, wherein the final plat is objectionable.
The Council shall act on a final plat within 60 days of the filing of all
required final plat, engineering plans and legal instruments with the
clerical staff of the Engineering Department.



   (D)   Record plat. Within 60 days following the approval of the
final plat by the City Council, the applicant must record the final plat with
the County Recorder. A filing fee of $250 will be required for any final plat
that is not recorded within the 60-day requirement that needs reapproval by
the City Council.



   (E)   Filing copy of recorded plat. Within 60 days following the
approval of the final plat by the City Council, applicant shall file with the
city a copy of the recorded final plat and also file one original size
reproducible copy of the final plat. Failure to so file a plat shall
constitute a municipal infraction punishable by civil penalty.



   (F)   Replats; notification of adjacent property owners. The city
shall provide mailed notice to each person owning property adjacent to or
within 200 feet of the ground subject to replat, the notice to be mailed at
least five days prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission wherein the
application for replat will be considered. The cost of any mailed notice
shall be charged in addition to the application fee, pursuant to guidelines
established by resolution of Council.



(Ord. 2389, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2489, passed 3-26-2013; Ord. 2536, passed
4-12-2016; Ord. 2556, passed 10-24-2017)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 158.06  DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Standard specifications adopted. The type of materials and
construction for improvements within subdivisions shall be in accordance with
the version of the Iowa Statewide Urban Design Standards and Specifications
in effect at the time of construction. The Design and Specifications Manuals
can be located at www.iowasudas.org.



   (B)   Improvements; compliance with standard plans; supervision of
construction; inspection; cost of inspection.



      (1)   The public improvements, place or private drive
improvements and private sanitary sewer system improvements required in all
subdivisions shall be designed, constructed and inspected in accordance with
this section, and with the Iowa Statewide Urban Design Standards and
Specifications in effect at the time of construction or the newly approved
standard drawings as stated in division (A) above.



         (a)   Construction, supervision, inspection and testing
of improvements mentioned in division (B)(1) above shall all be performed
under the direction of a licensed professional engineer at the expense of the
subdivider.



         (b)   The inspecting agency shall submit daily reports
to the City Engineer, on forms approved or furnished by him or her,
certifying compliance of all construction performed with the Iowa Statewide
Urban Design and Specifications.



         (c)   The subdivider must provide as-built plans to the
City Engineer. The city shall pay the expenses of inspections, and the
subdivider or property owner shall reimburse the city for the expenses within
60 days after the final bill therefore is submitted; payment shall be made to
the City Treasurer. Interest charges, of the maximum allowed by law, will be
levied on all unpaid balances after the 60-day time period has elapsed.



      (2)   (a)   The private or quasi-public sewage treatment
and disposal systems and water well systems required in any subdivision shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with standard State or County Board
of Health laws, rules and regulations.



         (b)   Construction, inspection and testing of
improvements mentioned in division (B)(2)(a) above shall be performed under
the direction of the county Board of Health.



   (C)   Improvement credit; procedure established. Upon the
installation of improvements required by this chapter, which may provide
benefits to other properties in the vicinity of the land to be subdivided,
which cross or adjoin other properties and can be used by the properties, the
subdivider and the city may, by contract, agree that upon the connection or
use of the installations made by the subdivider by others, within a period of
ten years following their installation, the new user or users shall pay to
the city a fee in an amount agreed upon by the subdivider and the city, the
amount of the fee to be credited to and paid to the subdivider.



   (D)   Monuments and markers.



      (1)   The subdivider shall provide monuments and markers
placed so that the cap shall coincide exactly with the intersection or lines
to be marked, and they shall be set so that the top of the monument or marker
is level with the surface of the surrounding ground.



      (2)   Monuments shall be set:



         (a)   At the intersection of all lines forming angles in
the boundary of the subdivision; and



         (b)   At every point of intersection of the outer
boundary of the subdivision with an existing or created street, railroad or
other right-of-way line.



      (3)   Markers shall be set:



         (a)   At the beginning and end of all curves along
street property lines;



         (b)   At all points where lot lines intersect curves
along street property lines;



         (c)   At all angles in property lines of lots; and



         (d)   At all other lot corners not established by a
monument.



      (4)   Monuments shall be of concrete or stone, with a minimum
diameter of six inches and a minimum of three feet long. Markers shall
consist of iron pipes or iron or steel bars at least three feet long and not
less than five-eighths inch in diameter. Both monuments and markers shall
have a cap affixed to the top of the same that is capable of being detected
by magnetic or electronic equipment and is made of a reasonably inert
material, bearing an embossed or stencil-cut marking of the state
registration number of the registered land surveyor that prepared the survey.



      (5)   Where any point requiring a monument or marker has been
previously established by an existing monument or marker, the existence and
accuracy of the same shall be confirmed by the registered land survey
surveyor and properly shown and described on the final plat for use in lieu
of setting a new monument or marker.



   (E)   Sewers and sewage disposal.



      (1)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a
complete public sanitary sewer system adjacent to each lot in his or her
subdivision, which shall connect with a public sanitary sewer outlet.



      (2)   In areas where a public sanitary sewer outlet is not
available, the subdivider shall provide a private sanitary sewer system
adjacent to each lot in his or her subdivision and a private or quasi-public
sewage treatment and disposal system to serve each lot.



         (a)   Maintenance and repair of private sanitary sewer
systems constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be the responsibility of the subdivider or a duly constituted homeowners’
association until a time as it is connected to a public sanitary sewer
outlet. At the time of connection to a public sanitary sewer outlet, the
private sanitary sewer system shall be dedicated to the city and become a
public sanitary sewer system. The private or quasi-public sewage treatment
disposal systems shall not be dedicated to or maintained by the city and
shall remain the responsibility of the property owner, subdivider or duly
constituted homeowners’ association to properly abandon in accordance with
the applicable standard state of the State and County Board of Health laws,
rules and regulations.



         (b)   Persons making connection to the private sanitary
sewer system mentioned in this chapter shall pay all sewer connection fees
and conform with all requirements of this code dealing with public sanitary
sewer connections.



         (c)   Whenever a private sewage treatment and disposal
system is to be provided on a lot or parcel, the subdivider shall require, as
a condition of the sale of each lot or parcel in the subdivision, that the
facilities referred to in this section shall be installed by the developer of
the lot in accordance with these regulations.



         (d)   All private sanitary sewer systems shall be
installed in accordance with these regulations prior to occupancy of the
buildings connected to the systems.



      (3)   The option is available for the subdivider to use a
temporary public lift station and force main in conjunction with a public
sanitary sewer system to connect to a public sanitary sewer outlet if it can
be established, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, that both the
existing and proposed sewerage systems are adequate and feasible through the
engineering considerations of construction, maintenance and operation.



      (4)   Sanitary sewers whether part of a public or private
system, shall be laid in an easement and located approximately seven and
one-half feet inside the property line. Sewers shall be located on the east
and south sides of the street, or the opposite side of the street from water
mains, if already in place.



      (5)   The plans for the installation of either a public or
private sanitary sewer system shall be prepared by the subdivider and
approved by the City Engineer and the State Department of Water, Air and
Waste and shall be filed with the City Engineer.



   (F)   Water.



      (1)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a
complete public water supply system in accordance with the franchise, as it
existed or may exist, between the city and the Iowa American Water Company.
When a public water supply is not available, the subdivider shall provide a
private or quasi-public water well system on or to each lot in the
subdivision.



      (2)   Water mains provided by a private enterprise shall be
laid in an easement and located approximately seven and one-half feet inside
the property line. Water mains shall be located on the west and north sides
of the street, or the opposite side of the street from sanitary sewer lines,
if already in place.



      (3)   Fire hydrants in residential areas shall not exceed a
spacing of 400 feet. Fire hydrants should be installed at intersections of
streets where possible. There shall be a minimum of one fire hydrant in a
cul-de-sac. If two or more hydrants are required due to the length of the
cul-de-sac or the fire flow requirements as required by the Fire Code, one
shall be placed at the end of the cul-de-sac and one shall be placed near the
entrance of the cul-de-sac. Any other required hydrants, if any, shall be
evenly spaced between the two aforementioned hydrants.



   (G)   Storm drainage.



      (1)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with an
adequate stormwater sewer system when the evidence available to the
Commission and Council indicates that the natural surface drainage is
inadequate.



         (a)   Storm sewers shall, if practicable, be placed in
either parkway between the curb and water main or sanitary sewer main, or in
an easement.



         (b)   Storm drainage easements shall be provided where
necessary.



         (c)   No person shall place or allow to be placed an
accumulation of material, including, but not limited to, wood, concrete,
stone, brush, grass clippings or other debris that might block the flow of
stormwater in a storm drainage easement or could reasonably be expected to be
carried downstream by the stormwater to the detriment of either upstream or
downstream property owners.



      (2)   The plans for the installation of a storm drainage
system shall be prepared by the subdivider and approved by the City Engineer.
Upon the completion of the storm sewer system, the plans for same, as built,
shall be filed with the City Engineer.



   (H)   Curbs and gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed by
the subdivider on both sides of all streets; however, the requirements of
curbs and gutters may be waived at the discretion of the Council.



   (I)   Sidewalks. The subdivider shall provide sidewalks on both
sides of all streets, places and cul-de-sac in accordance with §§ 97.025
through 97.041. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a subdivider may submit a
written request to the City Council for a temporary exemption from this
requirement should the Council determines the placement of sidewalks to be
premature or inconsistent with the city’s comprehensive plan.



   (J)   Street lights. The subdivider is responsible for providing
street lighting, including the wiring in a subdivision. The street light
standards shall conform with any design standards set forth in the Statewide
Urban Design Standards and Specifications and/or any overlay and design
requirements as required by the city.



   (K)   Utilities generally.



      (1)   All gas, water, electrical, cable television, telephone
or communication service or the use or maintenance of any associated
structure such as poles, tower, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs,
platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches,
communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances provided as
new installations to any area subdivided for residential and commercial
purposes shall be placed underground except those services and associated
structures listed hereunder as exceptions. The aforementioned services and
associated structures provided as new installations to any area subdivided
for industrial purposes shall be placed underground within any portion of the
subdivision lying within 100 feet of an undeveloped residentially zoned area,
or within 100 feet of a residentially zoned and developed area that is
already served by the underground services, except those services and
associated structures listed hereunder as exceptions. The subdivider shall be
responsible for making arrangements with the appropriate utility company(ies)
for the proper installation of the underground services in accordance with
the utility company’s rules and regulation.



      (2)   The following instances, with the conditions listed for
each of them, may be considered exceptions to this division (K):



         (a)   Any of the aforementioned services which is
considered by the utility company providing the service to be unfeasible in
undergrounding due to inordinately high and unjustified cost, high voltage or
topographic or soil conditions, can be provided overhead, upon approval by
the City Council; and



         (b)   In the instance that a subdivision is developed
adjacent to or abutting an existing development, and in a way as the new
development would normally share the primary feeder lines that have already
been installed, and when those feeder lines have been installed overhead, the
new development can use those feeder lines which do exist, providing that the
service lines to the structures in the new development are installed
underground, and providing that all additional necessary feeders are
installed underground or in accordance with the provisions of this section.



      (3)   The following specific facilities shall not be subject
to the requirements of this section:



         (a)   When authorized by the City Council, poles and
overhead lines and associated overhead structures crossing or entering any
portion of a district from which overhead wires have been prohibited and
originating in an area in which these structures are allowed;



         (b)   Overhead lines attached to the exterior of a
building by means of bracket or similar device and extending from one
location on the building to another location on the same building:



         (c)   Radio antenna and associated structures and
equipment used for furnishing communications service;



         (d)   Service terminals and necessary pad mounted
electric equipment installed aboveground used to distribute telephone, cable
television, gas, water, communication and electric service in underground
systems;



         (e)   Transmission lines carrying a voltage of 69,000
volts or above; and



         (f)   All underground electric distribution circuits
installed by the utility company for the purpose of distributing electrical
current within the city shall be installed in accordance with the safety
rules for the installation and maintenance of electric supply and
communications lines, Department of Commerce, and the National Bureau of
Standards.



   (L)   Street improvements.



      (1)   Conformance required. Street improvements shall be made
in accordance with the provisions of this division (L) after the approval of
a final plat or prior to the approval if provided for in accordance with the
provisions of the chapter. Place or private drive improvements shall be made
in accordance with the provisions of this section and the improvements shall
extend, as a minimum, from the street being constructed, re-constructed or
repaired to the city right-of-way. Multi-family, shopping center, and
industrial areas may have common vehicular use areas (accessways, service
areas, driveways, loading areas, and parking spaces) if the parcel containing
the vehicular use area is under one ownership. If the parcel has more than
one owner or if the owners are adjacent to one another, agreements for cross
easements and maintenance of vehicular use areas are required and must be
provided at the time of final platting. The city will not maintain or repair
vehicular use areas that are privately owned, even when the areas are
generally available for public use.



      (2)   Public improvements generally.



         (a)   All public or private improvements, including, but
not limited to, public and private sanitary sewers, storm sewers, streets,
alleys and private drives or places, shall be constructed as set forth on the
approved final subdivision plans and in accord with the city’s standard
specifications and drawings for construction in effect at the time of
construction, and shall further conform to the provisions of this section of
this chapter.



         (b)   All platted rights of way which are not opened to
traffic shall, prior to opening, follow the following procedure:



            1.   Council by resolution shall authorize the
opening of the right-of-way;



            2.   Improvements necessary for public use shall
be in place within a date certain as established in resolution authorizing
the opening of the right-of-way; and



            3.    Improvement shall be constructed according
to the standards as established in division (L)(2)(a) above.



         (c)   Before any public improvement may be accepted by
City Council the subdivider shall provide a maintenance bond, or bonds from
all the subdivider’s contractors, which will ensure the city that the
improvements will be maintained in good and suitable condition for a period
of two years after Council acceptance of the construction;



            1.   The term MAINTAIN or MAINTAINED shall be
defined as pertaining to the repairs which shall become necessary because of
defective or faulty workmanship or materials in the improvement completed by
the subdivider and/or subdivider’s contractors;



            2.   The form and type of a maintenance bond shall
be approved by the City Engineer. If the improvements are not maintained
within the specified times, the Council may use the bond or bonds or any
necessary portion thereof to maintain the improvements.



      (3)   Paving requirements by street classification. The
general street, private drive and alley classifications with their respective
minimum dimensions and characteristics shall be as follows:



         (a)   Arterial streets including major arterials and
primary thoroughfares.



            1.   Width of pavement. Forty-nine feet, measured
back of curb to back of curb.



            2.   Surfacing. Portland cement concrete paving.
Asphalt cement concrete paving shall not be used.



            3.   Pavement thickness. Nine inches of portland
cement concrete paving. The requirement may be increased where the City
Engineer has determined that design analysis justifies additional thickness.



         (b)   Feeder streets, including secondary thoroughfares,
collector streets and minor arterials.



            1.   Width of pavement. Thirty-seven feet,
measured back of curb to back of curb.



            2.   Surfacing. Portland cement concrete paving.
Asphalt cement concrete paving shall not be used.



            3.   Pavement thickness. Eight inches of portland
cement concrete unless in a commercial or industrial district, in which case
the thickness shall be increased to nine inches of portland cement concrete.
If, in the determination of the City Engineer, a street near a commercial or
industrial district could be reasonably expected to bear commercial or
industrial traffic as a result of its proximity to that commercial or
industrial district, its pavement thickness shall be increased to nine inches
of portland cement concrete. The requirement in or near a commercial or
industrial district may be reduced to eight inches of portland cement
concrete where the City Engineer has determined that design analysis
justifies less thickness.



         (c)   Residential streets, including border parkways,
private drives and local commercial or industrial streets.



            1.   Width of pavement. Thirty-one feet, measured
back of curb to back of curb, except as provided in § 158.04(G)(5) of this
chapter. Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a paving radius of 40 feet,
measured back of curb to center point of the turnaround.



            2.   Surfacing.



               A.   Portland cement concrete paving.



               B.   Asphalt cement concrete paving with
portland cement concrete curb and gutter two and one-half feet wide and
eight-inch thick apron. Asphalt cement concrete paving shall not be used in a
commercial or industrial district. If, in the determination of the City
Engineer, the street near a commercial or industrial district could be
reasonably expected to bear commercial of industrial traffic as a result of
its proximity to that commercial or industrial district, its surfacing shall
not be asphalt cement concrete paving.



            3.   Pavement thickness.



               a.   Seven inches of portland cement
concrete unless in a commercial or industrial district, in which case the
thickness shall be increased to nine inches of portland cement concrete. If,
in the determination of the City Engineer, a street near a commercial or
industrial district could be reasonably expected to bear commercial or
industrial traffic as a result of its proximity to that commercial or
industrial district, its pavement thickness of portland cement concrete shall
be increased to nine inches of portland cement concrete. The requirement in
or near a commercial or industrial district may be reduced to seven inches of
portland cement concrete where the City Engineer has determined that design
analysis justifies less thickness.



               b.   Asphalt cement concrete base course
thickness of six inches with an asphalt cement concrete surface course
thickness of two inches.



         (d)   Alleys.



            1.   Width of pavement. Twenty feet.



            2.   Surfacing.



               A.   Portland cement concrete paving.



               B.   Asphalt cement concrete paving. Asphalt
cement concrete paving shall not be used in a commercial or industrial
district. If, in the determination of the City Engineer, an alley near a
commercial or industrial district could be reasonably expected to bear
commercial or industrial traffic as a result of its proximity to that
commercial or industrial district, its surfacing shall not be asphalt cement
concrete paving.



            3.   Pavement thickness.



               A.   Seven inches of portland cement
concrete unless in a commercial or industrial district, in which case the
thickness shall be increased to nine inches of portland cement concrete. If,
in the determination of the City Engineer, an alley near a commercial
district could be reasonably expected to bear commercial traffic as a result
of its proximity to that commercial district, its pavement thickness of
portland cement concrete shall be increased to nine inches of portland cement
concrete. The requirement in or near a commercial district may be reduced to
seven inches of portland cement concrete where the City Engineer has
determined that design analysis justifies less thickness.



               B.   Asphalt cement concrete base course
thickness of six inches with an asphalt cement concrete surface course
thickness of two inches.



      (4)   Minimum pavement width and thickness costs to be paid by
subdivider; when city will share costs.



         (a)   The subdivider shall provide the full width of
pavement on all streets, private drives or alleys within the subdivision, or
the cost equivalent thereof, in accordance with the minimum requirements as
specified in this section. The subdivider on each side of a street, private
drive or alley shall provide one-half the width of the pavement on all
streets, private drives or alleys, both existing and proposed, immediately
adjacent to the subdivision, or the cost equivalent thereof, in accordance
with the minimum requirements as specified in this section. In the city’s
sole option, the developer may be required to pay an amount equal to the cost
of paving as provided by current assessment policy, which shall hold the
funds until the adjacent street, private drive or alley is paved. All costs
held pursuant to this section shall be the total cost required of any
developer or subsequent purchaser of the development for paving. The cost of
paving shall be determined by averaging three legitimate bids. If a side of a
street, private drive or alley is zoned as a single-family residence district
exclusively, and circumstances require the width of pavement for the street,
private drive or alley to be in excess of 31 feet, the city shall pay for the
extra width of pavement on one-half the width of pavement for the street,
private drive or alley immediately adjacent to that single-family residence
district, or the equivalent cost thereof, in accordance with the minimum
requirements as specified in this section.



         (b)   The subdivider on each side of a street, private
drive or alley shall provide the full pavement thickness on all streets,
private drives or alleys in or immediately adjacent to the subdivision, or
the equivalent cost thereof, in accordance with the minimum requirements as
specified in this section. If a side of a street, private drive or alley is
zoned as a residential district and circumstances require the pavement
thickness for the street, private drive or alley to be in excess of seven
inches of portland cement concrete or eight inches of asphalt cement
concrete, the city shall pay for the extra pavement thickness on one-half the
width of pavement for the street, private drive or alley immediately adjacent
to that residential district, or the cost equivalent thereof, in accordance
with the minimum requirements as specified in this section.



         (c)   All final plats approved by the Council after the
effective date of division (L)(4)(a) above shall be subject to the
requirements of that division. All final plats approved by the Council prior
to the effective date of division (L)(4)(a) above shall be subject to the
requirements of the section in effect prior to the effective date of that
division. All final plats approved by the Council prior to or after the
effective date of division (L)(4)(b) above shall be subject to the
requirements of that division.



         (d)   Notwithstanding the above, when a property owner
plats ground as required pursuant to § 158.03 of this code, and no property
division into lots results from the platting, the Council shall not require
compliance with division (L)(4)(a) above.



         (e)   Developers shall provide an approved drainable
base material under the following typical local streets:



            1.   Seven-inch portland cement concrete or
eight-inch asphaltic cement concrete paving;



            2.   Six-inch drainable base (without engineering
fabric) with four-inch drainage tile along both sides in accordance with city
specifications; and



            3.   Developers may choose to employ a parabolic
crown or straight crown on local streets.



(Ord. 2389, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2536, passed 4-12-2016; Ord. 2556, passed
10-24-2017)



APPENDIX A:  SUBDIVISION FORMS



Note: For a printer-friendly, PDF copy of Appendix A, please click HERE



   REQUEST FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW



Applicant’s
Name:____________________________________________________________________



Address:_______________________________________________________________________
_____



Phone No.:______________________________  Fax
No.:___________________________________



E-mail
address:______________________________________________________________________ 
   



Address or General Location of Development:
______________________________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
______



Legal Description of
Development:______________________________________________________



_______________________________________________________________________________
____    



Contact
Person:______________________________________________________________________



Phone
No.:__________________________________________________________________________



Owner’s Name if Different from
Applicant:_______________________________________________



Owner’s
Address:____________________________________________________________________



Owner’s Phone
No.:__________________________________________________________________



____________________________________      _______________________________
_



Owner’s
signature                        Developer’s/Option
Holder’s Signature



===============================================



For office use only:



_____   Application - 1 copy



_____   Site Plan - 2 copies



_____   Landscape Plan - 2 copies



_____   Stormwater Detention Plans and Calculations - 2 sets



_____   Reduced (8-1/2 inches x 14 inches) copy of Site Plan and Landscape
Plan - 1 set



Date filed:____________________________    Filing fee paid:_____   
Review fee paid:_____



Application received
by:__________________________________________________________   



Planning and Zoning Commission meeting
date:_______________________________________   




Filing Fees: $200.00   5 acres or less





                  $300.00      More than 5 acres




Review Fees:  Actual time and material costs incurred to review and approve
the site plan. Review fees are in addition to filing fees.



   INFORMATION ON SITE PLAN



The purpose of the site plan is to show the facts needed to enable the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council to determine whether the
proposed development meets the City requirements. The site plan at a scale of
one inch equals twenty (20) feet [1:20] or larger, shall be prepared by an
engineer, landscape architect, urban planner, or other similar professional
and shall include the following:



_____   1.   Existing grading and proposed grading at two (2) foot
contours.



_____   2.   Proposed street and existing street with both paving and
right-of-way indicated.



_____   3.   All utility easements, both privately owned and municipal,
and any proposed.



_____   4.   Outline of proposed or existing building on the site.



_____   5.   Proposed or existing paving or surfaced area for driveways
or parking lots, or other uses for durable  surface.



_____   6.   All required linear yard dimensions of the requested
district and those provided if different from required.



_____   7.   The number of parking spaces required and number provided.



_____   8.   Location and name of adjoining subdivisions, subdivision
lots therein, and names of the adjoining landowners.



_____   9.   Zoning district classification; type of water supply and
sewage disposal and storm sewer disposal.



_____   10.   Proposed or existing sidewalk locations and easements, if
appropriate.



_____   11.   Proposed and existing landscaping and other existing
natural features.



_____   12.   Proposed or existing sign location and sign height.



_____   13.   Location map, locating the site within the City of
Clinton.



_____   14.   Identification of existing and proposed plats and
development on adjacent property as well as the location of existing and
proposed signs within one hundred (100) feet of the site.



_____   15.   Proposed or existing property lines.



_____   16.   Proposed or existing fencing and identification of the
type and height of fence.



_____   17.   Proposed or existing access or other easements.



_____   18.   Locations of proposed or existing manholes, drainage
intake, fire hydrants, utility pole anchors and guides.



_____   19.   Front, side, and rear setbacks.



_____   20.   Key plan, legend, notes and legal description.



_____   21.   The scale, north point and date.



_____   22.   Proposed or existing features not otherwise mentioned,
such as specific recreational areas and equipment, water retention areas,
ponds, waterways, etc.



_____   23.   Perspective drawing of the site showing concept described
in the site plan, specifically representing the building and sign appearance
and contour effect of the site.



_____   24.   Elevation plans for exterior vertical and horizontal
design of the buildings and sign which are being contemplated.



_____   25.   Construction plans for public or private improvements for
streets and sewer in accordance with the procedures of Chapter 76 of the
Clinton Municipal Code.



_____   26.   Legal documents such as but not limited to homeowners’
association, restrict covenants, agreement contracts or other documents
necessary to insure the concept involved.



_____   27.   Fire hydrant locations - existing and proposed (showing
distances).



_____   28.   Size of water main.



_____   29.   Building construction type - per the 2007 International
Building Code.



_____   30.   Building area - each floor and total for entire building.



_____   31.   Occupancy type(s) - per the 2007 International Building
Code.



_____   32.   Is building to be equipped with automatic fire sprinkler
system and/or standpipe system? If so, indicate location of fire department
connection(s).



_____   33.   Street width - public, on-site, and fire lanes.



_____   34.   Turning radii, turnarounds, access grades, and height of
overhead obstructions.



_____   35.   Names, addresses, and phone numbers of the architect,
developer, and owner.



Note:  Items 27 through 32 are required in order to determine fire hydrant
and water flow requirements. Items 33 and 34 are used to determine if
accessibility is adequate for fire apparatus.



   APPLICATION



   FOR APPROVAL OF A PRELIMINARY PLAT OF A SUBDIVISION



   CITY OF CLINTON, IOWA



Name of
Subdivision:________________________________________________________________



Name of Applicant submitting
Subdivision:______________________________________________



Address of
Applicant:________________________________________________________________



Phone No.:______________________________  Fax
No.:_________________________________



Name of Subdivision Property
Owner:__________________________________________________



Address of
Owner:__________________________________________________________________



Phone
No.:________________________________________________________________________



Name of Surveyor or Engineer preparing plat drawing and/or engineering
construction plans:_____



_______________________________________________________________________________
__



Address of
Engineer:_______________________________________________________________



Phone No.:______________________________  Fax
No.:________________________________



Name of Person or Agent to be contacted and notified concerning this plat
(may be engineer or any of the above
listed):___________________________________________________________________



Address:_______________________________________________________________________
___



Phone No.:______________________________  Fax
No.:_________________________________



E-mail
Address:____________________________________________________________________



The undersigned agrees that the preliminary plat of a subdivision for which
approval is requested by this application will comply and conform to all
applicable laws of the State of Iowa and the ordinances of the City of
Clinton, Iowa.



____________________________________      __________________



Owner’s
signature                        Applicant’s
signature



===============================================



For office use only:



Filing Fee:  $100.00 plus $2.00 for each lot shown on the proposed plat.



Filing Fee Paid $____________



Review Fees:  Actual time and material costs incurred to review and approve
the preliminary plat. Review fees are in addition to filing fees.



Review Fee Paid $_________________



Received
by:________________________________________________________________________



Title:_________________________________________________________________________
_____



Date:__________________________________________________________________________
____



Note: Certain material must accompany this application. The information
called for in Items 2 and 3 below may be submitted as one or two maps or
plans. Check (y) if required information or materials accompanies this
application.



THE SUBDIVIDER SHALL PROVIDE THE FOLLOWING:



_____   1.   Location map (which may be prepared by indicating the data
by notations on available maps) showing:



      a.   Subdivision name and location.



      b.   Major thoroughfares related to the subdivision.



      c.   Public transportation lines.



      d.   Main shopping center.



      e.   Community or neighborhood stores.



      f.   Elementary and high schools.



      g.   Parks and playgrounds.



      h.   Other community features.



      i.   Title, scale, north point, and date.



_____   2.   A site map showing:



      a.   Topographical data in one of the following forms, which
shall be determined by the Commission during preliminary consideration of the
plan:



         1)   A contour map with contours at intervals of 2 feet
if the general slope of the site is less than 10% and at vertical intervals
of 5 feet if the general slope is greater than 10%.



         2)   A land inspection sketch showing terrain features,
wooded area, building, and other natural or artificial features which would
affect the plan of the subdivision.



      b.   Tract boundary lines, showing dimensions, bearings,
angles, and references to section, township, and range lines or corners.



      c.   Streets and rights-of-way, on or adjoining the site,
including dedicated widths, roadway widths, approximate gradients, types and
width of pavements, curbs, location of street lights, sidewalks, tree
planting and other pertinent data.



      d.   Easements: Locations, widths, and purposes.



      e.   Utilities, including sanitary and storm sewers, other
drainage facilities; water lines; gas mains; electric utilities and other
facilities. Size or capacity of each should be shown and the locations of
distance to each existing utility indicate.



      f.   Zoning of the site and adjoining property.



      g.   Existing or proposed platting of adjacent land within 300
feet of the subdivision.



      h.   Other features or conditions which would affect the
subdivision favorably or adversely.



      i.   Title, scale, north point, and date.



_____   3.   A preliminary plan of the subdivision, drawn to scale of
50 feet to 1 inch or 100 feet to 1 inch, provided however, that if the
resulting drawing would be over 36 inches in shortest dimension, a scale as
recommended by the Engineer or the Commission may be used.



      a.   Proposed name of the subdivision.



      b.   Names and addresses of owner and subdivider and the City
Planner, land planning consultant, engineer, or surveyor who prepared the
plan.



      c.   Street pattern, showing the names (which shall not
duplicate names of other streets in the community) and widths of
rights-of-way or streets, and widths of crosswalks, easements, or alleys.



      d.   Layout of lots, showing dimensions and numbers. Square
foot area of each lot with irregular sides (not rectangular). Block number if
required, distances, radii, and chords.



      e.   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for
schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public, semi-public, or community
purposes.



      f.   Building setback or front yard lines.



      g.   Key plan, legend, and notes.



      h.   Scale, north point, and date.



_____   4.   Engineering plans showing:



      a.   Profiles, typical cross sections and specifications for
proposed street improvements.



      b.   Profiles and locations and other explanatory data
concerning the installation of sanitary and storm sewage systems and water
distribution system.



_____   5.   A description of the protective covenants or private
restrictions to be incorporated in the plat of the subdivision.



_____   6.   Information as to any agreements which have been entered
into with the owners of other property within the neighborhood in which the
proposed subdivision is located, as to general plans for the entire
neighborhood. Reference should be made to the comprehensive plan for
suggestions as to the general street pattern and design of the neighborhood.
Wherever possible, all of the property owners within the neighborhood should
endeavor to agree upon a general plan for its development, in order that each
subdivision may be designed as an integral part of a well-considered overall
plan.



   APPLICATION



   FOR APPROVAL OF A FINAL PLAT OF A SUBDIVISION



   CITY OF CLINTON, IOWA



Name of
Subdivision:_________________________________________________________________



Name of Applicant submitting
Subdivision:_______________________________________________



Address of
Applicant:_________________________________________________________________



Phone No.:______________________________  Fax
No.:__________________________________



Name of Subdivision Property
Owner:___________________________________________________



Address of
Owner:___________________________________________________________________



Phone No.:______________________________  Fax
No.:__________________________________



Name of Surveyor or Engineer preparing plat drawing and/or engineering
construction plans:______



_______________________________________________________________________________
____



Address of
Engineer:   ________________________________________________________________
_



Phone No.:______________________________  Fax
No.:__________________________________



Name of Attorney preparing legal
documents:_____________________________________________



Address of
Attorney:_________________________________________________________________



Phone No.:______________________________  Fax
No.:__________________________________



Name of Person or Agent to be contacted and notified concerning this plat
(may be engineer or any of the above
listed):____________________________________________________________________



Address of
Agent:___________________________________________________________________



Phone No.:______________________________  Fax
No.:_________________________________



E-mail
Address:____________________________________________________________________



The undersigned agrees that the final plat of a subdivision for which
approval is requested by this application will comply with and conform to all
applicable laws of the State of Iowa and the ordinances of the City of
Clinton, Iowa, and that it is the applicant’s responsibility to submit all
required legal documents in a manner such that the documents must be recorded
within 60 days of final plat approval by the City Council.



____________________________________      _______________________________



Owner’s
signature                        Applicant’s
signature



===============================================



For office use only:



Filing Fee:  $200.00 should accompany this plat.



Filing Fee Paid $____________



Review Fees:  Actual time and material costs incurred to review and approve
the final plat. Review fees are in addition to filing fees.



Review Fee Paid $_________________



Received
by:________________________________________________________________________



Title:_________________________________________________________________________
_____



Date:__________________________________________________________________________
____



   CERTAIN MATERIALS MUST ACCOMPANY THIS APPLICATION.



Note:   The original drawing of the final plat of the subdivision shall be
drawn to a scale of fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch, provided that if the
resulting drawing would be over thirty-six (36) inches in shortest dimension,
a scale of one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch may be used. Three black or
blue line prints shall be submitted with the original final plat, or, in
order to conform to modern and reproduction methods, three black line prints
and a reproducible print shall be submitted.



The following basic information shall be shown in the final plat. Check if
required information or material accompanies the application.



_____   1.   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and angles, which
provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of not more than one (1)
feet in five thousand (5,000) feet.



_____    2.   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest
established street corners of official monuments. Reference corners shall be
accurately described on the plan.



_____    3.   Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets
intersecting the boundaries of the tract.



_____    4.   Accurate metes and bounds description of the boundary.



____    5.   Source of title to the land as shown by the books of the
Recorder of Clinton County.



_____    6.   Street names.



_____    7.   Complete curve notes for all curves included in the plan.



_____    8.   Street lines with accurate dimensions in feet and
hundredths of feet, with angles to street, alley, and lot lines.



_____    9.   Lot numbers and dimensions.



_____   10.   Easements for utilities including street lights and any
limitations on such easements.



_____   11.   Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or
reserved for public, semi-public, or community use.



_____   12.   Building setback lines or front yard lines and dimensions.



_____   13.   Location, type, material, and size of all monuments and
lot markers.



_____   14.   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land
and become covenants in the deeds for lots.



_____   15.   Name of the subdivision.



_____   16.   Name and address of the owner and the subdivider.



_____   17.   North point, scale, and date.



_____   18.   Certification by a registered professional engineer or
registered land surveyor.



_____   19.   Certification of dedication of the streets and other
public property.



_____   20.   “Notice of Intent” (National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System General Permit #2). Copy to Engineering Department.



_____   21.   Developer’s stormwater pollution prevention plan.



_____   22.   Resolution and certificate for approval by the Council
and signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk.



_____   23.   The final plat shall also be accompanied by a set of
legal documents as required by the Clinton Subdivision Code. A set of draft
copies of these documents may be obtained from the Clinton Planning
Department. If the required documents, engineering plans, or other required
material are not submitted at the time of initial submittal, any mandatory
time requirement for processing of this plat shall not begin until all
required material is submitted.



(Ord. 2389, passed 10-28-2008)



CHAPTER 159:  ZONING REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   159.001   Title



   159.002   Districts and boundaries; official map



   159.003   Compliance with the regulations



   159.004   Definitions



Zoning Districts



   159.015   A-1 Agricultural Reserve District



   159.016   R-1A, R-1B, R-1C One-Family Residential District



   159.017   R-2 Two-Family Residential District



   159.018   R-4 Residential District



   159.019   R-5 Condominium Residential District



   159.020   MH Manufactured Home District



   159.021   PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District



   159.022   C-1 Local Commercial District



   159.023   C-2 General Commercial District



   159.024   C-2M General Commercial/Light Manufacturing District



   159.025   PWC Parkway Commercial District



   159.026   C-3 Central Business District



   159.027   SP Special Purpose Commercial and Historical Overlay
Districts



   159.028   C-4 Planned Commercial District



   159.029   C-R Commercial/Recreation District



   159.030   M-1 Industrial (Light) District



   159.031   M-2 Industrial (Heavy) District



   159.032   M-3 Industrial (Park) District



Zoning Regulations



   159.045   Height and area requirements



   159.046   Supplemental regulations



   159.047   Nonconforming uses



   159.048   Signs



   159.049   Special use regulations



   159.050   Certificates of occupancy



   159.051   Plans



   159.052   Amendments



   159.053   Interpretation, purpose and conflict



   159.054   Zoning permits and inspections



Off-Street Parking and Loading



   159.065   Off-street parking requirements



   159.066   Off-street loading requirements



Zoning Board of Adjustment



   159.080   Zoning Board of Adjustment



Wireless Communication Facilities



   159.095   Purpose



   159.096   Definitions



   159.097   Zoning and land use



   159.098   Special use permit required



   159.099   Special use permit application process



   159.100   Exceptions



   159.101   Application process for all applications



   159.102   Application review for applications identified as eligible
facilities requests



   159.103   Application review for applications identified for new
tower construction



   159.104   Application review for applications identified for the
initial placement or installation of transmission equipment on wireless
support structures, modification of an existing tower or existing base
station that constitutes a substantial change, or other requests for
construction or placement of transmission equipment that do not constitute
eligible facilities requests



   159.105   Proprietary leasing of city owned or controlled property



   159.106   Removal of abandoned wireless communications facilities



 



   159.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 159.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Zoning Chapter of the
City of Clinton, Iowa.”



(1999 Code, § 165.01)



§ 159.002  DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES; OFFICIAL MAP.



   (A)   In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location of
trades and industries and the location of buildings designated for specific
uses; to regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lot areas and to
regulate and determine the area of yards and other open spaces surrounding
the building, the city is hereby divided into “districts.” The use and
area regulations are uniform in each district, and the districts are known as:



 




A-1

 
Agricultural Reserve District



R-1A

 
One-Family Residential District



R-1B

 
One-Family Residential District



R-1C

 
One-Family Residential District



R-2

 
Two-Family Residential District



R-4

 
Apartment Residential District



R-5

 
Condominium Residential District



C-1

 
Local Commercial District



C-2

 
General Commercial District



C-2M

 
General Commercial-Light Manufacturing District



C-3

 
Central Business District



C-4

 
Planned Commercial District



C-R

 
Commercial-Recreation District



M-1

 
Industrial (Light) District



M-2

 
Industrial (Heavy) District



M-3

 
Industrial (Park) District



M-H

 
Manufactured Home District



SP

 
Special Purpose Commercial and Historic Overlay District




 



   (B)   The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as
shown on the “zoning district map” of the city, which map is by this
reference made a part of this chapter. The zoning district map and all the
notations, references and other information shown thereon is properly
attested and on file with the Clerk. Where uncertainty exists with respect to
the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning district map,
the following rules apply.



      (1)   The district boundaries are either streets or alleys
unless otherwise shown, and where a district designated on the map is bounded
approximately by street or alley lines, the centerline of the street or alley
shall be construed to be the boundary of the district, the zoning district
line for railroads shall also be construed to be the centerline between the
tracks.



      (2)   Where district boundaries are not otherwise indicated
and where the property has been or may hereafter be divided into blocks and
lots, the district boundaries shall be construed to be the lot lines, and
where the districts designated on the map are bounded approximately by lot
lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the boundary of the districts
unless the boundaries are otherwise indicated on the map.



      (3)   In subdivided property, the district boundary lines on
the zoning district map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on
the map.



      (4)   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is
vacated by official action of the Council, the zone adjoining each side of
the alley, street or public way shall be automatically extended to the center
of the vacation, except where the street, alley or public way is deeded to
one party, then the zoning district line will be extended to include the full
vacated area, and all area included therein shall thereafter be subject to
all appropriate regulations of the extended district.



      (5)   (a)   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines or
streams will be construed as following the centerline of the stream or
corporate limits in the case of the Mississippi River.



         (b)   A tract of land may be voluntarily annexed into a
specific zone after recommendation by the Plan Commission and after a public
hearing is held by the Council.



(1999 Code, § 165.02)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001)  Penalty, see §
159.999



Cross-reference:



   For ordinances amending the zoning district map, see Table of Special
Ordinances, Table V



§ 159.003  COMPLIANCE WITH THE REGULATIONS.



   The purpose of this section is to assure that the land is not used in
any other way except in conformity with these regulations. This section
contains statements of policy, a declaration to those who live under the
ordinance codified in this chapter and those responsible for administration
and enforcement of it and to the courts that may, at some time in the future,
be required to interpret it so that there is a schedule of district
regulations considered a binding requirement that is to be enforced, except
as hereinafter specifically provided.



   (A)   No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the
district in which it is located.



   (B)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, nor shall any building be used
except for a use permitted in the district in which the building is located.



   (C)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein
established for the district in which the building is located.



   (D)   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered except in conformity with the area
regulations of the district in which the building is located.



   (E)   No building shall be erected or structurally altered to the
extent specifically provided hereinafter except in conformity with the
off-street parking and loading requirements of this chapter.



   (F)   The minimum yards, parking spaces and open spaces, including
lot area per family required by this chapter for each and every building
existing at the time of passage of this chapter or for any building hereafter
erected or structurally altered, shall not be encroached upon or considered a
part of the yard or parking space required for any other building, nor shall
any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this chapter for the
district in which the lot is located.



   (G)   Every building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall
be located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than
one main building on one lot except where allowed.



   (H)   As defined in § 159.004 of this chapter, the use of land for
agricultural purposes shall be permitted in any zoning district and a farm
shall be permitted in any zoning district.



   (I)   On a farm as defined in § 159.004 of this chapter, the
following uses shall be permitted:



      (1)   Truck gardens, nurseries, grain storage facilities and
other agricultural uses including the sale and distribution of agricultural
products, and produce grown on the farm and including a greenhouse, but not
including a sales room or roadside stand. One additional single-family
dwelling that is under the same ownership as the principal farm dwelling is
allowed to be used by the family or employees of the farm; and



      (2)   Any other use permitted in the zoning district in which
the farm is located.



   (J)   The following regulations shall not apply to the use of land
for agricultural purposes on farms:



      (1)   Fence restrictions as set out in § 159.046(I);



      (2)   Restriction on storage of vehicles as set out in §
159.016; and



      (3)   Residential use restrictions as set out in §§ 159.030,
159.031 and 159.032.



   (K)   The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 requires all
“places of public accommodation” to be accessible to all individuals
regardless of disability (42 U.S.C. § 12181).



   (L)   Use regulations for all land, buildings and structures are
described in § 159.046(N).



(1999 Code, § 165.03)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2352, passed
7-24-2007)



§ 159.004  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. For use
in this chapter, the following terms and words are defined, and as used in
this chapter the word “building” includes the word “structure” and
the word “lot” includes the word “plot” or “parcel.”



   ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USE.  A subordinate building or use which is
incidental and customary in connection with the principal building or
principal use and is located on the same lot.



   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.  A building or use having a
substantial or significant portion of its business by the offering of
entertainment, stock in trade of materials, scenes or other presentations
characterized by emphasis on depiction or description of specific sexual
activities including nude and semi-nude dancing. The uses include but are not
limited to:  adult book stores, adult massage parlors, adult modeling
studios, adult mini motion picture theaters, adult motion picture theaters,
adult theaters, adult sexual encounter centers and licensed beer and liquor
establishments offering nude and semi-nude performances for entertainment.



   AGRICULTURE.  Land used for agricultural purposes, agricultural
horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and animal and poultry husbandry and
the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the produce provided,
however, that the operation of any accessory use is secondary to that of
normal agricultural activities. Does not include animal feeding operations as
defined by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources in the Iowa Code Chapter
65.



   AIRPORT ZONING.  See Airport Zoning Regulations, Chapter 157.



   ALLEY. A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of
access to property abutting thereon.



   APARTMENT HOUSE. See DWELLING, MULTIPLE.



   ARTIST STUDIO. A place designed to be used, or used as, a place of work
or a combination of both a dwelling place and a place of work, by an artist,
artisan, or craftsperson, including persons engaged in the application,
teaching, or performance of fine arts such as, but not limited to, drawing,
dance, vocal or instrumental music, painting, sculpture, and writing.



   AUDITORIUM or ASSEMBLY HALL. A building or structure designed or
intended for use for the gathering of people as an audience to hear music,
lectures, plays, and other presentations.



   AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION. Any building, structure or land used
primarily for supplying automotive fuel and motor oil at retail cost direct
to the customer, including the supplying of accessories, replacement parts
and minor services essential to the normal operation of automobiles, but not
including body or fender work, painting or major motor repairs. When the
aforementioned service is incidental to the conduct of a public garage, the
use shall be classified as a public garage.



   BAR or TAVERN. Any establishment whose principal business is serving
alcoholic beverages at retail for consumption on the premises.



   BASEMENT  or UNDERGROUND HOUSE. A building partly underground, having
at least three-fourths of its height below adjoining ground level. All
dwellings must provide, in each room or living area (excluding storage rooms,
utility rooms and the like), proper ventilation, adequate lights and proper
drainage. Not to be counted as a story for height regulations.



   BED AND BREAKFAST HOME INN and BED AND BREAKFAST HOME. A building,
other than a hotel, where, for compensation, meals and lodging are provided
on a short term basis. Short term  basis shall be defined as 14 days or
less. A BED AND BREAKFAST HOME shall not exceed three guest rooms. A BED AND
BREAKFAST INN shall not exceed ten guest rooms. Facilities must meet the
requirements of the Iowa Code § 137C.35.



   BOARDING HOUSE. A building other than a hotel, where, for compensation
and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, lodging, meals or lodging and
meals are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding 20 persons.



   BUILDING. Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.



   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. Any structure erected or constructed, including
buildings as herein defined, the use of which requires location on the ground
or attachment to something located on the ground and which is incidental and
customarily appurtenant to a principle use permitted on the zoning lot. An
ACCESSORY BUILDING cannot be used for a dwelling use. See ACCESSORY BUILDING
AND USE.



   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance measured from the grade to
the highest point of a roof.



   BUILDING, ZONING ADMINISTRATOR or BUILDING AND NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES
DIRECTOR OR HIS OR HER DESIGNEE. The Building and Neighborhood Services
Director or his or her designee of the city.



   BULK CONTROL PLANE. An imaginary inclined plane rising over a lot,
drawn at a specified angle from the vertical, the bottom side of which is
coincidental with the lot line(s) or yard line(s) of the lot, or directly
above them and which, together with other bulk regulations and lot size
requirements, delineate the maximum area of any improvement which may be
constructed on the lot.



   CELLAR. A story having more than one-half of its height below grade but
not to be counted as a story for height regulations.



   CLINIC, MEDICAL. An establishment where patients are not lodged
overnight but are admitted for examination or treatment by one or more
practitioners providing medical, dental, psychiatric, osteopathic,
chiropractic, ophthalmology, physical therapy or similar services with or
without shared common spaces or equipment. This includes a common area
pharmacy or drug dispensary available to persons other than patients being
treated therein and billing for the services only.



   CLUB. A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a
corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational or
recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service
which is customarily carried on as a business.



   CONDOMINIUM. A building containing two or more dwelling units which are
designed and intended to be separately owned in fee. See Horizontal Property
Act, Iowa Code Chapter 499B.



   CONVENTION CENTER. Facility used for service organization, business,
and professional gatherings, such as conventions, conferences and seminars,
and limited to accommodations for attendees. Accessory uses may include
accommodations for sleeping, eating, and recreation. Such facility is not
designed to be only utilized by the general public for overnight purposes.



   DAY CARE FACILITIES.



      (1)   ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY. A facility providing short-term
supervision for the frail, elderly and disabled person.



      (2)   CHILD CARE FACILITY. A facility operating under the Iowa
Code Chapter 237A providing for the care of seven or more children.



      (3)   FAMILY DAY CARE FACILITY. A facility operating under the
Iowa Code Chapter 237A for the care of less than seven children and owned and
operated by a resident occupant.



   DECK. A structure, without a roof, directly adjacent to a building,
which has an average elevation of 12 inches or greater from finished grade.



   DENTAL or MEDICAL LAB. A facility providing diagnostic or pathological
testing and analysis for the healthcare industry.



   DISTRICT. Any section of the city within which the zoning regulations
are uniform.



   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designated or used exclusively
for residential occupancy, but not including home trailers, mobile homes,
hotels, motels, bed and breakfast homes, boarding and lodging houses, tourist
courts or tourist homes.



   DWELLING, ATTACHED (ROW). A multi-family dwelling where each dwelling
unit has a separate outdoor entrance and is either joined to one other
dwelling unit at one side by one party wall; or joined to two other dwelling
units by one party wall on each side.



   DWELLING, DETACHED. A dwelling that is completely surrounded by open
space on the same lot.



   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. A building designated for or occupied exclusively
by one family.



   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designated for or occupied exclusively
by two families.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by
three or more families.



   FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING. A factory-built structure designed for long term
residential use. For the purpose of these regulations, factory-built housing
consists of three types:  modular homes, mobile homes and manufactured homes.



   FACTORY-BUILT STRUCTURE. Any structure which is, wholly or in
substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in manufacturing
facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site.



   FAMILY. One person or two or more persons occupying a living unit as an
individual housekeeping organization.



   FARM. A parcel of land of not less than 40 acres which is used
primarily for the commercial, soil dependent cultivation of agricultural crop
production and/or the raising of livestock including dairy farms with the
necessary accessory uses for treating and storing the produce provided from
the normal farming activities. See AGRICULTURE.  Animal feed operations, as
defined by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources in the I.A.C. Chapter 65,
are not considered a farm activity for purposes of permitted uses unless the
use is secondary to that of normal farming activities.



   FENCE. A structure, other than a building, used to enclose or screen an
area of land.



   FLOODPLAIN. Land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, watercourse
or other body of water established by using a known flood elevation
determined to be land inundated by a 100-year frequency flood or other flood
frequencies established for the city. It is the purpose of the FLOODPLAIN to
apply special regulations to the use of land in those areas of the city which
are subject to predictable inundation of known frequency intervals. The land
use controls are necessary and follow prescribed requirements to qualify
property owners for flood protection insurance adopted by the city in 1976,
as defined under the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended and
Chapter 156 of this code of ordinances.



   FLOOR AREA. The total gross area on all floors, as measured to the
outside surfaces of exterior walls, excluding crawl spaces, garages,
carports, breezeways, attics without floors, open porches, balconies and
terraces.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or portion of a main
building housing the automobiles of the occupants of the premises.



   GARAGE, REPAIR. A building or portion thereof, other than a private,
storage or parking garage, designated or used for equipping, servicing and
repairing motor vehicles. The term REPAIRING includes an automotive body
repair shop, automobile repair shop and vehicle rebuilding, as defined in the
definition of vehicle rebuilder below. Dismantling or storage of wrecked or
junked vehicles (defined as a salvage yard) is prohibited.



   GARAGE, STORAGE. A building or portion thereof designated or used
exclusively for term storage of motor driven vehicles, as distinguished from
daily storage furnished transients and within which motor fuels and oils are
not sold and motor driven vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold.



   GRADE. The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent
to the exterior walls of the building.



   GROCERY STORE. A retail establishment primarily selling prepackaged and
perishable food as well as convenience and household goods.



   HEALTH CLUB. A facility where member or nonmembers use equipment or
space for the purpose of physical exercise including, but not limited to,
running, jogging, aerobics, weightlifting, court sports, Tae Kwan Do, and
yoga, as well as locker rooms, showers, saunas, and related accessory uses.



   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation, profession, activity or use that is
clearly a customary, incidental and secondary use of a residential dwelling
unit, and which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the
residential character of the neighborhood.



   HOTEL. A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided
and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to
and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a
person in charge at all times. As such is open to the public, in contrast to
a boarding house, a lodging house or an apartment which are herein separately
defined.



   HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY OR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES. A multi-family
structure designed, maintained and operated for exclusive occupancy by the
elderly and/or persons with disabilities as defined by the regulations of HUD
and providing that one dwelling unit may be used for a resident manager who
shall be exempt from occupancy age limitations or disabilities.



   INDOOR RECREATION. An establishment providing completely enclosed
recreation activities. Accessory uses may include the preparation and serving
of food or the sale of equipment related to the enclosed uses. Included in
this definition shall be bowling, roller-skating or ice-skating, billiards,
pool, motion picture theaters, and other amusements.



   INSTITUTION or INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING. An establishment owned and
occupied by a private or public non-profit corporation, association,
organization or group for the use or benefit of the general public.



   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. An establishment licensed to operate a facility
housing dogs, cats or other household pets and where grooming, breeding,
boarding, training or selling of animals is conducted as a business.



   KENNEL, NONCOMMERCIAL. The use of a private residence for the care of
dogs and cats belonging to the owner of the residence, kept for purposes of
show, hunting or as pets.



   LAUNDROMAT, SELF-SERVICE. An establishment providing home-type washing,
drying or ironing machines for use on the premises.



   LODGING HOUSE. See BOARDING HOUSE.



   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of ownership or of building
development and having its principle frontage upon a street or upon an
officially approved place.



   LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection.



   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.



   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. A lot having a frontage on two non-intersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.



   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.



   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which
has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds or a lot
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in
the office of the County Recorder of Deeds.



   LOT WIDTH. The width of the lot at the front yard line.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A factory-built, single-family structure which is
manufactured or constructed under the authority of the state and 42 U.S.C. §
5403, and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not
constructed with a permanent hitch or other device, allowing it to be moved
other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site and which does not
have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A mobile
home is not a manufactured home unless it has been converted to real property
and is taxed as a site-built dwelling. For the purpose of these regulations,
a MANUFACTURED HOME is considered the same as any site-built, single-family
detached dwelling if it meets the requirements of § 155.06.



   MINI WAREHOUSE FACILITY. A building or group of buildings which are
rented and designed, through individual compartments or controlled stalls,
for self-service storage purposes.



   MOBILE HOME. Any vehicle without motive power used or so manufactured
or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public
streets and highway and so designed, constructed or reconstructed which will
permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more
persons, but shall also include any vehicle with motive power not registered
as a motor vehicle in Iowa. A MOBILE HOME is factory-built housing built on a
chassis. A MOBILE HOME shall not be construed to be a travel trailer or other
form of recreational vehicle. A MOBILE HOME shall be construed to remain a
mobile home subject to all regulations applying thereto, whether or not
wheels, axles, hitch or other appurtenant of mobility are removed, and
regardless of the nature of the foundation provided. However, certain MOBILE
HOMES may be classified as manufactured homes. Nothing in this chapter,
unless defined, shall be construed as permitting the MOBILE HOME in other
than an approved mobile home park, unless the mobile home is classified as a
manufactured home.



   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which
mobile homes used for human habitation are parked, either free of charge or
for revenue purposes, which shall include any roadway, building, structure,
vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of
the MOBILE HOME PARK. Also includes MANUFACTURED HOME PARK and MANUFACTURED
HOMES.



   MODULAR BUILDING. A prefabricated transportable building manufactured
in whole or in part off the site, designed to be used by itself or to be
incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular structure.
The term is intended to apply to major assemblies and does not include
prefabricated panels, trusses or sub-elements which are to be incorporated
into a structure at the site. A seal must be obtained from the State Building
Department for these units.



   MODULAR HOME. Factory-built housing certified as meeting the State Code
as applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the state, MODULAR HOMES
are subject to the same standards as site-built homes.



   MORTUARY or FUNERAL HOME. A building used for the storage, preparation,
and display of the deceased and for the performance of rituals and ceremonies
connected therewith before burial or cremation. Crematoriums are permitted as
an accessory use to a funeral home or mortuary.



   MOTOR COURT or MOTEL. A building or group of buildings used primarily
for the temporary residence of motorists or travelers.



   MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE YARD. An open surfaced area used for the
temporary storage of damaged, wrecked or inoperable motor vehicles. Storage
of any vehicles shall not exceed 60 days. No vehicle salvaging is allowed.
All storage lots or parts of lots used for vehicle storage shall be
completely screened with a six-foot high visual barrier. Construction of this
barrier shall comply with the requirements of § 159.046(I).



   NONCONFORMING BUILDING, USE OR LAND. A building, structure, use or land
or a portion thereof, lawfully existing at the time this chapter or an
amendment thereto becomes effective which does not meet the bulk, height,
yard, parking, loading or other requirements of this chapter or any amendment
thereto.



   NURSING, REST OR CONVALESCENT HOME. A home for the aged or infirm in
which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or
provided with food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including
hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis
and treatment of the sick or injured.



   PARKING AREA. An open, unoccupied space used or required for use for
parking of vehicles exclusively and in which no gasoline or vehicular
accessories are sold or no other business is conducted and no fees are
charged.



   PARKING LOT. An open, all-weather surfaced area used exclusively for
the temporary, daily or overnight storage of motor vehicles and within which
motor fuels and oils may be sold and fees charged, but no vehicles are to be
equipped, repaired, rented or sold.



   PARKING SPACE. An all-weather surfaced (minimum of four-inch rock, seal
coated) area not in a street or alley and having a minimum space nine feet by
18 feet exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary
storage of one vehicle and connected with a street or alley by an all-weather
surfaced (minimum of four-inch rock, seal coated) driveway which affords
ingress and egress for a vehicle without requiring another vehicle to be
moved.



   PARKING STRUCTURE. A structure or portion thereof composed of one or
more levels or floors used excessively for the parking of vehicles.



   PET CREMATORIUM. Any structure, facility or building provided by any
person for a fee, whether or not for profit, to veterinarians or members of
the general public, for the cremation of pets. However, a PET CREMATORIUM
shall not provide for permanent internment or inurnment of pet remains.



   PLACE. An open, unoccupied space or thoroughfare other than a street or
alley permanently reserved as a principal means of access to abutting
property.



   PORCH, UNENCLOSED. A porch consisting only of a roof, floor and
supporting members together, if desired, with a solid or open support for a
rail and not more than three feet in height.



   PRIVATE CLUB. A nonprofit voluntary association of persons for the
promotion of same purposes or philosophy. The permitted uses of a building
owned or leased by such an association shall include all customary club
activities such as lectures, discussions, meetings, social or recreational
events, and similar activities, and shall also include as an accessory use
the sale of food or beverages, but only where limited to club members and
guests and only in conformance with state and federal regulations.



   RECYCLING PROCESSING FACILITY. Buildings used for the collection,
reduction, recovery, recycling and related activities when all processing
activities are conducted within a completely enclosed building, and subject
to compliance with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. This
definition does not include waste handling facilities, salvage yards or solid
waste transfer stations.



   RETAIL SALES or SERVICE. Establishments engaged in selling or renting
goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household
consumption and/or services in conjunction or separate to the sale of such
goods. Retail sales/service establishments shall not include eating and
drinking places, uses defined as adult entertainment, vehicle sales or
service, or wholesale, processing or manufacturing operations with an
accessory retail outlet on the premises.



   SALVAGE YARD. A lot or portion thereof where waste, discarded or
salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, stored, packed,
disassembled or handled. Types of operation include used vehicle parts
dealers and vehicle salvagers as licensed under the Iowa Code § 321H.2(6),
building wrecking activities, used lumber sales and places for storage of
salvaged building materials and equipment, but not including places where the
uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building.



   SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA. Round, parabolic antenna intended to receive
signals from orbiting satellites or other sources. In residential zoning
districts, all satellite dish antennas having a diameter greater than one
meter (3.28 feet) are defined as accessory structures. In nonresidential
zoning districts, satellite dish antennas having a diameter greater than two
meters (six and one-half feet) are defined as accessory structures.



   SIGN. A name, identification, description, display or illustration
which is affixed to, painted or represented, directly or indirectly, upon a
building, structure, parcel or lot, and which directs attention to an object,
product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business.



   SIGN, GROUND or BILLBOARD. Any sign erected, constructed or maintained
for the purpose of displaying outdoor advertising by means of posters,
pictures, pictorial and reading matter when the sign is supported by upright
posts or braces permanently anchored or secured to the ground and not
attached to any part of a building.



   SIGN, MONUMENT. A freestanding sign supported by an internal structural
framework or integrated into landscaping or other solid structural features
other than poles. The base of the structure shall be placed on or at ground
level, and shall not be attached to any building, wall, fence or other
structure.



   SIGN, PORTABLE. A sign intended for changeable copy, designed to be
moved or readily capable of being moved from place to place, which is not
permanently affixed to the ground or any other structure.



   STABLE, NONCOMMERCIAL. An accessory building or use that shelters
animals for the exclusive use of the occupants of the premises.



   STORAGE YARD OR LOT. An area outside of an enclosed building, where
construction materials and equipment, solid fuels, lumber, building
materials, monuments and stone products, public service and utility equipment
or other materials, goods, products, vehicles, equipment or machinery are
stored, baled, piled, handled or distributed, whether a principal or
accessory use. A STORAGE YARD OR LOT shall not be construed to include a
vehicle salvage yard or a junk yard.



   STORY. The portion of a building, excluding a cellar, between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there
is no floor above it, than the space between the floor and the ceiling next
above it. In split level homes, height and story regulations shall apply to
each section of the residence independently.



   STORY, HALF. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the
top floor level and in which space was not more than two-thirds of the floor
area is finished off for use. A half-story containing an independent
apartment of living quarters shall be counted as a full story.



   STREET. All property dedicated or intended for public or private use
for access to abutting lands or subject to public easements therefore, and
whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle or however otherwise
designated. See the subdivision regulations, Chapter 158.



   STREET LINE. A dividing line between a lot and a contiguous street.



   STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY. The land, property or interest therein, formally
established and intended for a street.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change except those required by law or
ordinance which would prolong the life of the supporting members of a
building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, not including
openings in bearing walls as permitted by other ordinances.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, erected or placed with a more or less
fixed location on the ground or attached or resting on something having a
fixed location on the ground.



   TATTOO PARLOR. An establishment whose principal business activity is
the practice of tattooing and/or piercing the body of paying customers.



   TOURIST HOME. An establishment used for dwelling purposes in which
rooms, with or without meals, are offered to transient guests for
compensation.



   UNDEVELOPED LAND. Property in its natural state, prior to grading,
construction and subdividing.



   USE. The purpose or purposes for which land or a structure is designed,
arranged or intended, or to which purpose land or a structure is occupied,
maintained, leased or operated.



   VEHICLE REBUILDER. A person or business licensed under the Iowa Code
Chapter 321H engaged in the business of rebuilding or restoring to operating
condition vehicles subject to registration under the Iowa Code Chapter 321,
which have been wrecked or damaged.



   VISUAL CLEARANCE ZONE. A triangular area formed by the intersection of
two public rights-of-way with two sides of the triangle located along the two
abutting public rights-of-way and the third side being a line connecting the
ends of the other two lines.



   WAREHOUSE. A building where commercial or industrial goods are stored
for compensation.



   WAREHOUSE FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE AND OTHER MATERIAL. A
building designated for storage of personal and household goods and
recreational vehicles during the off season.



   WELDING SHOP. A building containing equipment capable of uniting
metallic or other material by heating and allowing the metals or other
material to flow together or by hammering or compressing with or without
previous heating. The processing of these materials must comply with all fire
safety code requirements of the city.



   YARD. An open space, other than a court, on a lot, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.



   YARD, FRONT. A yard across the full width of the lot, extending from
the front line of the building to the front property line of the lot.



   YARD, REAR. A yard extending the full width of the lot between a
principal building and the rear lot line.



   YARD, SIDE. A yard on the same lot with the building between the main
building and the adjacent side of the lot and extending from the front yard
to the rear yard thereof.



(1999 Code, § 165.04)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2352, passed
7-24-2007; Ord. 2360, passed 2-12-2008; Ord. 2378, passed 7-8-2008; Ord.
2392, passed 11-11-2008; Ord. 2459, passed 8-23-2011; Ord. 2585, passed
7-10-2018)



ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 159.015  A-1 AGRICULTURAL RESERVE DISTRICT.



   The A-1 Agricultural Reserve District is intended to preserve existing
agriculture and other non-intensive uses; to prevent premature development
and non-orderly encroachment of intensive urban uses; and to help guide urban
growth into suitable areas. The regulations set forth in this section or set
forth elsewhere in this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the
regulations in the A-1 Agricultural Reserve District.



   (A)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Agriculture uses;



      (2)   One-family dwelling on a lot containing a minimum of
five acres;



      (3)   Parks, game and forest preserves;



      (4)   Home occupations in accordance with § 159.046(M); and



      (5)   Noncommercial stables.



   (B)   Height and area regulations. The height and area requirements
for the A-1 Agricultural Reserve District are the same as those established
for the R-1A One-Family Residential District in §§ 159.045 and 159.046
except that the minimum lot area and minimum area per family shall be five
acres.



   (C)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in
§ 159.065.



   (D)   Signs. Signs shall be permitted according to the provisions of
§ 159.048.



(1999 Code, § 165.05)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001)  Penalty, see §
159.999



§ 159.016  R-1A, R-1B, R-1C ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the
R-1A, R-1B, R-1C One-Family Residential District.



   (A)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   One-family dwelling, provided that for all new
one-family dwellings for which building permits have been issued on or after
January 1, 1985, the minimum dimension of the main body of the dwelling unit
shall not be less than 24 feet. The structure shall be placed on a permanent
foundation and taxed as real estate;



      (2)   Farming, agriculture and other agricultural uses such as
domestic gardening, berry or bush crops, tree crops, flower gardening,
nurseries, orchards, apiaries including a greenhouse, but not including a
sales room or roadside stand.  Commercial sales are not permitted on the
premises except on farms as defined in this chapter.  The keeping of no more
than six chickens is considered an allowed use with a valid permit;



      (3)   Publicly owned and operated park, playground, community
building and publicly owned and operated buildings and facilities such as
community centers, auditoriums, libraries, museums and armories;



      (4)   Church or other place of worship or Sunday school;



      (5)   Public, parochial, elementary and high schools and
educational institutions having a curriculum the same as ordinarily given in
public schools;



      (6)   Golf club or grounds. A miniature course or practice
driving tee operated for commercial purposes are not permitted;



      (7)   Child day care, adult day care, nursery school and
preschool facilities if located within a public/private institutional
building;



      (8)   Noncommercial stable, provided that the land area is not
less than five acres and provided that no structure or building for the
stabling of animals or tethering area is closer than 200 feet from any
abutting residential property. The area devoted to the accessory use shall be
used exclusively by the residents of the property and shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition. Maximum number of horses per five acres is
three;



      (9)   Accessory uses and buildings including private garages
and storage sheds. No accessory building may be used as a place of business.
An accessory garage may be used for the storage of not more than one
commercial vehicle. Accessory buildings shall follow the use and area
requirements in § 159.046(G);



      (10)   Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes
for a period not to exceed one year. An extension must be requested if there
is a need for a longer period of time;



      (11)   Group/family homes licensed under the Iowa Code Chapter
135C and Chapter 237. A minimum separation of one-quarter mile shall be
provided between a group/family home and any other similarly licensed home;



      (12)   Home occupations in accordance with § 159.046(M); and



      (13)   Trucks and commercial vehicles/equipment. No truck used
for commercial purposes of one ton rated capacity or other type of commercial
vehicular equipment shall be parked or stored on a lot in this district
except when located in a garage or enclosed structure. This provision shall
not apply to a bona fide agricultural use.



   (B)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed.



   (C)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking space rules shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in
§ 159.065.



   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



(1999 Code, § 165.06)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2352, passed
7-24-2007; Ord. 2544, passed 10-25-2016)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.017  R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the
R-2 Two-Family Residential District.



   (A)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   A two-family dwelling;



      (2)   Any use permitted in the R-1A One-Family Residential
District;



      (3)   Single-family residential attached.  A single-family
residential use in which one dwelling unit is located on a single lot and is
attached by a common vertical wall to only one other adjacent dwelling unit
on another single lot. Proposals for single-family attached dwellings must
meet the following requirements:



         (a)   Dimensional requirements.



 

Minimum lot area
 

3,000 square feet



Minimum lot area per unit
 

3,000 square feet



Minimum lot width
 

40 feet



Minimum front yard
 

25 feet



Minimum rear yard
 

25 feet



Minimum side yard
 

5 feet on the side opposite the zero lot line



Maximum number of stories
 

2-1/2




 



         (b)   Each dwelling unit shall be provided separate
building access, shall face a public street, and shall have separate utility
service from the street or rear lot line; and



         (c)   Submission requirements.



            1.   Site development plan that is in compliance
with § 159.052(D)(2); and



            2.   Covenants and other documents to ensure the
peculiar needs of attached housing are addressed.



      (4)   Trucks and commercial vehicles/equipment. No truck used
for commercial purposes of one ton rated capacity or other type of commercial
vehicular equipment shall be parked or stored on a lot in this district
except when located in a garage or enclosed structure. This provision shall
not apply to a bona fide agricultural use.



   (B)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed.



   (C)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in
§ 159.065.



   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



(1999 Code, § 165.07)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2296, passed
6-28-2005; Ord. 2352, passed 7-24-2007)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.018  R-4 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, when referred to this section, are the regulations in the R-4
Residential District.



   (A)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Multiple-family dwelling;



      (2)   Any use permitted in the R-2 Two-Family District, which
complies with the minimum requirements;



      (3)   Rooming house and boarding house;



      (4)   Bed and breakfast inn and bed and breakfast home;



      (5)   Religious, educational, charitable institution of a
philanthropic nature, but not a penal or mental institution;



      (6)   Private club, fraternity, sorority or lodge, except one
whose chief activity is a service customarily carried on as a business;



      (7)   Accessory building or use customarily incidental to any
of the above uses, including a storage garage on a lot occupied by a
multiple-dwelling, rooming or boarding house, or other allowable uses;



      (8)   Child day care, adult day care, nursery school and
preschool facilities operated by an Internal Revenue Service designated
501(c)3; and



      (9)   Trucks and commercial vehicles/equipment. No truck used
for commercial purposes of one ton rated capacity or other type of commercial
vehicular equipment shall be parked or stored on a lot in this district
except when located in a garage or enclosed structure. This provision shall
not apply to a bona fide agricultural use.



   (B)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed.



   (C)   Parking requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements for specific uses set forth in
§ 159.065.



   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



(1999 Code, § 165.09)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2319, passed
3-14-2006; Ord. 2352, passed 7-24-2007)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.019  R-5 CONDOMINIUM RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.



   Any building or premises must qualify under Horizontal Property Act,
Iowa Code, Chapter 499B. The regulations set forth in this section or set
forth elsewhere in this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the
regulations in the R-5 Condominium Residential District.



   (A)   Use regulations. Any building or premises shall be used only
for the following purposes:



      (1)   Condominiums; and



      (2)   All uses under the R-1A, R-1B and R-1C One-Family
Residential District, which comply with the minimum lot size.



   (B)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed.



   (C)   Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in § 159.065.



   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



(1999 Code, § 165.10)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001)  Penalty, see §
159.999



§ 159.020  MH MANUFACTURED HOME DISTRICT.



   The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the MH
Manufactured Home District.



   (A)   Use regulations.



      (1)   Generally.  In the MH District, a building or premises
shall be used only for the following purposes.



      (2)   Specifically.  Manufactured home, park manager’s
office and residence, community center and recreation facility, laundry,
maintenance building and commercial uses intended exclusively for the service
and convenience of the residents of the park.



   (B)   Height and area requirements.



      (1)   Height.  Same as the R-4 District.



      (2)   Area.  Maximum density of seven manufactured home
spaces per acre.



      (3)   Setbacks.  Each manufactured home space shall have
15-foot front and rear yards and ten-foot side yards.



      (4)   Accessory uses.  Accessory uses and buildings including
private garages and storage sheds.



   (C)   Parking requirements. Each manufactured home space shall
provide two off-street parking areas. All nonresidential buildings shall
provide one space for each 150 square feet of floor area.



   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to § 159.048(S).



   (E)   Other. All buildings and manufactured homes shall be served
with community or municipal water and sewage disposal systems approved by the
County Health Department. All manufactured home spaces shall abut a hard
surfaced roadway. All manufactured homes shall be skirted and anchored.



(Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.021  PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   (A)   Generally.



      (1)   In order to permit greater development flexibility than
is allowed under traditional zoning and to encourage redevelopment within the
urban core, the PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay District is hereby
established. The intent of this overlay zoning district is to apply it to a
comprehensive development and/or redevelopment plan and not apply it on a
parcel-by-parcel basis.



      (2)   The intended application of this designation is when one
or both of the following situations exist:



         (a)   Includes land which, because of environmental or
topographical issues, shape problems or other practical difficulties,
otherwise could not be feasibly developed; and/or



         (b)   Incorporates multiple land uses within a common
area of land. A district shall be laid out and developed as a unit and shall
not be approved simply to attain variations in development standards that
could have been achieved through the variance process. The open space
provision of the PUD Overlay District is intended to create additional
bicycle/pedestrian trials and park spaces to serve nearby residents and
further ensure the park goals of the city’s development plan, as amended,
are attained. The open space requirement is not intended to facilitate the
acquisition or construction of additional community-wide or regional parks or
athletic fields.



   (B)   Use regulations. Buildings or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Any Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay District
containing residential development permits uses allowed in C-2 General
Commercial District. Any PUD Overlay District containing industrial
development permits uses allowed in M-3 Industrial (Park) District;



      (2)   This Overlay District is intended to function as an
“overlay” to the underlying base zones, in addition to other applicable
provisions of the municipal code. The regulations and requirements imposed by
the PUD Overlay District shall be in addition to the underlying base zones,
which jointly apply. Under the joint application of the underlying base
zones, the more restrictive requirements shall apply unless otherwise
approved during the planned development process;



      (3)   (a)   Planned developments.



            1.   The owner or owners of any tract of
undeveloped land comprising an area of not less than two acres or any tract
of developed land comprising an area of not less than one acre and which
meets the following criteria:



               a.   Includes land which, because of
environmental or topographical issues, shape problems or other practical
difficulties, otherwise could not be feasibly developed; or



               b.   Incorporates multiple land uses within
a common area of land, may submit a plan for the use and development of all
or part of the tract for the purposes of and meeting the requirements set
forth in this section.



            2.   The plan shall be referred to city staff for
review with a subsequent report and recommendation for approval/denial being
given to the City Plan Commission for study, report and public hearing. If no
report is transmitted from the City Plan Commission to City Council within 60
days of notification, the City Council may take action without further
awaiting of the report. If the Commission approves the plans, they shall then
be submitted to the City Council for its consideration and action. The
Commission’s approval and recommendations shall be accompanied by a report
stating the reasons for approval and that the application meets the
requirements of the Planned Unit Development Overlay District, as set forth
in this section. In order that the purpose of this district may be realized,
the land and buildings and appurtenant facilities shall be in single
ownership or under the management or supervision of a central authority or
otherwise subject to the supervisory lease or ownership control until the
project is fully developed. In the event the planned unit development is not
constructed within 24 months, unless otherwise negotiated during the planned
development process, the city shall consider reverting the subject area to
the same zoning classification which existed prior to the change to the
Planned Unit Development Overlay Zone and the district regulations in force
prior to the establishment of the planned unit development shall thereupon be
in full force.



         (b)   Planned unit development projects shall be
designated as a whole, unified single project in compliance with the
following requirements and, if built in stages, each stage shall conform to
the approved plan.



   (C)   Site plan requirements. In addition to the requirements of
division (A) above, the owner or developer must submit a site plan in
accordance with § 159.052(D)(1).



   (D)   Open space requirements. Planned unit development projects
which include any residential units must dedicate land for public open space,
pay a fee in lieu of land for public open space or a combination thereof. The
in-lieu fee shall be equal to the fair market value of the land that
otherwise would have been required for dedication. The fair market value of
the undeveloped land shall be determined by a qualified real estate appraiser
who is acceptable to both the city and the subdivider or developer. The city
and subdivider or developer will equally share the appraisal costs. The
amount of land dedicated shall be determined by the following formula with a
minimum size of 0.50 acres required for dedication:



 

A x 0.94DU x PDU x 2.0/1000


where



A  =   Acres of property




DU =   Maximum dwelling units per acre (43,560 divided by the minimum lot
area requirement for the highest density residential use allowed in the
subject base zone)




0.94 =   This percentage figure reflects the average development density
occurring in Clinton




PDU =   Persons per dwelling unit based on the most recent census




2.0/1000 =   The city’s development plan goal of acres of mini-park
space per 1,000 population




 



      (1)   The dedication of land shall be reviewed as part of the
preliminary subdivision plat or preliminary site development plan, whichever
is applicable. The subdivider or developer shall designate the area or areas
of land to be dedicated pursuant to this subchapter on the preliminary
subdivision plat or preliminary site development plan.



      (2)   The city and owner/developer will decide during the
planned development process whether the dedicated land will be privately- or
publicly-owned.



      (3)   If a payment in lieu of open space is requested, the
subdivider or developer must include a request in a letter submitted with the
application for a preliminary subdivision or preliminary site development
plan, whichever is applicable.



      (4)   The payment of fees in lieu of open space land
dedication shall be reviewed and approved as part of the preliminary
subdivision plat or preliminary site development plan, whichever is
applicable.



      (5)   In-lieu fees must be paid in full in a single total
payment by the owner/developer prior to the issuance of the first building
permit for a lot within the planned unit development.



      (6)   All payments in lieu of dedication shall be deposited in
a special neighborhood open space account designated by the name of the
contributing development. The city will use all payments in lieu of open
space to acquire or upgrade/improve existing open spaces, parks, recreation
facilities and greenways/trails that are located within 0.50-mile of the
perimeter of the planned unit development to benefit the residents of the
planned unit development.



      (7)   The city is required to use the payment in lieu of
dedication within five years from the date received. All funds not spent
within the time frame will be forfeited by the city and returned to the
owner/developer within 30 days of the end of the five-year period.



      (8)   All dedicated open space shall be a contiguous parcel of
land unless the city determines that two or more parcels would better serve
the public interest. If the city determines that two or more parcels are
necessary to best serve public interest, the city may require the parcels to
be connected by a strip of land to provide access between the parcels.



      (9)   Land dedicated for open space includes neighborhood
parks and pedestrian/bicycle trials. Efforts should be made to connect any
trail to existing trail systems in order to promote neighborhood connectivity.



      (10)   Public access to pedestrian/bicycle trails and parks
shall be maintained by adjoining public street frontage or providing a
dedicated public access easement at least 50 feet in width which connects the
dedicated land to a public street or right-of-way.



      (11)   Lands set aside for open space dedication cannot exceed
15% in grade or be located in wetlands subject to federal or state regulatory
jurisdiction, floodways, lakes or other bodies of water or other any areas
the city deems unsuitable for neighborhood open space due to topography,
flooding or other appropriate considerations.



   (E)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
as set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed, unless otherwise
approved during the planned development process.



   (F)   Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
specific uses set forth in §§ 159.065 and 159.066.



   (G)   Screening requirements. In the absence of a natural barrier,
the City Plan Commission may recommend a form of screening to mitigate the
impacts of an incompatible development on adjacent properties. If the City
Plan Commission deems screening as necessary for development, a landscaping
plan must be submitted with the request for a building permit for city staff
review. The landscaping plan must indicate the types of materials/plantings
being used for screening, along with their respective size, location and
current/estimated heights upon maturation. All screening must be five to six
feet in height and more than 50% solid year round. Suitable screening
materials may include a solid or opaque fence, berms, native evergreen shrub
species including but not limited to: Arborvitae, Boxwood, Cotoneaster,
Firethorn, Holly, Leyland Cyprus, Ligustrum or Yew, or associated landscape
materials or a combination of the above. All screening must be installed
prior to occupancy or commencement of a use, unless any plantings being used
cannot be installed at the time due to seasonal conditions. In the event the
plantings cannot be installed, the Building Official may issue a temporary
certificate of occupancy and grant a delay of installation until the seasonal
calendar dates of June 1 or November 1, whichever occurs first, and the
property owner must place in an escrow account, established with the city, an
amount which will cover 110% of the estimated costs of the plantings and
installation of the screening. Funds placed into the escrow account will be
returned to the owner/developer upon installation of the plantings.



   (H)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



   (I)   New construction/additions.  All new construction/additions
shall meet the requirements of § 159.046(O).



   (J)   Developer incentives. Developers are eligible to receive
incentives, as negotiated during the planned development process, in exchange
for landscaping and/or additional open space beyond the required amounts as
described in § 159.065. Examples of developer incentives include having a
portion or all of the fees from the Community Development Department exempted
and/or receiving expedited review and permit processing from the Community
Development. Developers can also earn incentives based on the quality of
materials used for construction. To improve the aesthetic quality of
development, the use of high-quality, permanent building materials is
encouraged. Examples of high-quality materials include but are not limited to
brick, stone, manmade stone and the like. Potential incentives will be
discussed during the planned development process.



(Ord. 2392, passed 11-11-2008)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.022  C-1 LOCAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the
C-1 Local Commercial District.



   (A)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the R-5 Condominium Residential
District;



      (2)   Day care facility;



      (3)   Office use, provided that no use permitted in this
division shall employ more than five persons in a single shift on the
premises. This does not include employees whose principal duties are off the
premises or temporary, seasonal employees;



      (4)   Retail sales and service, provided that no use permitted
in this division shall employ more than five persons in a single shift on the
premises. This does not include employees whose principal duties are off the
premises or temporary, seasonal employees. Dressmaking, tailoring, shoe
repair, repair of household appliances and bicycles, dry cleaning and
pressing, catering and bakery products on the premises and other uses of a
similar character, provided that no use permitted in this division shall
employ more than five persons in a single shift on the premises. This does
not include employees whose principal duties are off the premises or
temporary, seasonal employees;



      (5)   Automotive service station and automobile convenience
store. No major repairs or sales of vehicles will be permitted on the
premises;



      (6)   Restaurants, including outdoor eating areas and taverns,
excluding uses offering adult entertainment;



      (7)   Business and technical schools;



      (8)   Florist shop or greenhouse;



      (9)   Funeral home; and



      (10)   Accessory building or uses customarily incidental to
any of the above uses.



   (B)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed.



   (C)   Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
specific uses set forth in § 159.065.



   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



   (E)   New construction/additions.  All new construction/additions
shall meet the requirements of § 159.046(O).



(1999 Code, § 165.11)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2256, passed
6-25-2002)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.023  C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the
C-2 General Commercial District. If all or part of a C-2 General Commercial
District has been designated a Special Purpose Overlay District, use, height
and area, parking, loading and sign regulations can be found in § 159.027(B).



   (A)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Any non-residential use permitted in the C-1 Local
Commercial District;



      (2)   Any use permitted in an R-4 Residential District not
including the R-1A Single- Family Residential District;



      (3)   Condominiums of two or more units per building;



      (4)   Motor vehicle sales and service;



      (5)   Office use, retail sales and service, entertainment,
restaurant and recreation trade. Adult entertainment excluded;



      (6)   Short-term lodging;



      (7)   Short-term automobile parking lot and parking ramp, but
not including motor vehicle storage lots;



      (8)   Motor vehicle services and repairs provided all repairs
are conducted within a completely enclosed building. All outdoor storage
areas must comply with the requirements for a motor vehicle storage yard. No
more than seven vehicles awaiting repair may be stored at one time;



      (9)   Radio or television broadcasting station or studio.
Special use permit required for transmission towers, see § 159.049;



      (10)   Veterinarian animal hospital or kennel. Outdoor runs
must be at least 100 feet from a residential district;



      (11)   Microbreweries and brew pubs;



      (12)   Publishing, sales promotion, lettering work, electronic
or other technical research, electrical and/or light assembly work, office
and research use, insurance company home and branch office or other financial
institution use, any commercial enterprise employing substantially clerical
and technical personnel, coupon clearinghouse, marketing systems, service and
research, direct mail service, sales promotion handling and analysis,
publishers circular and fulfillment and inquiry card processing;



      (13)   Mini warehouse;



      (14)   Hospital and nursing home;



      (15)   Building material and product sale. Outdoor storage
allowed if suitably screened from abutting public streets; and



      (16)   Accessory building or use customarily incidental to any
of the above uses.



   (B)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed.



   (C)   Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading requirements shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
for specific uses set forth in § 159.065.



   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



   (E)   New construction/additions.  All new construction/additions
shall meet the requirements of § 159.046(O).



(1999 Code, § 165.12)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2256, passed
6-25-2002; Ord. 2352, passed 7-24-2007; Ord. 2521, passed 8-11-2015) 
Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.024  C-2M GENERAL COMMERCIAL/LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.



   The regulations in this section or set forth elsewhere in this chapter,
when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the C-2M General
Commercial/Light Manufacturing District.



   (A)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the C-2 General Commercial
District. No residential uses allowed;



      (2)   Light manufacturing uses are permitted, provided the
Council enters the following findings concerning the use:



         (a)   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the
permitted use will not be detrimental to public health, safety, morals,
comfort or general welfare;



         (b)   The permitted use will not be injurious to the use
and enjoyment of other properties in the immediate vicinity;



         (c)   The permitted use will not substantially diminish
and impair property values within the neighborhood;



         (d)   The permitted use will be compatible with and will
not impede development and/or the character of the area where it is located;



         (e)   A site and building development plan, including
plans for outdoor storage, if any, has been reviewed by the Public Works
Director and the Fire Marshal;



         (f)   The permitted use will not be in conflict with the
comprehensive plan; and



         (g)   Inspection by the Fire Marshal to comply with the
Fire Prevention Code and established use compliance by the Building and
Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee.



      (3)   Existing manufacturing uses approved prior to (amendment
adoption date) are exempted from the provisions of division (A)(2) above.



   (B)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 for the C-2 General Commercial District
shall be observed.



   (C)   Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
specific uses set forth in § 159.065.



   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



   (E)   New construction/additions.  All new construction/additions
shall meet the requirements of § 159.046(O).



(1999 Code, § 165.13)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2256, passed
6-25-2002)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.025  PWC PARKWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the regulations for the
PWC Parkway Commercial District. The PWC Parkway Commercial District shall be
designated to provide a district for local or small regional commercial or
office use. The city shall encourage the creation of unified and coordinated
development.



   (A)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Short-term lodging;



      (2)   Office use, excluding contractors and others who perform
services off site;



      (3)   Retail sales and service, excluding the sale and/or
repair of motor vehicles and machinery; and



      (4)   Entertainment, restaurant and recreation trade.



   (B)   Height and area requirements.



      (1)   Front yard.  Thirty feet.



      (2)   Side yard.  None required, except 25 feet minimum
required if adjacent to a residential district.



      (3)   Rear yard.  None required, except 25 feet minimum
required if adjacent to a residential district.



      (4)   Lot area.  No minimum.



      (5)   Lot width.  No minimum.



      (6)   Building height.  Thirty-five feet maximum.



   (C)   District area. Five acre minimum.



   (D)   Parking and loading requirements. See §§ 159.065 and 159.066.



   (E)   Performance standards.



      (1)   Outside storage of merchandise or other materials shall
not be visible from the public right-of-way.



      (2)   Parking areas shall be designed to minimize headlights
shining into residential areas.



      (3)   All uses shall be designed to be compatible with
adjacent residential areas.



      (4)   All utilities shall be placed underground.



   (F)   Architectural standards. All sides of commercial buildings
visible from the public right-of-way shall be architecturally treated to
produce an aesthetically pleasing facade. Exterior materials of commercial
quality shall include brick or other suitable clay masonry material, stone
veneer, granite, cast in place concrete panels, finished faced precast
concrete, wood (only if painted or treated, and approved by City Building
Department), ceramic tile, decorative concrete block and tinted glass.



   (G)   Parking lot landscaping. See § 159.065(B).



   (H)   Sign regulations.



      (1)   See § 159.048 for sign regulations except as modified
according to division (H)(2) below.



      (2)   Sign regulation modifications.



         (a)   No off-premise advertising signs, roof signs or
portable signs.



         (b)   Total area of all signs shall not exceed 200
square feet per building.



         (c)   One freestanding sign identifying the
shopping/office center and the names of the businesses contained therein.
Individual freestanding business signs are not allowed.



         (d)   Height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed 25
feet.



         (e)   Area of a freestanding ground sign shall not
exceed 200 feet.



   (I)   Site plan requirements. See § 159.052(D).



(Ord. 2352, passed 7-24-2007)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.026  C-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.



   The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the
C-3 Central Business District. If all or part of a C-3 Commercial District
has been designated a Special Purpose Overlay District, use, height and area,
parking, loading and sign regulations can be found in § 159.027(A).



   (A)   Use regulations.



      (1)   Generally.  A building or premises shall be used only
for the following purposes.



      (2)   Specifically.  Any use permitted in the C-2 General
Commercial District unless designated a Special Purpose Overlay District. 
See § 159.026(A) for permitted uses and other requirements for these special
districts.



   (B)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed.



   (C)   Parking and loading requirements. Off-street loading spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of § 159.066.
Provision for off-street parking is not required in the C-3 Central Business
District.



   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



   (E)   New construction/additions.  All new construction/additions
shall meet the requirements of § 159.046(O).



(1999 Code, § 165.14)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2256, passed
6-25-2002)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.027  SP SPECIAL PURPOSE COMMERCIAL AND HISTORICAL OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



   Special purpose districts are intended to further the goal of creating
a new vision for the city  including the planning and management of growth,
protect significant features of the community and to allow for economic
expansion. The overlay district may encompass one or more underlying zoning
district (base zone) and may require additional requirements above that
required by the underlying zoning district (base zone). Where the standards
or requirements of the overlay and base zones are different, the more
restrictive requirements shall apply.



   (A)   CBD Overlay Zone.  The CBD Overlay Zone will be used to
manage the future growth and redevelopment of downtown Clinton.



      (1)   Zone designation; CBD Overlay Zone. The Overlay Zone for
the downtown area will be separated into two subzones, each with specific
design standards and uses. The CBD Overlay Zone includes the area known as
the downtown Clinton area and the area bounded by South First Street on the
east; South Fourth Street on the west; Second Avenue South on the north and
Eleventh Avenue South on the south. The CBD Overlay Zone shall be designated
on the official zoning map.



      (2)   Applicability. The requirements of this division shall
apply to all building construction/ reconstruction, renovation and use of
land within the CBD Overlay Zone.



      (3)   Design standards. All projects in the CBD Overlay Zone
shall comply with the downtown Clinton design and use standards plan if and
when a plan is adopted. The design standards shall address the following
design characteristics:



         (a)   Signage, lighting and landscaping;



         (b)   Placement of buildings on the lot or lots;



         (c)   Limiting ingress and egress by individual uses;



         (d)   Parking standards and parking lot landscaping; and



         (e)   Building design and facades.



      (4)   Use regulations.



         (a)   CBD Core Zone.  A building or premises shall be
used only for the following purposes:



            1.   Appliance sales or service;



            2.   Art gallery, museum, or library;



            3.   Artist studio;



            4.   Auditorium or assembly hall;



            5.   Bakery (wholesale/commercial);



            6.   Banks, savings and loan, or credit union;



            7.   Bar or tavern;



            8.   Barber or beauty shop;



            9.   Brewpubs and microbreweries;



            10.   Business services;



            11.   Convention center;



            12.   Dental or medical lab;



            13.   Furniture or home furnishing sales;



            14.   Furniture upholstery or repair;



            15.   General office;



            16.   Grocery store;



            17.   Health club;



            18.   Hotel;



            19.   Housing for the elderly or persons with
disabilities;



            20.   Indoor recreation;



            21.   Laundry or dry cleaner;



            22.   Medical office or clinic;



            23.   Mortuary or funeral home;



            24.   Parking structure;



            25.   Photographic studio;



            26.   Printing or publishing;



            27.   Private club;



            28.   Public or private park or similar natural
recreation area;



            29.   Public, private or parochial school approved
by the state of Iowa (K-12);



            30.   Retail sales or service;



            31.   Residential uses.



               A.   There shall be no residential dwelling
on the ground floor in which the residential dwelling is fronting either side
of the portions of the public streets within the Central Business District
(CBD) Core and Central Business District Fringe Overlay Zone, where:



                  i.   A minimum of 75% of the linear
footage of the front of the building width must be reserved and utilized for
commercial usage.



                  ii.   No more than 25% of the linear
footage of the front of the building width may be used for residential
accessory uses, such as lobbies, hallways, or other common areas.



               B.   At least 40% or 3,500 square feet -
whichever is larger - of the total ground floor square footage shall be
reserved to be utilized as a commercial space, and that space shall be
fronting any public street along the property and include the original
storefronts of the building.



            32.   Restaurants;



            33.   School of private instruction;



            34.   Shoe repair;



            35.   Sports arena;



            36.   Tailor or alteration shop; and



            37.   Tattoo parlor.



         (b)   CBD Fringe Zone.  A building or premises shall be
used only for the following purposes:



            1.   Appliance sales or service;



            2.   Art gallery, museum, or library;



            3.   Artist studio;



            4.   Auditorium or assembly hall;



            5.   Bakery (wholesale/commercial);



            6.   Banks, savings and loan, or credit union;



            7.   Bar or tavern;



            8.   Barber or beauty shop;



            9.   Brewpubs and microbreweries;



            10.   Business services;



            11.   Carry out restaurant (not including
drive-in);



            12.   Convention center;



            13.   Dental or medical lab;



            14.   Entertainment;



            15.   Furniture or home furnishing sales;



            16.   Furniture upholstery or repair;



            17.   General office;



            18.   Grocery store;



            19.   Health club;



            20.   Hotel;



            21.   Housing for the elderly or persons with
disabilities;



            22.   Indoor recreation;



            23.   Laundry or dry cleaner;



            24.   Medical office or clinic;



            25.   Mortuary or funeral home;



            26.   Parking structure;



            27.   Photographic studio;



            28.   Place of religious exercise or assembly;



            29.   Printing or publishing;



            30.   Private club;



            31.   Public or private park or similar natural
recreation area;



            32.   Public, private or parochial school approved
by the state of Iowa (K-12);



            33.   Recreation trade;



            34.   Residential uses above first floor;



            35.   Restaurants;



            36.   Retail sales and service;



            37.   School of private instruction;



            38.   Shoe repair;



            39.   Short-term lodging; average length of stay
is less than 60 days;



            40.   Sports arena;



            41.   Tailor or alteration shop; and



            42.   Tattoo parlor.



      (5)   Height and area requirements.  The height and area
requirements set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed.



      (6)   Parking and loading.  Off-street loading spaces shall
be provided in accordance with the requirements of § 159.066. Provisions for
off-street parking is not required in the CBD Overlay Zone.



      (7)   Signs.



         (a)   CBD Core Overlay Zone.  Signs are permitted
according to the provisions of § 159.048 and the Signage Guidelines and
Regulations for Downtown Clinton. The following requirements shall be
observed:



            1.   Off-premises signs are prohibited;



            2.   One freestanding ground sign for each
developed parcel having a frontage on a public right-of-way, not to exceed 50
square feet. Height shall not exceed 15 feet;



            3.   Wall or facia signs for each occupancy, not
to exceed a total copy area of two square feet for each linear foot of
building occupancy, not to exceed 150 square feet. Signs shall not exceed 10%
of the wall area, and in no case shall the signs exceed 10% of the first 15
vertical feet of wall area;



            4.   One projecting sign is permitted per
occupancy, not to exceed 40 square feet per face. Signs shall not project
move than one-half the distance from the building to the curb; and



            5.   One roof sign is allowed on buildings
containing three or more stories. Sign may not project more than 16 feet
above the roofline. Total copy area may not exceed 100 square feet.



         (b)   CBD Fringe Zone.  Signs are permitted according
to the provisions of § 159.048.



   (B)   LSO Liberty Square Overlay Zone.  The “LSO” Liberty
Square Overlay Zone is intended to promote a consistent and comprehensive
development/redevelopment of the Liberty Square area.



      (1)   Zone designation.  The LSO Liberty Square Overlay
District shall be designated on the official zoning map by ordinance. The
Liberty Square Overlay Zone includes the areas between Camanche Avenue and
Liberty Avenue extending from 25th Place to South 4th Street and all
properties with street frontage along the north side of Camanche Avenue
within the same corridor. Designation of the overlay zone is by separate
ordinance.



      (2)   Applicability.  The requirements of this division (B)
shall apply to all building construction/reconstruction, renovation and use
of land within the LSO. Where the requirements of the LSO and underlying base
zone are different, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. The
following are exempt from the requirements of this division (B):



         (a)   One-family dwellings.



         (b)   Existing structures at the time of the adoption of
the LSO. Any renovation or addition exceeding 50% of the total assessed value
of the structure requires the entire structure to come into compliance with
the provisions of this division (B).



         (c)   This division (B) shall not prevent the routine
maintenance of any exterior elements of any building, structure or sign
described in this division (B). Routine maintenance includes work done to
prevent deterioration or to replace parts of a building, structure or sign
with equivalent materials in order to correct any deterioration, decay of or
damage to any such building, structure or sign.



      (3)   Design standards. The design standards provide a clear
set of architectural and site design criteria that will be used by land
developers to create sustainable, high quality development for Liberty Square
properties. The intent of development in the Liberty Square district is to
create a “streetscape” and an environment for “street life.” The
proximity of the buildings to the public street, coupled with the development
of public and private activity spaces (e.g., entrance courts, patios and
outdoor display areas), will promote street character and human activity.
Developers are required to meet the minimum parameters established by the
design standards and are further encouraged to assist the city in maintaining
high quality standards and exemplary development in the Liberty Square
District.



         (a)   Design features.



            1.   Architectural features and building facades
(faces) of new buildings will be constructed of permanent building materials
(brick, stone, manmade stone and concrete) and clear glass.



            2.   Parapet walls will be used to conceal flat
roofs and/or roof mounted mechanical and electrical equipment from street
level view. Both flat roofed buildings and gabled roofed buildings will have
parapet features at building entrances and other architectural focal areas.
The parapets will be accentuated with peaks and other architectural features.



            3.   Buildings will be one, two or three stories.



            4.   Architectural variety and interest can be
achieved by varying the heights of adjacent building facades. Lengthy
building facades will be broken into bays (sections/divisions) or
vertical/horizontal architectural treatments to suggest bays
(sections/divisions) can be added.



            5.   Solid waste containers shall be placed on a
concrete pad in the rear yard and screened from all public right-of-ways.
Screening shall provide a solid visual barrier and shall not exceed the
height requirements for fences. Screening shall be constructed of materials
that are the same or similar to the primary structure.



            6.   All outdoor storage areas will be screened
from all public right-of-ways. Screening shall provide a solid visual barrier
and shall not exceed the height requirements for fences.



            7.   The architectural facades of accessory
buildings will be constructed of permanent building materials and building
design should be an extension of the architecture of the primary building
served.



            8.   Synthetic plastic veneer, metal siding and
vinyl siding are not permitted in the Liberty Square District.



         (b)   Site development.



            1.   Building orientation and access:



               a.   Liberty Square District buildings will
be located along Camanche Avenue and/or Liberty Square side streets.



               b.   At least 75% of building facades will
be located along the building setback line (15 feet).



               c.   Each building will be designed for
pedestrian access from both the public street face and the building face
opposite the public street face. The facades of buildings parallel with
Camanche Avenue, or the Liberty Square street side, should have a public
front that orients to street visibility and a public entrance on the street
side of the building.



               d.   The majority of parking for buildings
should be opposite the public street façade of the building. A minimal
amount (20%) of parking may be placed between the buildings; however, parking
should not front or abut the public right-of-ways.



            2.   Building setbacks:  Building setbacks along
public streets may not be less than 15 feet nor greater than 20 feet.



            3.   Site open space:



               a.   Each development site will maintain a
minimum 20% open space.



               b.   Open space will be landscaped “green
space.”



               c.   Open space may contain pedestrian
improvements (e.g. walks, site furniture, lights, and the like); however, the
majority of open space must be unencumbered “green space.”



               d.   Building foundation-planting areas less
than six feet wide and parking lot islands do not qualify as site open space.



      (4)   Use regulations.  Permitted uses listed in this
division (B) shall be used instead of the permitted uses listed in the base
“C-2" and “M-1" Zoning Districts. Regardless of specific uses, all
operations within the subject district must be restricted to enclosed
buildings and all outdoor storage is prohibited, unless otherwise specified.



         (a)   Permitted uses, land with a base zoning of C-2.



            1.   C-1 permitted use - florist shop.



            2.   C-1 permitted use - restaurant.



            3.   C-2 permitted use - office use.



            4.   C-2 permitted use - retail sales and service.



            5.   C-2 permitted use - entertainment.



            6.   Accessory buildings or uses customarily
incidental to any of the above uses.



         (b)   Permitted uses, land with a base zoning of M-1.



            1.   M-1 permitted use - wholesale trade.



            2.   M-1 permitted use - industrial services.



            3.   M-1 permitted use - warehousing and freight
handling.



            4.   Accessory buildings or uses customarily
incidental to any of the above uses.



         (c)   Restrictions.  No fast food restaurants with
drive through windows.



      (5)   Height and area requirements.



         (a)   Yard requirements:



            1.   Front:  15 feet minimum/20 feet maximum.



            2.   Side:  five feet.



            3.   Rear:  15 feet minimum.



         (b)   Minimum lot width:  100 feet.



         (c)   Minimum lot area:  one-half acre.



         (d)   Maximum building height:  45 feet.



         (e)   Maximum building stories:  Three.



      (6)   Parking and loading requirements.  The vitality of the
area will depend upon the accessibility, availability and distribution of
parking.



         (a)   At any time any building or structure is erected
or structurally altered, off-street parking and loading spaces shall be
provided in accordance with §§ 159.065 and 159.066 except as modified
herein.



            1.   Off-street parking areas will provide 75% of
use requirement and no more than 115% of the use requirement.



            2.   All parking areas will be constructed with an
asphalt or concrete surface. Flexible pavement design must be a minimum
three-inch on a six-inch crushed rock base. Rigid pavement design must be six
inches of concrete on stabilized subgrade.



         (b)   All parking areas will be accessible from either
Camanche Avenue or Liberty Avenue and one Liberty Square side street.



         (c)   Shared parking arrangements will help to improve
parking efficiency. To accomplish shared parking, agreements between area
businesses and the city will be essential. Evening and daytime businesses and
businesses with varying peak use periods can agree to share parking spaces.
The net effect will be less surface parking and more efficient and cost
effective utilization of area real estate.



         (d)   All surface-parking areas should contain 10%
landscaped open space. To be recognized as parking open space, parking lot
islands must be at least nine feet wide. Perimeter parking lot islands may be
included in the required open space.



         (e)   The minimum parking setback along public streets
is ten feet. Parked vehicles may not overhang the parking setback.



         (f)   Parking areas will be screened from view.
Screening may be accomplished with plantings, masonry walls or a combination
of walls and plantings. Cinder block walls and chain link fences with slats
shall not constitute acceptable screening materials.



      (7)   Signs.



         (a)   Permitted signs.



            1.   Temporary signs in conformance with §
159.048(R)(3)(a) through (d).



            2.   Monument signs. One monument sign for each
developed parcel having frontage on a public right-of-way. A developed parcel
having multiple public right-of-way frontages will be permitted a maximum of
two monument signs, each to be located along a different street frontage with
a minimum separation distance of 100 feet. The permitted sign area shall not
exceed 25 square feet per sign. Where two or more uses are located on the
same developed parcel, the sign(s) must be shared. The sign(s) shall be
oriented perpendicular to the adjacent public right-of-way and installed in a
landscaped area of not less than 12 square feet which will count towards site
open space requirements. The sign(s) shall be constructed of permanent
building materials consistent with the architecture of the primary building
served.



            3.   Wall signs in conformance with §
159.048(T)(3)(c). Wall signs must be of the individual channel-letter type.



            4.   Projecting signs in conformance with §
159.048(T)(3)(e).



            5.   Directional signs in conformance with §
159.048(T)(3)(g).



            6.   Awning, canopy or marquee sign in conformance
with § 159.048(T)(3)(h).



         (b)   Temporary use signs.  Permits required.



            1.   All temporary signs in conformance with §
159.048(R)(3)(a) through (d).



            2.   Special event signs in conformance with §
159.048(V).



            3.   Wall sign in conformance with §
159.048(T)(3)(c).



         (c)   Height and setback requirements.



            1.   Minimum/maximum height.



               a.   Temporary signs:  12 feet/15 feet.



               b.   Monument signs:  none/six feet.



               c.   Wall signs:  12 feet/15 feet.



               d.   Projecting signs:  15 feet/20 feet.



               e.   Directional signs:  none/four feet.



               f.   Awning, canopy or marquee signs:  12
feet/15 feet.



            2.   Setback from public right-of-way.



               a.   Temporary signs:  ten feet.



               b.   Monument signs:  ten feet.



               c.   Projecting signs:  five feet.



               d.   Directional signs:  ten feet.



               e.   Awning, canopy or marquee signs:  five
feet.



         (d)   Prohibited signs.



            1.   Roof signs.



            2.   Portable signs.



            3.   Pole mounted ground signs, except for
directional signs.



            4.   Off-premises signs.



            5.   Electronic changeable copy signs, other than
signs which exclusively display the current time and temperature.



            6.   Electronic changeable graphic signs.



            7.   Painted wall signs.



         (e)   Lighting.



            1.   Monument signs.  Monument signs shall be
externally lit. External lighting shall be white and designed and shielded so
that it illuminates the face of the sign and does not shine beyond the edge
of the sign.



            2.   Wall signs.  Wall signs must include one of
the following methods of illumination:  back lit, halo-lit illumination or
reverse channel letters with halo illumination.



      (8)   Landscaping.



         (a)   A variety of plants (shade trees, ornamental
flowering trees, evergreen trees, deciduous and evergreen shrubs,
groundcovers, perennial and annual flowers and grasses) will be used to
augment site open spaces. Varying species of plants are encouraged to
minimize disease risks and encourage environmental diversity. Each species of
plant used will be adapted to the site microenvironment. All trees shall be
selected from the city’s Master Tree list.



         (b)   Plants will be used to provide traditional
environmental comforts (e.g., shade, temperature and wind buffering, and the
like) and they will also be used to supplement site aesthetics.



         (c)   Plants will be used to define public areas, direct
pedestrian movement and link private and public spaces.



         (d)   The size and quantity of plants used will be ample
to perform functional requirements (e.g., screening) and to create a
landscape setting for the site.



         (e)   Minimum plant sizes and root conditions:



            1.   Deciduous shade trees:  two and one-half
inch caliper; balled and burlapped root condition.



            2.   Evergreen trees:  six feet height; balled
and burlapped root condition.



            3.   Deciduous shrubs:  24 inch spread or three
feet height; container grown stock.



            4.   Evergreen shrubs:  15 inch spread or two and
one-half feet height; container grown stock.



            5.   Groundcovers and other perennial plants: 
Container class, #SP5; container grown stock.



         (f)   All landscape plants will meet the requirements of
the current American Standard for Nursery Stock published by the American
Nursery and Landscape Association.



         (g)   Upon installation of required landscape materials,
each owner shall take appropriate actions to maintain the health of the plant
materials in order to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance and to
assure that the buffer actually serves the purpose for which it is intended.
Required landscaping that does not remain healthy shall be replaced
consistent with this division (B) and the approved landscaping plan for the
project.



      (9)   Site plan required.



         (a)   All new development and existing facility
renovations or additions exceeding 50% of the total assessed value of the
structure are required to submit eight 22-inch by 34-inch and sixteen 11-
inch by 17-inch site plans. The site plan must indicate the following
information:



            1.   Title block with sheet number, title name,
address, telephone and fax number of the firm or individual who prepared the
plans and date(s) of submission.



            2.   Revision block with date(s) of any
revision(s) and a summary of the revision(s).



            3.   Legal description, address, and parcel
identification number of property.



            4.   Name and address of the property owner(s).



            5.   Name and address of the developer(s) (if
different).



            6.   Seal and expiration date, signature,
registration number and address of the professional engineer, surveyor,
architect, landscape architect or other design professional licensed in the
State of Iowa who assisted in the development of the site plan.



            7.   Title, engineer’s scale (not to exceed one
inch equaling 20 feet), legend, north arrow and date listed on each sheet.



            8.   Stamped survey from a licensed surveyor in
the State of Iowa.



            9.   Survey information including distances with
angles or bearing.



            10.   All notes from previous plans and plats.



            11.   Location map with a 1,000 foot minimum
radius of site to surrounding area.



            12.   Existing and finished grade elevations using
two-foot contours.



            13.   Drainage flow arrows.



            14.   Existing zoning classification(s).



            15.   Lot dimensions.



            16.   Total lot area in square feet and acres.



            17.   Building setback lines.



            18.   Location and dimensions of proposed and
existing streets, curbs, sidewalks, easements and right-of-ways.



            19.   Location, dimensions and area (in square
feet) of all present and proposed structures.



            20.   Architectural renderings of all sides of
each structure, including accessory buildings.



            21.   Proposed use of structure including the
estimated number of employees.



            22.   Location of all parking lots including
driveways, direction of vehicular traffic flow, maneuvering widths, number of
parking spaces and loading spaces required and typical parking space
dimensions. Reference § 159.065 of the Zoning Regulations when determining
the required number of parking spaces.



            23.   Location of all loading bays and docks.



            24.   Location, type and height of proposed and
existing fencing.



            25.   Location of nearest existing and/or proposed
fire hydrant(s).



            26.   Location of all solid waste containers.



            27.   Location of exterior lighting.



            28.   Location of all utilities including water
and sewer lines/connections.



            29.   Location, size and height of all proposed
signage.



            30.   Stormwater detention/erosion control plan.



            31.   Landscaping plan including the percentage of
open space (in square feet).



            32.   Other data may be required if deemed
necessary by city staff to determine compliance with the provisions of the
Zoning Regulations.



      (10)   Variance.  Variances from the requirements under this
division (B) shall be heard by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance
with § 159.080.



   (C)   HOD Historic Overlay District.  The HOD Historic Overlay
District is intended to recognize the establishment of the city’s historic
districts (§§ 32.115 through 32.122 of the code of ordinances) and to
promote the public interest in having the full and informed participation of
the city’s Historic Preservation Commission in the hearing of building
permit applications potentially affecting the city’s historic resources.



      (1)   Zone designation.  The HOD Historic Overlay District
shall be designated on the official zoning map by ordinance. Designation of
the overlay zone is by separate ordinance.



      (2)   Notice.  Within ten days of the receipt of any
application for a building permit or Zoning Board of Adjustment appeal by the
Planning/ Community Development Department respecting property located within
a HOD Historic Overlay District, the Chairperson of the Historic Preservation
Commission shall be notified of the application. The application shall be
considered by the Historic Preservation Commission as specified in §§
32.115 through 32.122.



      (3)   Certificate of appropriateness.  Unless exempted from
the provisions of §§ 32.115 through 32.122, no building permit can be
issued or appeal heard by the Zoning Board of Adjustment until a certificate
of appropriateness is issued by the Historic Preservation Commission.



      (4)   Applicability to underlying district regulations.  The
regulations of this section and §§ 32.115 through 32.122 shall also apply
in addition to all the requirements and regulations of the underlying zoning
district. In the event of conflict between the historic preservation
regulations and the underlying zoning district regulations, the historic
preservation regulations shall control.



   (D)   Main Avenue Overlay Zone. The Main Avenue Overlay Zone is
intended to protect and promote the area as a neighborhood commercial
shopping area.



      (1)   Zone designation.  The Main Avenue Overlay Zone shall
be designated on the official zoning map by ordinance. The Overlay Zone
includes those properties near or abutting the Main Avenue Corridor from
North Third Street to McKinley Street.



      (2)   Applicability. The requirements of this section shall
apply to all building construction/reconstruction, renovation, and use of
land within the Main Avenue Overlay Zone.



      (3)   Use regulations.



         (a)   Generally.  Permitted uses in the Main Avenue
Overlay District shall be those listed in § 159.023, C-2 General Commercial
District with the following exception.



         (b)   Exception.  Residential uses are only permitted
above the first floor.



      (4)   Height and area requirements. The height and area
requirements for § 159.023 shall be observed.



      (5)   Parking and loading.  Parking and loading requirements
for § 159.023 shall be observed.



      (6)   Signs.  Sign regulations for § 159.023 shall be
observed except that off premise signs are prohibited.



(Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2309, passed 12-6-2005; Ord. 2352, passed
7-24-2007; Ord. 2439, passed 2-22-2011; Ord. 2459, passed 8-23-2011; Ord.
2518, passed 3-10-2015; Ord. 2585, passed 7-10-2018)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.028  C-4 PLANNED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.



   In order to provide for modern retail shopping facilities of integrated
designs in appropriate locations to serve residential neighborhoods, the C-4
Planned Commercial District is hereby established. The district shall be laid
out and developed as a unit.



   (A)   Use regulations. Buildings or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Uses allowed in C-2 General Commercial District; and



      (2)   (a)   Planned developments. The owner or owners of
any tract of land comprising an area of not less than five acres may submit
to the City Council a plan for the use and development of all or part of the
tract for the purposes of and meeting the requirements set forth in this
section. The plan shall be referred to the Plan Commission for study, report
and public hearing. If no report is transmitted by the Plan Commission within
60 days of notification, the City Council may take action without further
awaiting the report. If the Commission approves the plans, they shall then be
submitted to the City Council for its consideration and action. The
Commission’s approval and recommendations shall be accompanied by a report
stating the reasons for approval and that the application meets the
requirements of the Planned Commercial District, as set forth in this
section. In order that the purpose of this district may be realized, the land
and buildings and appurtenant facilities shall be in single ownership or
under the management or supervision of a central authority or otherwise
subject to the supervisory lease or ownership control as may be necessary to
carry out the provisions of this section. In the event the shopping center is
not constructed, it shall revert to the same zoning classification which
existed prior to the change to the C-4 Planned Commercial District, or a
zoning classification the City Council deems appropriate, and the district
regulations in force prior to the establishment of the commercial district
shall thereupon be in full force and effect except when the zoning is
changed. Within the C-4 Planned Commercial District, a building or premises
may be used only for the retail sale of merchandise, services, recreation
(except outdoor theatres and similar uses), parking areas and other
facilities ordinarily accepted as shopping center uses approved by the Plan
Commission and City Council.



         (b)   The shopping center shall be designated as a
whole, unified single project in compliance with the following requirements
and, if built in stages, each stage shall conform with the approved plan.



   (B)   Site plan requirements. In addition to the requirements of
division (A) above, owner or developer must submit a site plan in accordance
with § 159.052(D)(1).



   (C)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
as set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed.



   (D)   Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
specific uses set forth in § 159.065.



   (E)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



   (F)   New construction/additions.  All new construction/additions
shall meet the requirements of § 159.046(O).



(1999 Code, § 165.15)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2256, passed
6-25-2002)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.029  C-R COMMERCIAL/RECREATION DISTRICT.



   The C-R Commercial-Recreation District is intended to regulate
development and assure compatibility of new construction and uses in and
along the city’s riverfront areas. The regulations set forth in this
section or elsewhere in this chapter, when referred to in this section, are
the regulations in the C-R Commercial-Recreation District.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of these regulations is as follows:



      (1)   To improve the general welfare by increasing public
access to riverfront areas;



      (2)   To encourage revitalization and redevelopment through
the expansion of tourist-related and river-related commercial and
recreational use;



      (3)   To compliment and support redevelopment efforts in
commercial areas adjoining the riverfront; and



      (4)   To enhance the general welfare by preserving the
principal vistas and visual relationships both from and to the river.



   (B)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Specialty commercial such as boutiques, antique shops,
candy, food or ice cream shops;



      (2)   General offices above first floor only;



      (3)   Bar/tavern, including microbrewery, brewpub and beer
garden;



      (4)   Restaurant, including outdoor eating area;



      (5)   Hotel/motel;



      (6)   Art gallery;



      (7)   Gift/souvenir shop;



      (8)   Excursion boats, train station, trolley station,
carriage stand and services for these uses;



      (9)   Museum, auditorium and assembly hall;



      (10)   Bicycle rental;



      (11)   Indoor recreation facility;



      (12)   Artist’s studio;



      (13)   Pleasure craft harbor, boat rental and associated
launch area, excluding boat sales and rental;



      (14)   Bed and breakfast;



      (15)   Tourist and/or information center;



      (16)   Publicly owned and operated park, playground, community
buildings and facilities such as baseball stadiums and fields, tennis courts,
band shells, swimming pools, skate parks, marinas, recreational vehicle (RV)
parks and community centers; and



      (17)   Accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to
any of the above uses.



   (C)   Temporary uses. The following uses are permitted as temporary
uses (seven days or less) in the C-R Commercial-Recreation District:



      (1)   Social or cultural festivals;



      (2)   Concerts, craft shows or specialty collection displays;
and



      (3)   Outdoor sales and marketing of produce, baked goods and
other homemade items.



   (D)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed.



   (E)   Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of §
159.065.



   (F)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



(1999 Code, § 165.16)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2431, passed
11-9-2010; Ord. 2599, passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.030  M-1 INDUSTRIAL (LIGHT) DISTRICT.



   The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, when referred to this section, are the regulations of the M-1
Industrial (Light) District.



   (A)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the C-2 General Commercial, except
that no new dwelling, other than that for a resident watchperson or caretaker
employed on the premises, shall be permitted. Existing residences shall not
be considered as nonconforming uses;



      (2)   A building or premise shall be used only for the
following purposes:



         (a)   Wholesale trade;



         (b)   Industrial services;



         (c)   Warehousing and freight handling;



         (d)   Motor vehicle storage yard;



         (e)   Contractor shop and storage yard;



         (f)   Metal products;



         (g)   Plastic and paper products; and



         (h)   Bulk storage of petroleum products for local
distribution radius of 50 miles.



   (B)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
as set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed.



   (C)   Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
specific uses set forth in § 159.065.



   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



(1999 Code, § 165.17)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001)  Penalty, see §
159.999



§ 159.031  M-2 INDUSTRIAL (HEAVY) DISTRICT.



   The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the
M-2 Industrial (Heavy) District.



   (A)   Use regulations. A building or premises shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Any use permitted in the M-1 Industrial (Light)
District, except that no new dwelling other than for a resident watchman or
caretaker employed on the premises, shall be permitted. Existing residences
shall not be considered to be nonconforming;



      (2)   Manufacturing and processing, excluding those identified
as special uses in § 159.032(A). Existing manufacturing uses approved prior
to (amendment adoption date) shall not be considered nonconforming uses;



      (3)   Power generating plant; and



      (4)   Railroad yard.



   (B)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 shall be observed.



   (C)   Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
specific uses set forth in § 159.065.



   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



(1999 Code, § 165.18)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001)  Penalty, see §
159.999



§ 159.032  M-3 INDUSTRIAL (PARK) DISTRICT.



   The regulations set forth in this section or set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, when referred to in this section, are the regulations in the
M-3 Industrial (Park) District.



   (A)   Use regulations.  In the M-3 Industrial (Park) District, all
buildings and premises may be used for any purpose except as follows:



      (1)   No residential uses are allowed other than a dwelling or
residential quarters for a resident watchman or caretaker employed upon the
premises;



      (2)   No adult entertainment establishment will be permitted
unless in compliance with the requirements of § 159.046(K); and



      (3)   The following special uses will be permitted in this
zoning classification if the location has been approved by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, who shall take into consideration the special use regulations
as set forth in § 159.049:



         (a)   Acid manufacture;



         (b)   Animal pound;



         (c)   Animal, poultry and bird raising (commercial);



         (d)   Asbestos products;



         (e)   Cement, lime or gypsum manufacture;



         (f)   Concrete products or central mixing and
pro-portioning plant;



         (g)   Distillation, manufacture or refining of bones,
coal or tar asphalt;



         (h)   Explosives, manufacture or storage;



         (i)   Exterminating agents and poisons;



         (j)   Fat, grease, lard or tallow rendering or refining;



         (k)   Fertilizer (nonorganic);



         (l)   Fertilizer manufacture (from organic matter);



         (m)   Fire arms manufacture;



         (n)   Flour, feed and grain milling or storage;



         (o)   Forge plant, pneumatic, drop and forging hammering;



         (p)   Glue or size manufacture;



         (q)   Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping;



         (r)   Hair and felt products washing, curling and dyeing;



         (s)   Leather tanning and curing;



         (t)   Meat packing;



         (u)   Ore dumps and elevators;



         (v)   Paint, lacquer, shellac and varnish (including
colors and pigments, thinners and removers);



         (w)   Paper manufacture from pulp;



         (x)    Petroleum products terminal;



         (y)   Petroleum or asphalt refining;



         (z)   Planing and millwork;



         (aa)   Roofing materials, building paper and felt
(including asphalt and composition);



         (bb)   Sawmill (including cooperage stock mill);



         (cc)   Shell grinding;



         (dd)    Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores;



         (ee)    Soap and soap products;



         (ff)    Storage of processing raw hides or fur;



         (gg)    Stock yards or slaughter of animals;



         (hh)    Tar products (except distillation);



         (ii)    Wall board manufacturing;



         (jj)   Wood preserving treatment;



         (kk)   Wool pulling or scouring;



         (ll)   Other uses similar to the above when approved by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided in § 159.080; and



         (mm)   Recycling processing facility.



   (B)   Height and area requirements. The height and area requirements
provided for and applicable to the M-2 Industrial (Heavy) District, shall
apply to the height and area use in the M-3 Industrial (Park) District, as
set forth in §§ 159.045 and 159.046 and shall be so observed.



   (C)   Parking and loading requirements. Off-street parking and
loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
specific uses as set forth in § 159.065, and where reference therein is made
to the M-2 Industrial (Heavy) District, the same shall apply to the M-3
Industrial (Park) District.



   (D)   Signs. Signs are permitted according to the provisions of §
159.048.



(1999 Code, § 165.19)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2352, passed
7-24-2007)  Penalty, see § 159.999



ZONING REGULATIONS



§ 159.045  HEIGHT AND AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   The height and area requirements shall apply to all districts unless a
particular district or overlay district requires special regulations. The
following general requirements shall apply.



   (A)   In residential areas, minimum lot area shown is for one
housing unit.



   (B)   All permitted uses must comply with floodplain requirements.



   (C)   Minimum dwelling unit size for efficiency apartments is 400
square feet; for two-family and multi-family apartments the minimum is 525
square feet.



   (D)   In single-family districts, number of stories may be increased
to three and the building height may be increased to 45 feet if the side yard
is increased to ten feet.



   (E)   See § 159.020 for height and area requirements for the MH
Manufactured Home District.



   (F)   See § 159.017(A)(3) and (B) for height and area requirements
for single-family attached dwellings.



 


Zone

 

Front Yard
(in ft.)

 

Side Yard
(in ft.)

 

Rear Yard
(in ft.)

 

Minimum Lot Area

 

Min. Lot Width
(in ft.)

 

Max. Bldg. Height
(in ft.)

 

Max. No. of Stories






A-1

 

30

 

7

 

25

 
5 acres
 

70

 

35

 

2-1/2




R-1A

 

30

 

7

 

25

 
2 acres (private septic system)
 

70

 

35

 

2-1/2



12,000 sq. ft. (public sanitary system)



R-1B

 

30

 

5

 

25

 
2 acres (private septic system)
 

60

 

35

 

2-1/2



7,200 sq. ft. (public sanitary system)



R-1C

 

30

 

5

 

25

 
2 acres (private septic system)
 

50

 

35

 

2-1/2



6,000 sq. ft. (public sanitary system)



R-2

 

25

 

5

 

25

 
3,000 sq. ft. for 1-family
 

40

 

45

 

2-1/2



6,000 sq. ft. for 2-family
 



 



 






R-4

 

25

 

5

 
25 ft. for interior lots
 
5,000 sq. ft. for 1-family
 

50

 

45

 

3



15 ft. for corner lots
 
6,000 sq. ft. for 2-family


2,500 sq. ft. for multi-family

+ 1,500 sq. ft. for each unit



R-5

 

25

 

10

 
25
 
Same as R-4
 

50

 

45

 

3




C-1

 

20

 

None

 

15

 

None

 

None

 

35

 

2-1/2



5 ft. if abutting residential district

3 ft. high solid visual barrier needed
 
3 ft. high solid visual barrier required if abutting residential district
 
For residential, see R-4



C-2

 

20

 

None

 

15

 
For residential, see R-4
 

None

 

45

 

3



5 ft. if abutting residential district

3 ft. high solid visual barrier needed
 
3 ft. high solid visual barrier required if abutting residential district



C-2M

 

20

 

None

 

15

 

None

 

None

 

45

 

3



5 ft. if abutting residential district

3 ft. high solid visual barrier needed
 
3 ft. high solid visual barrier required if abutting residential district
 
Residential not allowed
 



 



 






C-3

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

100

 

None



5 ft. if abutting residential district

3 ft. high solid visual barrier needed
 
15 ft. if abutting residential district with 3 ft. high solid visual barrier
 
For residential, see R-4
 



 



 






C-R

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

100

 

None



5 ft. if abutting residential district

3 ft. high solid visual barrier needed
 
3 ft. high solid visual barrier required if abutting residential district
 
For residential, see R-4



C-4

 

20

 

Same as C-2

 

Same as C-2

 

Same as C-2

 

None

 

45

 

3




M-1

 

20

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

45

 

3



10 ft. if abutting residential district

with 3 ft. high solid visual barrier
 
20 ft. if abutting residential district

with 3 ft. high solid visual barrier
 
 
 



 



 






M-2

 

20

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

100

 

8



10 ft. if abutting residential district

with 3 ft. high solid visual barrier
 
20 ft. if abutting residential district

with 3 ft. high solid visual barrier



M-3

 

20

 

Same as M-2

 

Same as M-2

 

None

 

None

 

100

 

8





 



(1999 Code, § 165.21)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2296, passed
6-28-2005; Ord. 2566, passed 3-27-2018; Ord. 2599, passed 12-11-2018) 
Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.046  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.



   The regulations hereinafter set forth in this section qualify or
supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere
in this chapter or in effect after February 8, 1965.



   (A)   Height regulations.



      (1)   Schools, public buildings and institutions may be
erected to a height not exceeding 85 feet in any district in which they are
permitted, provided front and rear yards are increased in width one foot for
each foot of height that the building exceeds the height regulations of the
district in which it is located.



      (2)   The height regulations prescribed herein shall not apply
to grain elevators, television and radio towers, church spires, belfries,
monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers, scenery lofts,
ornamental towers and spires, chimney, elevator bulkheads, smoke stacks,
conveyors, flag poles and heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems
or wind energy conversions systems (as permitted under § 159.049(D)(24)
below.



      (3)   The limitation on the number of stories shall not apply
to buildings used exclusively for storage purposes, provided that the
buildings do not exceed the height in feet permitted in the district in which
they are located.



   (B)   General area exceptions and modifications.



      (1)   Required yard.  Every part of a required yard shall be
open to the sky, unobstructed by a building, except for accessory buildings
in a rear yard and except for the ordinary projection or sills, eaves,
soffitts, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features not to exceed two
feet unless yard requirements are adjusted proportionately.



      (2)   Fire escapes.  Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes,
required by law, projecting into a yard not to exceed five feet and the
ordinary projection of chimneys and pilasters shall be permitted by the
Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee when
placed so as not to obstruct light and ventilation.



      (3)   Awnings, canopies, bay windows, solar energy collectors
and heat storage units.  Awnings, canopies, bay windows, solar energy
collectors and heat storage units may encroach into a required yard a
distance not exceeding three feet unless yard requirements are adjusted
proportionately. If located in a required side yard, these projections must
be at least two feet from an adjacent side lot line.



      (4)   Educational, institutional, motel, hotel, commercial or
industrial purposes.  Where a lot or tract is used for educational,
institutional, motel, hotel, commercial or industrial purposes, more than one
main building may be located upon the lot or tract but only when the
buildings conform to all open space requirements around the lot or tract
where located.



      (5)   Open space.  Where an open space is more than 50%
surrounded by a building, the minimum width of the open space shall be at
least 20 feet for one story buildings, 30 feet for two-story buildings and 40
feet for buildings three or more stories in height.



      (6)   Land, farm outbuildings, farm barns or other
buildings.  The following height and area requirements shall apply to land,
farm outbuildings, farm barns or other buildings or structures used for
agricultural purposes:



 

Maximum number of stories of a building
 

3 stories



Maximum height of building
 

100 feet



Minimum depth of front yard
 

30 feet



Minimum depth of side yard
 

5 feet



Minimum depth of rear yard
 

25 feet




 



      (7)   Vacant lots.  In residential districts, no fence,
garage, shed or any other accessory structure may be constructed on a vacant
lot. No vacant lot in a residential district may be used for storage or as a
parking lot.



      (8)   Visual clearance zones.  In all zoning districts,
nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow on a corner lot
in a manner as to significantly impede vision between a height of two and
one-half feet and ten feet above the centerline street grade of an area
described as follows:  that triangular shaped area bounded by the street or
road right-of-way lines of a corner lot or tract and a straight line joining
points on the right-of-way that are 20 feet from the point of intersection of
the right-of-way lines.



      (9)   Signs.  Where signs are permitted by the regulations
established in § 159.048, allowable ground signs, directional signs and
projecting signs may occupy required yard areas.



   (C)   Front yards. The front yards heretofore established shall be
adjusted in the following cases.



      (1)   Where 40% or more of the frontage on the same side of
the street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings which
have observed a front yard greater in depth than herein required, new
buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than the average front
yard so established by the existing buildings.



      (2)   Where 40% or more of the frontage on the same side of a
street between two intersecting streets is developed with buildings that do
not have a front yard as described above, then:



         (a)   Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of
land that is within 100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum
front yard shall be a line drawn between the two closest front corners of
adjacent buildings, including open porches on each side;



         (b)   Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of
land that is within 100 feet of any existing building on one side only, the
building may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent
building; or



         (c)   Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of
land that is more than 100 feet from any building on either side, a front
yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet shall be provided.



      (3)   Interior lots fronting on two non-intersecting streets
shall provide the required front yard on both streets.



      (4)   Building setback lines in approved subdivisions shall
apply along the frontage in place of any other setback requirements unless
specified yard requirements in this chapter require a greater setback.



      (5)   On corner lots, a front yard shall be provided on each
street. For lots of record approved prior to February 8, 1965, a ten-foot
side yard adjacent to the side street is observed except if the main building
is closer than ten feet, in which case any addition can be in line with the
existing building. All accessory buildings/uses must also follow these
requirements.



      (6)   Filling station pumps and pump islands may be located
within a required yard provided they are not less than 15 feet from any
street line and not less than 50 feet from any residential district. Awnings
and canopies that provide shelter for fuel pumps may encroach into required
yards no closer than five feet from the lot line. On corner lots, all
structures shall adhere to the requirements of visual clearance zones.



   (D)   Side yards. The side yard regulations heretofore established
shall be adjusted in the following cases.



      (1)   Commercial or industrial buildings used in part for
dwelling purposes shall provide side yards of not less than five feet in
width unless every dwelling room opens directly upon a front yard, rear yard
or court.



      (2)   For the purpose of side yard regulations, a two-family
dwelling or a multiple dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying
one lot.



      (3)   Whenever a lot of record approved prior to February 8,
1965, has a width of less than 50 feet, the side yard on each side of a
building may be reduced to a width of not less than 10% of the width of the
lot, but in no instance shall it be less than four feet.



      (4)   Side yards on corner lots shall follow the requirements
for front yards on corner lots.



      (5)   A drive through roof structure, carport or canopy may
project into a required side yard, provided every part of the roof structure,
carport or canopy is unenclosed except for the necessary structural supports
and is not less than five feet from any side lot line.



   (E)   Rear yards. The rear yard regulations heretofore established
shall be adjusted in the following cases.



      (1)   Where a lot abuts upon an alley, one-half of the alley
width may be considered as part of the required rear yard when determining
area requirements for accessory buildings.



      (2)   On corner lots, the minimum required rear yard may be
reduced to ten feet in the case of a building fronting on the long side of a
lot, provided there is a minimum side yard of 25 feet on the side of the
building not fronting a street.



   (F)   Lot area per family. Where a lot of record approved prior to
February 8, 1965, or a lot in a subdivision which the Council has officially
approved and has agreed to accept from February 8, 1965, has less area or
width than therein required in the district in which it is located, the lot
may nonetheless be used for a one family dwelling or for any other
non-dwelling use permitted in the district in which it is located, with the
approval of the Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided in §§ 159.049 and
159.080. In residential districts where two or more contiguous lots have a
width and area less than that herein required and are under common ownership,
and are of the size as together constitute a conforming lot, the lots or
portions thereof shall be joined, developed and used for the purposes of
forming an effective and conforming lot or lots.



   (G)   Accessory buildings. The regulations set forth in this
division regulate all accessory buildings.



      (1)   Accessory buildings must be in a rear or side yard and
shall not occupy more than 30% of a rear yard. In all R Districts, the
aggregate ground cover of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 1,000
square feet in floor area. In addition, one yard shed, not exceeding 160
square feet in floor area, is allowed. All accessory buildings, except yard
sheds, shall be constructed of materials that are the same or similar to the
principle building. Modifications to the maximum square footage requirement
are as follows.



         (a)   In the A-1 and R-1A Districts, on parcels
containing five or more acres, the aggregate ground cover of all accessory
buildings shall not exceed 2,000 square feet.



         (b)   In the R-4 and R-5 Districts, the aggregate ground
cover of all accessory buildings shall not exceed 2,000 square feet in floor
area if included in site plan approved by the City Council.



         (c)   Yard sheds, not exceeding 160 square feet total
floor area, are not included in the aggregate ground cover restriction.



      (2)   On existing lots of record approved after February 8,
1965, detached accessory building shall follow all front yard regulations for
corner lots. All others shall be set back from any adjacent street
right-of-way line in accordance with the minimum distance required for a
principal building on the same lot.



      (3)   If an accessory building in a residential district is
located closer than ten feet to the main building, it shall be regarded as
part of the main building for the purpose of determining side and rear yard
requirements. If the accessory building is farther than ten feet from the
main building, it shall not be closer than three feet from any side or rear
property line. Storage sheds less than 60 square feet are excluded from this
requirement.



      (4)   If a garage is entered into from an alley, and the
garage door is parallel to the alley, it shall not be located closer than
five feet from the property line abutting the alley right-of-way.



      (5)   No accessory building in a residential district shall
exceed 15 feet in height. However, in the A-1 or R-1A Districts, properties
with five or more acres, accessory buildings may be constructed to a height
of 18 feet.



      (6)   No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot
until the construction of the main building has actually been commenced and
no accessory building shall be used unless the main building on a lot is
completed and used.



      (7)   No accessory building shall be used for dwelling
purposes.



      (8)   In all residential districts, except for properties
containing five or more acres in the A-1 and R-1A districts, all accessory
buildings shall be constructed of materials that are the same or similar to
the principle building or an approved residential siding material.



   (H)   Swimming pools.  The regulations set forth in this division
regulate the location of swimming pools.



      (1)   Swimming pools are described as any structure intended
for swimming, recreational bathing or wading that contains water over 24
inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground pools, hot
tubs, spas and fixed-in-place wading pools.



      (2)   Swimming pools are not allowed to be located in any
front yard.



      (3)   For in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming
pools, hot tubs, spas and fixed-in place wading pool, including any attached
decks, may not be closer than two feet to any side or rear property line.



      (4)   Except in the case of corner lots, when the swimming
pool, hot tub, spa or fixed-in place wade pool is located ten feet or less
from the main building, it can be in line with the existing building line. If
it is located more than ten feet from the main building, it must be a minimum
of ten feet from the corner street side property line. A ten-foot visual
clearance zone must be observed when a corner front or side property line
abuts an alley.



   (I)   Fences, walls and hedges. The regulations set forth in this
division regulate the placement of fences in all districts.



      (1)   (a)   Fences shall be constructed of material
commonly used for landscape fencing, such as masonry block, lumber, plastic,
chain link or natural plantings, but shall not include barbed wire, salvage
material or be electrified. Electrified fences and barbed wire may be used
for permitted livestock containment and horse stables.



         (b)   In all zoning districts, the smooth, finished,
nonstructural or dressed side of the fence, if any, shall be directed toward
the neighboring property or properties.



      (2)   Fences, walls or screen plantings may be located on a
residential property in any rear or side yard from the front building line to
the rear property line not to exceed six feet.  In the front yard from the
front building line to the front property line, a fence that provides
openings of at least 75% in area of the vertical surface to permit the
transmission of light, air or vision through the vertical surface at a right
angle may be constructed to a height not to exceed four feet. Fences not
providing openings of at least 75% may not exceed a height of three feet.



      (3)   On corner lots, both yards that abut a street must
follow the requirements for fences in front yards, except that fences not
providing openings of at least 75% may not exceed a height of three feet and
must provide a 20-foot visual clearance zone at all street intersections and
a ten-foot visual clearance zone when a corner lot front or side property
line abuts an alley. Fences not meeting the height standards must be located
ten feet from the side and rear property line on the corner side.



      (4)   In the C-2, C2-M, M-1, M-2 and M-3 commercial and
industrial districts, nonresidential fences may be up to eight feet in height
in the rear and side yards and up to six feet in height in a front yard,
provided that all fences located in a front yard are constructed of
see-through material. If barbed wire is needed for security reasons, the
fence may be extended another foot to a maximum height of nine feet in rear
and side yards and seven feet in front yards. Barbed wire may not be closer
than six feet to the ground and may not overhang any public right-of-way. Any
fence higher that this maximum height or constructed of material other than
see-through material in front yards must be approved by the Board of
Adjustment. Visual clearance zones shall also apply.



         (a)   Chain link fencing for public parks and
recreational areas and school facilities may be erected to a height of six
feet.



         (b)   In all zoning districts, public and nonpublic
buildings and facilities essential to the physical welfare of an area, such
as electrical distribution substations, pipeline pumping stations, gas
regulators, water storage facilities and similar uses may be surrounded by a
fence having a height above ground of not more than ten feet.



      (5)   Fences located outside of property lines on public
rights-of-way are allowed only if approved by the Public Works Director or
authorized with respect to a sidewalk café pursuant to § 97.042. If so
approved or authorized, the abutting property owner must assume
responsibility for maintaining the fence. If the property is needed by the
city, the owner is responsible for removing the fence. With the exception of
authorized fences enclosing a sidewalk café, fences placed in the
right-of-way may not be closer than 18 inches from a public sidewalk.



   (J)   Decks, porches and ramps. The regulations set forth in this
division regulate all decks, porches, ramps or similar additions.



      (1)   All unenclosed porches in existence prior to July 10,
1979, may be enclosed after obtaining a building permit. All porches
constructed after this date will be required to adhere to all required yard
requirements unless otherwise allowed in this section.



      (2)   Open decks or porches, but not including permanently
roofed-over or enclosed decks or porches, may extend no more than 15 feet
into a required front yard or rear yard. However, the encroachment shall
maintain a minimum distance of ten feet from a public right-of-way. The
following deck and porch encroachments into yards will be allowed as long as
the deck or porch remains uncovered:



         (a)   In front yards, the floor of an open deck located
in a required front yard shall not exceed three feet in height above the
average ground level. The total height of the deck (measured from the ground
to the top rail) cannot exceed six feet. Also, the vertical surface of the
area above the floor of the deck must provide openings of not less than 50%
in area in order to permit the transmission of light, air and vision through
the vertical surface at the right angle.



         (b)   In rear yards, all new, unenclosed decks and
porches must maintain a minimum distance of five feet from any accessory
building.



         (c)   In side yards, all new, unenclosed decks and
porches may extend three feet into a required side yard but shall not be
closer than two feet from any side property line.



      (3)   Steps or ramps which are necessary to provide access to
a lawful building or for access to a lot from a street or alley may encroach
into a required yard.



   (K)   Adult entertainment establishments. Because of their special
characteristics, adult entertainment establishments are recognized as having
potential deleterious impacts on surrounding establishments and areas,
thereby contributing to the creation of blight and decline of neighborhoods.
The following regulations apply to all adult entertainment establishments.



      (1)   Adult entertainment establishments are allowed only in
the M-3 Zoning District.



      (2)   No adult entertainment establishment shall be located
within 1,000 feet of any other establishment.



      (3)   No adult entertainment establishment shall be located
within 1,000 feet of any school, church or residential zoning district. To
determine minimum separation distances, measurements shall be taken on a
direct line from the closest customer entrance of the establishment to the
nearest property line of any other establishment, school, church or
residential zoning district.



   (L)   Screening requirements. The regulations set forth in this
division shall regulate screening requirements in all zoning districts.



      (1)   Solid waste containment. Solid waste containers,
including recyclable and scrap material containers, used for commercial,
industrial and multi-family apartment uses, shall not be permitted unless
completely screened from all public rights-of-way and residential zoning
districts. Screening shall provide a solid visual barrier and shall not
exceed the height requirements for fences. In existing developed areas, where
yard space may not be available or accessibility may be difficult, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment may provide an exemption from these requirements.



      (2)   Storage yards. All outdoor storage yards or storage lots
shall be suitably screened from all public rights-of-way. Screening material
shall provide a solid visual barrier and shall not exceed the height
requirements for fences.



   (M)   Home occupations. Regulations pertaining to home occupations
are designed to protect and maintain the residential character of a
neighborhood while permitting certain limited commercial activities.



      (1)   Restrictions on home occupations.  The following
requirements must be met for an activity or occupation to qualify as a home
occupation.



         (a)   The occupation or activity must be clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the premises as a dwelling. The
occupation or activity shall not occupy more than 25% of the floor area of a
building, not to exceed 400 square feet.



         (b)   The occupation or activity must be carried on
wholly within a main building or approved accessory building.



         (c)   The occupation or activity must be carried on by a
member of the family residing on the premises. No person not a resident on
the premises shall be employed. No person not a member of the family shall be
employed.



         (d)   No stock in trade or food or commodities may be
sold on the premises as a primary source of income.



         (e)   No external alterations or special construction of
the premises can be done. No exterior indication, except for the permitted
sign, that the building is being used for any purpose other than a dwelling
shall exist.



         (f)   No occupations or activities are permitted which
are noxious, offensive or hazardous by reason of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or by creation of noise, odor, refuse, heat, vibration, smoke, dust,
glare, radiation or other objectionable emissions or by interference with
television or radio reception.



         (g)   No substantial volumes of vehicular traffic or
parking demand shall be created.



         (h)   No advertising sign shall be displayed except for
an unlighted name plate flat against the building not exceeding two square
feet in area, stating only the resident’s name and occupation.



         (i)   There shall be no off-premises signs, radio,
television, newspaper, handbill or similar advertisement linking the premises
with the home occupation. The advertisement of the home occupation within a
telephone directory, excluding the address, is permitted. Also permitted is
the advertisement of the resident’s name, home occupation and phone number
only within a newspaper.



         (j)   The activity shall not involve any outside storage
nor in any way create, outside the building, any external evidence of the
operation.



         (k)   Divisions (c), (g) and (j) above shall not apply
to vehicle for hire businesses or vehicle for hire drivers as defined in
Chapter 114 of this code.



      (2)   Activities permitted. Permitted home occupations
include, but are not limited to the following list of activities; provided,
however, that each permitted home occupation is subject to the limitations in
the preceding division and to all other applicable regulations to the
district in which it is located.



         (a)   Studio of an artist, photographer, craftsman,
writer or composer;



         (b)   A family day care facility operating under the
provisions of the Iowa Code Chapter 237A. An exception is hereby established
in the case of family day care facilities under the Iowa Code Chapter 237A.
The exception pertains to the restriction that only resident members of the
family can be employed on the premises. Where Iowa Code Chapter 237A requires
additional employees, those employees may be nonresidential, non-members of
the family, provided a member or members of the family are the licensed or
registered party and are in charge of the family day care facility.
Inspection by the Fire Marshal of all family day care facilities is required;



         (c)   Domestic service activities such as sewing,
tailoring and laundering;



         (d)   Pet clipping;



         (e)   Barber shop and beauty shop;



         (f)   Carpentry shop, cabinet making, upholstering,
furniture repair, refinishing, sign making or other similar occupations;



         (g)   Home-based businesses where the service is
provided off-premises;



         (h)   Sale of real estate and/or insurance;



         (i)   Office of a physician or dentist for consultation
or emergency treatment, but not for general professional practice;



         (j)   Teaching, limited to not more than six pupils at
one time;



         (k)   Telemarketing, computer programming and repair and
services provided over the internet; and



         (l)   Mail order businesses where products are shipped
directly from the supplier to the customer.



      (3)   Activities prohibited.  Prohibited commercial
activities in the home include, but are not limited to, the following. These
activities and other similar activities are not classified as home
occupations and will not be permitted in a residential area.



         (a)   Motor repair service or auto body repair service;



         (b)   Junk yard, salvage yard or welding activity;



         (c)   Restaurants or taverns;



         (d)   Convalescent homes;



         (e)   Rooming and boarding house;



         (f)   Gift, craft or antique shops;



         (g)   Animal husbandry, kennels or commercial horse
stables;



         (h)   Tattooing, body piercing, fortune telling or
massage services;



         (i)   Business or store of any kind with stock for trade
or sale; and



         (j)   Warehousing or storage of materials or merchandise.



      (4)   Parking.  Off-street parking, other than in a front
yard, shall be provided for all home occupations. At least four off-street
parking spaces are required for barber shops and beauty shops; all other uses
shall comply with the parking requirements found in § 159.065.



      (5)   Variance.  Variances from the requirements under this
section shall be heard by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.



   (N)   Permitted uses. The regulations set forth in this division
shall regulate allowable uses within a zoning district. Uses permitted by
right shall be allowed if they comply with all applicable regulations. Uses
included are based on the common meaning of the terms and not the name that
an owner or operator might give to a use. Permitted uses are as follows.



      (1)   Residential uses.  Residential uses include group
living quarters, single- and two-family dwellings, rooming and boarding
houses, manufactured homes and multi-family dwellings.



      (2)   Short-term lodging.  Facilities offering transient
lodging accommodations to the general public where the average length of stay
is less than 60 days. Uses include bed and breakfast, hotels and motels.



      (3)   Office use.



         (a)   Activities conducted in an office setting and
primarily focusing on administrative, business, governmental, professional,
medical or financial services. Contractors and others who perform services
off-site and no equipment or materials are stored on the site, are also
included in this category.



         (b)   Examples include: banking and bank-related
services, data processing, government offices and facilities, telemarketing,
insurance services, lending credit services, public utility offices, real
estate, medical/dental/chiropractic clinics, radio and television studios and
offices of architects, engineers and lawyers.



      (4)   Motor vehicle sales.  Retail sales or leasing of
automobiles, light and medium trucks, motorcycles, recreational vehicles,
marine craft and accessories. Vehicle repair, including painting, are
permitted when conducted as a secondary activity to the sale of vehicles.



      (5)   Motor vehicle service and repair.  Motor vehicle
servicing, repairing, painting, detailing, bodywork, finishing and
accessories for automobiles, motorcycles and light trucks. Premises may not
be used for vehicle wrecking or salvaging.



      (6)   Entertainment, restaurant and recreation trade.



         (a)   Facilities providing entertainment or recreation
services and eating and drinking establishments. Definition excludes adult
entertainment establishments.



         (b)   Examples include: bars and taverns, banquet halls,
bowling alleys, exhibiting and meeting halls, health clubs, game arcades,
lodges and social clubs, movie theaters, pool halls, restaurants, cafes and
delicatessens.



      (7)   Retail sales and service.



         (a)   Uses involve the sale, lease or rental of new or
used consumer products, including prepared foods, to the general public and
uses providing services involving predominately personal or business
services, including repair of consumer and business goods. Does not include
vehicle repairs. Lumber yards and other building material facilities selling
primarily to contractors and not the general public are classified as a
wholesale establishment. Sale, rental or leasing of heavy trucks and
equipment are classified as a wholesale establishment.



         (b)   Retail sales example include antiques, appliances,
art supplies, automobile supplies, bakeries, candy, clothing, convenience
stores, computers, delicatessens, electronics, fabric, furniture, garden
supplies, groceries, hardware, home improvements, jewelry, office supply,
pharmacy, plants, flowers, shoes, sporting goods, stationary, toys and videos.



         (c)   Retail personal, business and repair service
examples include animal grooming, printing services, barber and beauty shops,
business schools, dance or music studios, dry cleaning, employment services,
equipment rental and leasing, medical care services, kennels, laundromats,
photography studios, sign making, tailors, television, bicycle, shoe, gun,
appliance and office equipment repair, upholsterers, veterinarian offices.



      (8)   Wholesale trade.



         (a)   Uses that involve the sale, lease or rental of
products primarily intended for industrial, institutional or commercial
businesses. Business may or may not be open to the general public, but sales
to the general public are limited.



         (b)   Examples include: mail order houses, electrical
supplies, heating and plumbing equipment, equipment, machine parts,
restaurant equipment, special trade tools, store fixtures, welding supplies,
auto parts, alcoholic beverages, food.



      (9)   Industrial services.



         (a)   Uses that involve the repair or servicing of
industrial, business or consumer machinery, equipment, products or
by-products, but not including consumer goods service or repair. Does not
include salvage yards.



         (b)   Examples include: building, heating or electric
contractors, electric motor repair, exterminators, fuel oil dispensers, heavy
machinery sales including repair and storage, buses and heavy truck servicing
and repair, machine shops, tool repair, towing and vehicle storage, truck
stops, welding shops.



      (10)   Manufacturing and processing.



         (a)   Uses that involve the manufacturing, processing,
fabrication, packaging or assembly of goods, excluding special uses listed in
§ 159.032(A). Products may be finished or semi-finished and are generally
made for the wholesale market, for transfer to other plants, or to order for
firms or consumers. Goods are generally not displayed of sold on site, but if
so, they are a subordinate part of sales.



         (b)   Examples include: apparel, textile, chemicals,
rubber, leather, clay plastic, stone and glass materials manufacturing,
concrete batching and asphalt mixing, energy production, food and related
products manufacturing, furniture and fixture manufacturing, lumber and wood
products manufacturing, metal and metal products manufacturing, including
enameling and galvanizing, machinery and electrical equipment, manufactured
homes and prefabrication manufacturing, printing and publishing, woodworking,
including cabinetry.



      (11)   Warehousing and freight handling.



         (a)   Uses that involve the storage or movement of
goods. Does not include the storage of sand, gravel, grain or mini-storage
facilities. No on-site sales.



         (b)   Examples include: freight storage, inter-model
transfer facilities, warehousing, truck and rail freight terminals,
warehouses used by retail stores, wholesale distribution centers.



      (12)   Waste processing, storage and transfer.



         (a)   Uses that receive solid or liquid waste from other
uses for disposal, storage or treatment on-site or for transfer to another
location; uses that collect sanitary wastes; uses that treat contaminated
material; uses that process materials for recycling; and uses that
manufacture or produce goods or energy from the composting of organic
material.



         (b)   Examples include:  recycling operations,
treatment plants, waste composting, waste incineration, solid waste disposal
facility, medical waste handling, storage and incineration, waste transfer
station, hazardous waste handling, storage and incineration.



      (13)   Salvage yards, including auto salvage.  A facility or
area for storing, keeping, selling, dismantling, shredding, compressing or
salvaging scrap or discarded material or equipment. Scrap or discarded
material includes, but is not limited to, metal, paper rags, tires bottles,
motor vehicles and parts thereof, machinery structural steel, equipment and
appliances.



      (14)   Adult entertainment establishments.  Adult
entertainment establishment means a building or use having a substantial or
significant portion of its business by the offering of entertainment, stock
in trade of materials, scenes or other presentations characterized by
emphasis on depiction or description of specific sexual activities including
nude and semi-nude dancing. The uses include but are not limited to: adult
book stores, adult massage parlors, adult modeling studios, adult mini motion
picture theaters, adult motion picture theaters, adult theaters, adult sexual
encounter centers and licensed beer and liquor establishments offering nude
and semi-nude performances for entertainment.



      (15)   Other uses not identified.  Uses specifically
identified with a particular district will be identified separately in the
district regulations. Uses not listed and the specific category cannot not be
determined will be referred to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for final
determination.



   (O)   Building appearance standards. All buildings, except
single-family homes and residential accessory buildings, fronting on a public
roadway in any C-1, C-2, C-2M, C-3, C-4 or C-R Commercial Zoning District,
shall follow the requirements this division.



      (1)   (a)   In order that buildings, structures and
landscaping elements will be in harmony with other structures and
improvements in the city, the following building standards shall apply to all
new construction.



         (b)   For all new construction, the preferred exterior
building materials shall include, but are not limited to brick or other
suitable clay masonry material, stone veneer, granite, cast in place concrete
panels, finished faced precast concrete, ceramic tile, decorative concrete
block and tinted glass.



      (2)   (a)   New construction not meeting the requirements
of division (O)(1)(b) above shall have the front exterior meet the following
standards.



         (b)   The front exterior of a new building shall have as
a facing material on a minimum of 30% of the gross wall area from the eave or
coping line down to grade line one of the preferred materials listed in
division (O)(1)(b), glazed tile, wood, glass or an approved equivalent.



      (3)   Buildings on corner lots shall follow these requirements
for both street frontages.



      (4)   Material guidelines:



         (a)   Material used shall be selected for suitability to
the type of building or design in which they are used.



         (b)   Materials shall have good architectural quality
and character.



      (5)   Exceptions.  Buildings completely screened by other
buildings from a public street or not clearly visible from a public street
shall be exempt from these requirements.



      (6)   In the event that a dispute arises as to which wall
constitutes the front of a building, the decision shall be made solely by the
Zoning Committee of the City Plan Commission by considering what the general
public would regard as the front of the building. The Zoning Committee will
also determine alternative facing material than those specified in this
section.



   (P)   Outdoor service areas (OSA).  All outdoor service areas that
are contiguous with a bar/tavern that is regulated by a city liquor license,
must meet the following requirements to operate within the city limits of the
city. Special events centers and sidewalk cafés leased or permitted pursuant
to § 97.042 are exempt from this division. Outdoor service areas must be
approved as a special use permit through the Zoning Board of Adjustment and
must comply with these listed requirements at all times during the duration
of the special use permit. The OSA will be inspected annually by the Fire
Marshal and/or the Building Official during the regularly scheduled liquor
license inspection. Violations of this division may be cause for suspension
or revocation of the OSA permit. All violations will be cited under the
zoning regulations, § 159.999.



      (1)   Definitions.



         ENCLOSED.  A predominantly indoor area covered with a
fixed structural roof and generally closed off from the outside.



         NON-ENCLOSED.  A predominately outdoor area that does not
meet the definition of enclosed, including but not limited to patios, outdoor
dining areas and outdoor service areas.



         OUTDOOR SERVICE AREAS.  Any non-enclosed area where one or
more persons wait for or receive goods or services including but not limited
to patios, outdoor dining areas and outdoor service areas.



         PERMANENT OSA.  An outdoor service area that is in
existence for more than seven days and is contiguous with a
building/establishment currently in operation as a restaurant, tavern/bar or
other similar business.



         RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  An area that is prescribed to be
residential according to the zoning regulations of the city.



         SPECIAL EVENT CENTERS.  Banquet and reception halls that
are not open to the general public and are privately rented out for
receptions, parties and or dinners.



         TEMPORARY OSA.  An outdoor service area that is in
existence for less than seven days, and, is associated with a festival, fair,
carnival or other similar temporary event.



      (2)   The OSA permit is for permanent outdoor service areas
for bars, taverns and/or restaurants with bars that are not temporary in
nature.



      (3)   All OSAs must comply with these requirements by April,
2009. Each OSA will be inspected annually by the Fire Marshal and/or the
Building Official as part of the annual liquor license inspection.



      (4)   The OSA will not be located within 100 feet of a
residential district.



      (5)   The OSA will not impair/impede an adequate amount of air
and light to the adjacent properties.



      (6)   The OSA will not unreasonably increase the congestion in
public streets or alleys.



      (7)   The OSA will not in any way impair the public health,
comfort, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city.



      (8)   The OSA will not in any other respects impair the public
health, comfort, safety or welfare of the inhabitants of the city.



      (9)   The OSA must have at least one 30-gallon trash
receptacle or a proportionate number of receptacles to meet this requirement.



      (10)   The OSA will not increase the danger of fire, or of the
public safety, and it will meet all current Fire Code regulations. (All
aspects of the OSA must meet the requirements of the Fire Marshal and the
Building Official.)



      (11)   The OSA will not use  any type of amplified music or
loudspeakers that will violate the noise regulations of the city.



      (12)   The OSA will not have any advertising, signs or
graffiti-like markings on the exterior of the wall/fence, and the wall/fence
must be maintained with proper maintenance so as not to be a nuisance.



      (13)   Each OSA must have an exit from the outdoor area. The
exit must be alarmed and only be accessible from the inside of the OSA.



      (14)   Each OSA that is entered through a required egress from
the establishment must provide a clear path for emergency exiting to the OSA
exit.



      (15)   The exit gate/door from the OSA must swing in the
direction of the egress with panic hardware.



      (16)   The OSA egress must be illuminated at all times while
the area is in use.



      (17)   The occupant load for the establishment that installs
an OSA will be based on the current occupancy load of the inside of the
establishment, and may not increase the occupancy load.



      (18)   A portable fire extinguisher must be located inside the
establishment within ten feet of the OSA entrance (unless a portable fire
extinguisher is kept in the OSA).



      (19)   The OSA will have a six-foot solid visual barrier wall
or fence enclosure on all sides, built to the ground, provided that this
provision shall not apply to OSA's located within a sidewalk café authorized
pursuant to § 97.042.



      (20)   The OSA is in a side or rear yard area; or in a
sidewalk café authorized pursuant to § 97.042, wherever located; and
complies with all zoning regulations in the district in which the use is to
be located.



      (21)   The OSA will be contiguous with a part of the main
building and will not be closer than ten feet to any residential unit.



      (22)   The OSA will not have an entrance to the walled/fenced
area except through the bar/restaurant establishment.



      (23)   The OSA must have a non-combustible floor surface and
have sufficient lighting to illuminate the entire OSA, and it must have a
solid, level floor that will not cause a tripping/falling hazard to occupants
and employees.



      (24)   The OSA will not have a roof or roof covering over more
than 50% of the walled/fenced area.



      (25)   The OSA must provide non-combustible ash trays and
containers for removal of ashes and cigarette butts.



   (Q)   Temporary Outdoor Service Area (TOSA).  These regulations
apply to all temporary outdoor service areas that are contiguous with a bar,
tavern or restaurant that is regulated by a city/state liquor license and are
in existence for less than seven days at a time.



      (1)   These regulations do not apply to special event centers,
fairs, carnivals, festivals or similar events located on public property.



      (2)   These regulations shall not contradict or repeal any
current ordinance, resolution or law in effect upon the enactment by
ordinance or resolution of this document.



      (3)   The TOSA permit is for temporary outdoor service areas
for bars, taverns, and/or restaurants that are contiguous with a bar, tavern,
or restaurant that exists and that has a current liquor license with the city
and the State of Iowa and is valid for the requested and approved time period
only.



      (4)   The application must be filed with the City Clerk at
least 45 days before the event is to take place to ensure that all
departments have sufficient time to consider approval for the event.



      (5)   Each application will be reviewed by the Fire Marshal,
the Building Official and the Police Chief or their designated
representative.  An inspection is also required by the Building Official to
verify compliance with these regulations.



      (6)   The temporary event will not impair/impede an adequate
amount of air and light to the adjacent properties and will not create
excessive light that adversely affects neighboring properties including
residential neighborhoods and properties.  The area must have sufficient
illumination for the duration of the event.



      (7)   The area/event will not cause any congestion in public
streets or alleys.



      (8)   The area/event will not in any way impair the public
health, comfort, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city.



      (9)   The area must have sufficient trash receptacles to
ensure that trash, garbage and debris are kept inside containers and will not
litter the grounds or surrounding properties.  All trash, garbage and debris
will be collected and contained at all times during the event including all
parking areas and public right-of-ways.



      (10)   The area/event will not increase the danger of fire or
of the public safety, and it will meet all current city ordinances and will
not decrease the required amount of parking spaces and it will not adversely
affect the surrounding neighborhoods.



      (11)   Those TOSAs that affect the normal parking areas must
provide a written plan for parking for the event(s).



      (12)   The owner of the establishment or the liquor license
will regulate any type of amplified music or loudspeakers to ensure that the
noise does not violate the city noise ordinance, Chapter 93 of this code.



      (13)   Each application must provide a plan for portable
restroom facilities, based upon the expected attendance of the event.



      (14)   Each area/event must have its entire area enclosed with
temporary fencing to ensure security and enforcement of all requirements and
laws concerning the liquor license and TOSA permit, and must have the
entrance staffed with sufficient employees to ensure safety, security and
enforcement of all requirements and laws concerning the liquor license and
the TOSA permit.



      (15)   The occupant load for the establishment that installs a
TOSA will be based on the current occupancy load of the inside of the
establishment, and may not increase the occupancy load of the inside of the
establishment by more than 10%, according to the Life Safety Code.



      (16)   The area/event will be contiguous with a part of the
main building and will not be closer than ten feet to any residential unit.



      (17)   The establishment must provide non-combustible ash
trays and containers for removal of ashes and cigarette butts and must have a
non-combustible floor.



      (18)   Any violation of these requirements during the event
may result in the immediate revocation of this temporary permit by the City
Police Department, Fire Department or Community Development Department, and
may be used as evidence to deny future similar events to the owner of the
liquor license and/or the owner of the establishment.  Any costs associated
with a violation where any city department is forced to respond during the
event shall be paid by the liquor license holder or the building owner.



      (19)   A copy of each application and the regulations will be
placed on file with the Building Official, the Fire Marshal and the Police
Chief, as well as the City Clerk, for purposes of enforcement during the
event.



   (R)   Urban chickens.  The keeping of no more than six chickens for
use on a single-family detached residential property for the benefit of the
owners of said property is an allowed use in an R-1 One-Family Residential
District and R-2 Two-Family Residential District.



      (1)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the
following definitions shall apply.



         CHICKEN. A member of the subspecies Gallus gallus
domesticus, a domesticated fowl.



         COOP. A cage, enclosure, or structure used for housing and
protecting chickens from weather and predators.



         SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING. Any building that contains only one
dwelling unit used, intended, rented, leased, let or hired to be occupied for
residential purposes.



         TRACTOR. A cage, structure, or similar enclosure capable of
movement used for housing and protecting chickens from weather and predators.



         URBAN CHICKEN. A chicken kept on a tract of land pursuant
to a permit issued under the terms of this chapter.



      (2)   Permit for urban chicken(s) required.



         (a)   Permit required. No person shall raise, harbor or
keep chickens on any land not zoned R-1 One Family District or R-2 Two-Family
District within the city without a valid permit issued by the Building and
Neighborhood Services Department.  No permit is required for property zoned
A-1 Agricultural Reserve.



         (b)   Requirements.  The Building and Neighborhood
Services Department shall issue a permit if the following requirements have
been met:



            1.   The property for which the permit is sought
has passed inspection by Building and Neighborhood Services;



            2.   All inspection fees have been paid;



            3.   There are no nuisance conditions, or
unresolved violations of nuisance ordinance, on the property;



            4.   The parcel of land for which the permit is
sought contains only one single-family dwelling which is occupied and used as
such by the applicant/permittee;



            5.   The applicant has provided written
verification of the consent of the owner of the parcel of land for which the
permit is sought, if the applicant is not the owner, and is instead tenant,
lessee or otherwise authorized to reside at and use the property;



            6.   The applicant has provided verification they
successfully completed an approved class in raising chickens in an urban, or
suburban, setting.  The City Clerk/Administrator shall maintain a current
list of approved classes.



            7.   The application is in compliance with all
other conditions and prerequisites set out in this ordinance;



         (c)   Terms of permit.  The permit shall contain, and
permittee agree to adhere, to the following:



            1.   The permittee shall follow the City Code and
state law regarding animal care;



            2.   The permittee grants the city the right to
inspect the coop and pen with due notice;



            3.   The permit is a limited license for the
specific activity and person named in the permit, and no vested zoning rights
arise from the permit being issued.  The permit is limited to the party to
whom it is issued, and does not run with the land;



            4.   The permit will be permanent unless revoked.



         (d)   Suspension or revocation of permit. The permit may
be suspended or revoked by Building and Neighborhood Services upon hearing
and finding evidence that the permittee has violated the conditions of the
permit or the terms of this section; or made a false statement or
representation on the application form.  All chickens must be removed upon
revocation of the permit.  The permit fee will not be refunded.



      (3)   General requirements.



         (a)   Non-commercial use only.  Permit holder shall not
engage in the breeding of chickens or fertilizer production for commercial
purposes.



         (b)   Single-family residential. Permits will only be
granted for parcels with one single-family residential unit.  Permits will
not be granted for any parcel with more than one residential unit located
upon the parcel.



         (c)   Private restrictions take precedence.  Private
restrictions on the use of the property shall remain enforceable and shall
supersede the terms of this chapter and any permit issued.  The private
restrictions include, but are not limited to: deed restrictions, condominium
restrictions, neighborhood association bylaws, covenants and restrictions,
and rental agreements.



         (d)   Rental property.  The owner of the parcel must
concur with any application for urban chickens.  Tenants must obtain the
written permission from the landlord/property owner to keep chickens or
install a coop.



         (e)   Slaughter of chickens.  Any slaughter of chickens
not regulated by federal or state law, or regulated otherwise, shall be
performed in a humane manner and shall not be done in open view to any public
area or adjacent to property owned by another.



         (f)   Dead chickens.  Other than slaughtered chickens,
the owner shall dispose of dead chickens in a sanitary manner. Composting
does not qualify as proper disposal.



         (g)   Hens only.  Only female chickens (hens) are
allowed.  Male chickens (roosters) are not allowed and shall be removed
immediately by the owner.



         (h)   No more than six allowed. No more than six
chickens shall be allowed on any parcel.



      (4)   Site requirements.



         (a)   Enclosures required. Chickens must be kept in an
enclosure or fenced area at all times.  Chickens shall be secured within a
coop or chicken tractor during non-daylight hours.



         (b)   Location and separation distances. 



            1.   Coops, including tractors, must be at least
ten feet from any property lines



            2.   Coops must be at least five feet from the
principle use residential structure on the applicant's property.



            3.   Coops must be in the rear yard of the
property.



      (5)   Enclosure requirements.



         (a)   Enclosures, coops and tractors must be kept in
clean, dry, odor free, neat and sanitary conditions at all times.



         (b)   Coops and tractors shall be well maintained.



         (c)   Coops and tractors must provide adequate
ventilation, sun and shade.



         (d)   Coops and tractors shall be constructed,
maintained and repaired to prevent entry by rodents, wild birds, predators,
dogs and cats.



         (e)   Coops and tractors shall be built of solid
materials such as wood, metal or plastic. 



         (f)   Coops and tractors shall be at least 18 inches in
height.



         (g)   Coops and tractors shall be designed to provide
safe and healthy living conditions for the chickens which reside therein,
with a minimum of 16 square feet. Maximum coop size is 96 square feet. 
Coops must allow a minimum of four square feet per chicken.



         (h)   Coops and tractors shall be enclosed on all sides
and shall have a roof and at least one door.  Access doors must be able to
be shut and locked at night.  Opening windows, vents or doors must be
covered with predator and bird proof wire of less than one-inch openings.



         (i)   Materials used for coops or tractors shall be
uniform of each element of the structure that the walls are made of the same
material, the roof has the same shingles or covering, and any windows or
openings are constructed using the same materials.  The use of scrap, waste
board, sheet metal or similar materials is prohibited.



         (j)   Well drained. Enclosures, coops and tractors must
be well drained to prevent accumulations of moisture; accumulations of
moisture shall be avoided and removed.



         (k)   Fences.  Fences that serve as enclosures for
chickens shall consist of sturdy wire fencing of a type customarily designed
for and used to enclose chickens and shall be constructed in a sturdy manner
so as to contain the chickens and prevent entry by predators, dogs and cats. 



      (6)   Predators, rodents, insects and parasites. The permittee
shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of predators and
rodents, and the potential for infestation by insects and parasites. 
Chickens found to be infested with insects or parasites that may result in
unhealthy conditions to human habitation shall be removed by the owner and
may be removed by the city at the owner's expense.



      (7)   Chickens at large and injury caused by other animals.



         (a)   At large prohibited.  Permittee shall not allow
their chickens to roam off the parcel of land covered by the permit.  Any
chicken found off the permitted property shall be considered to be "at-large"
and subject to the penalties and provisions of the city code for at-large
animals.



         (b)   Dangerous or vicious designation.  Injury or
death to a chicken that is caused by a dog, cat or other domesticated animal
shall not be considered sufficient grounds, in and of itself, to designate
the animal as dangerous or vicious pursuant to Chapter 91.



         (c)   City not liable.  The city shall not be liable
for injury or death of chickens caused by dogs, cats, or other animals
domestic or wild, regardless of whether or not licensed by the city.



      (8)   Feed and water. Chickens shall be provided with access
to feed and clean water at all times.  All feed and other items associated
with keeping chickens shall be protected in a manner to prevent rodents, wild
birds, and predators from coming into contact with them.



      (9)   Storage and removal of feces and waste.



         (a)   Feces and waste to be removed.  Feces and waste
shall be removed from enclosures, coops and tractors at least once per week.



         (b)   Storage and disposal of feces and waste.  Feces
and waste may be stored on the permittee's property.  Feces and waste must
be stored in a fully enclosed unit with a roof or lid.  The storage unit may
allow sunlight and movement of air so the materials dry, but must be
designed, used and maintained in such a manner as to keep the material fully
contained so that it does not blow or otherwise erode onto other
properties.  When stored, feces and waste must be stored in a manner to not
attract flies, rodents or other vermin.



         (c)   Use as fertilizer.  Feces and waste may be used
as fertilizer on the permitted property subject to being turned in to the
soil completely immediately upon application and there is no noxious odor.



      (10)   Nuisances.  Any violation of this section that
constitutes a health hazard or that interferes with the use or enjoyment of
neighboring property is a nuisance, subject to sanctions and abatement as set
out in the Code of Ordinances.



      (11)   Fees.  The fee for an inspection shall be $30. 
Should a re-inspection be required, there will be no charge for the first
re-inspection.  Any additional re-inspections will result in an additional
$30 fee.  All fees must be paid prior to a permit being issued.



(1999 Code, § 165.22)  (Ord. 2119, passed 8-8-2000; Ord. 2247, passed
10-9-2001; Ord. 2256, passed 6-25-2002; Ord. 2296, passed 6-28-2005; Ord.
2326, passed 6-13-2006; Ord. 2352, passed 7-24-2007; Ord. 2368, passed
5-27-2008; Ord. 2391, passed 10-28-2008; Ord. 2403, passed 4-14-2009; Ord.
2411, passed 4-27-2010; Ord. 2425, passed 9-14-2010; Ord. 2508, passed
6-24-2014; Ord. 2544, passed 10-25-2016; Ord. 2562, passed 1-9-2018; Ord.
2581, passed 5-8-2018)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.047  NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   The use of land which does not conform to the provisions of
this chapter, at the time of its effective date, may be continued until a
time as a structure is erected thereon and thereafter the use of the land and
the building must conform with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The lawful use of a building existing at the time of the
effective date of this chapter may be continued although the use does not
conform to the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are made, a
nonconforming use of a building may be continued as the same nonconforming
use to a more restricted classification or to a conforming use, but the use
shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use.



   (C)   In the event a nonconforming use of any building or premises
is discontinued for a period of one year, the use of the same shall
thereafter conform to the use regulations of the district, except that a
legal nonconforming use for a two-family dwelling can be reinstated,
regardless of the length of time that it was discontinued, provided all other
conditions of the zoning regulations and all other ordinances were met.



   (D)   No nonconforming use, except when required to do so by law or
ordinance, shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered
unless the use is changed to a use permitted in the district. The provisions
of this division shall not apply to existing residences in the M-1, M-2 or 
M-3 Districts. One or two-car garages, in connection therewith, may be
constructed.



   (E)   Direction or name signs or signs pertaining to or advertising
products sold on the premises of a nonconforming building or use may be
continued only when the nonconforming use is permitted to continue and any
signs shall not be expanded in area, height, number or illumination. New
signs, not to exceed 36 square feet in aggregate area, may be erected only
after all other signs existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter
are removed. New signs in conformity with the above regulations may have
illumination not to exceed 60 watts on one face of the sign, but flashing,
intermittent or moving illumination signs are not permitted.



   (F)   The adoption of this section shall not create any new
nonconforming uses or validate any existing nonconforming uses unless any
existing zoning districts are amended.



   (G)   If a nonconforming building or structure is damaged by more
than 50% of its assessed value by fire, wind, tornado or other natural
disaster, it cannot be rebuilt. If less than 50% damaged, it may be rebuilt
provided the rebuilding does not increase the intensity of use or floor area
of the nonconformity.



(1999 Code, § 165.25)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001)  Penalty, see §
159.999



§ 159.048  SIGNS.



   The regulations contained in this section apply to and regulate all
signs in all districts. No new or existing signs, awnings or other
advertising device, including signs painted on the vertical surface of a
structure, shall be located, replaced, erected or maintained except in
compliance with the regulations contained herein.



   (A)   Building permits are required for all new signs and all
existing signs if there is a change in location or in the total area of the
sign. Portable signs are allowed only under the provisions of divisions
(T)(3)(f) and (V) below. Portable signs in existence at the time of the
adoption of these regulations (adoption date) have two years to bring the
sign in conformance with the provisions of this section.



   (B)   Signs shall contain only the name of the business
establishment or the principal business conducted on the premises and may
include any motto, slogan, insignia or combination thereof.



   (C)   When a sign is illuminated, the light or lights shall be
shaded or concealed so that they will not interfere with the vision of motor
vehicle operators or shine directly on residential property located in any
residential property.



   (D)   All signs and sign structures shall be erected and maintained
in a safe condition. It is the responsibility of the sign owner, property
owner or proprietor of the premises to keep all signs thereon properly
maintained. The area around the base of the sign shall be kept free and clear
of any weeds, sign material, debris, trash and other refuse.



   (E)   When a business closes or if a sign is considered a hazard,
the owner is to remove the sign. If the owner refuses or neglects to repair
or remove the sign, the city, after proper notification, will remove the
dangerous or abandoned sign.



   (F)   Unless otherwise provided, all signs shall be contained upon
private property.



   (G)   Signs located within 20 feet of a corner street lot line
intersection shall be so erected and maintained that an unobscured visual
sight area is provided for vehicle operators. The unobscured area, at a
minimum, shall extend from a distance of two and one-half feet above finished
street grade to ten  feet above the grade. No more than two poles or post
supports of no more than ten inches in diameter shall be permitted within the
unobscured area.



   (H)   Unless otherwise permitted in this section, no part of any
sign which projects into or over a public right-of-way or other access way
shall have a minimum height of less than the following:



      (1)   Vehicular way, 16 feet



      (2)   Pedestrian way, ten feet



   (I)   A sign may be located in a required yard unless specifically
restricted therefrom.



   (J)   No sign or sign structure other than an official traffic,
street or other sign approved by the city shall be placed on any public
right-of-way.



   (K)   No sign or sign structure shall be erected at any location
where it may be, by reason of its size, shape, design, location, content,
color or manner of illumination, constitute a traffic hazard by obstructing
the vision of drivers or by obscuring or otherwise physically interfering
with a traffic control device.



   (L)   No sign or sign structure, unless otherwise provided in this
section, shall be erected on or overhang any public right-of-way.



   (M)   No signs or poles which contain or consist of reflectors or
lights which flash, strobe or resemble emergency lights shall be permitted.
No lights simulating movement shall be permitted exceeding 11 watts. This
prohibition does not exclude all electronic message boards. No sign may be
lighted in a manner which impairs the vision of any driver of any motor
vehicle.



   (N)   No sign shall be attached to or placed on any vehicle or
trailer parked on public or private property that is visible from a public
right-of-way. This prohibition does not prohibit the identification of a firm
or its principal products on a vehicle operating during the normal course of
business or being taken home.



   (O)   No sign shall be erected so as to prevent free ingress or
egress from any door, window or any other exit way required by the Fire
Prevention Code of the city or any other ordinances.



   (P)   No sign may imitate or resemble an official traffic control
sign, signal or device.



   (Q)   No sign that revolves or that utilizes movement or apparent
movement to attract attention shall be permitted.



   (R)   Only the signs listed in this division are permitted in R-1A,
R-1B, R-1C and R-2 Districts and are subject to the regulations set forth.



      (1)   Home occupations.  Unlighted name plate flat against
the building not exceeding two square feet in area, stating only the
resident’s name and occupation.



      (2)   Identification signs for other than residential use. 
Permitted nonresidential uses, but not including home occupations and legal
nonconforming uses, shall be permitted one non-illuminated identification
sign per establishment with a surface area not exceeding 12 square feet,
denoting only the name and address of the premises and name of management,
and shall be placed flat against the building. In addition, one bulletin
board ground sign shall be permitted for a church, school or other similar
institution for the purpose of displaying its name and activities or
services. The signs shall not exceed 36 square feet and may be lighted with
indirect lighting only. Signs must be located on the same lot as the building.



      (3)   Temporary signs.  The following temporary signs may be
installed without applying for a building permit.



         (a)   Temporary signs pertaining to the lease, hire or
sale of a building or premises. The signs shall not exceed ten square feet in
area and shall be located not less than ten feet from any property line.



         (b)   Temporary signs identifying construction or
improvements taking place on the property. Signs shall not exceed 36 square
feet in area and must be removed within five days after completion of the
work.



         (c)   Temporary real estate signs not exceeding 12
square feet in area. The signs must be removed within ten days after closing
the sale.



         (d)   Temporary signs identifying vacant lots for sale
in a subdivision shall not exceed 48 square feet.



         (e)   Special events message signs as provided for in
division (V) below of this section.



      (4)   Parking areas.  Signs designating accessory parking
area entrances and exits are limited to one sign for each exit or entrance
and a maximum surface area of two square feet for each sign. One sign per
parking area, designating the condition of use or identity of the parking
area and limited to a maximum area of nine square feet shall be permitted for
each street frontage. The signs shall not be located or constructed in a
manner which would constitute a safety hazard to vehicular or pedestrian
traffic by causing visual interference. Maximum height of the signs shall not
exceed 12 feet.



      (5)   Subdivisions or estate identifying signs.  Signs
identifying subdivisions or estate identifying signs are limited to 36 square
feet in area and shall not be higher than 12 feet. One sign is permitted for
each entrance to the subdivision or estate. Signs can be illuminated with
indirect lighting only.



   (S)   Only the signs listed hereinafter are permitted in the R-4 and
R-5 Districts and are subject to the regulations set forth herein.



      (1)   Any sign permitted in division (R) above.



      (2)   Multi-family unit signs indicating only the name and/or
address of the building, the name and location of the management thereof or
allied information. Signs shall not exceed 36 square feet or be higher than
12 feet and must be at least 20 feet from property lines abutting
single-family residential districts.



   (T)   Signs listed in this division are permitted in C Commercial or
M Industrial Districts and are subject to the regulations/limitations set
forth herein.



      (1)   Subject to the limitations set forth in this division,
the maximum area of all permitted signs is as follows:



         (a)   In the C-1, C-3 and C-R Districts, the maximum
area of all permitted signs on interior lots shall not exceed 300 square feet
and on corner lots shall not exceed 400 square feet; and



         (b)   In the C-2, C-2M, C-4 and all M Districts, the
maximum area of permitted signs on interior lots shall not exceed 400 square
feet and on corner lots shall not exceed 600 square feet. The total maximum
sign area may be increased by 200 square feet for buildings 50,000 square
feet or larger.



      (2)   Each developed parcel having frontage on a public
right-of-way is permitted to have one facia sign and one projecting sign
along that public street or the projecting sign may exist instead of but not
in addition to a freestanding ground sign or a roof sign.



      (3)   Subject to these provisions and division (W) below, the
following signs are permitted:



         (a)   Signs as permitted in divisions (R) and (S) above.



         (b)   One freestanding ground sign for each developed
parcel having frontage on a public right-of-way, not to exceed two square
feet of sign area for each linear foot of street frontage abutting the
portion of the parcel or premises. The maximum sign area shall not exceed 200
square feet. In the C-1, C-3 and C-R Districts, the height shall not exceed
25 feet. In all other C and M Districts, the height shall not exceed 35 feet.



         (c)   One wall or facia sign for each occupancy within a
developed parcel, not to exceed a total copy area of two square feet for each
linear foot of building occupancy. If the occupancy is on a corner, one wall
or facia sign will be permitted for each street frontage. If the building
includes a canopy, each occupancy will be permitted one under-canopy sign.
For buildings with a floor area of 50,000 square feet or more, the total copy
area may be increased to two and one-half square feet for each linear foot of
building occupancy.



         (d)   One roof sign shall be permitted for each
developed parcel. The sign shall not exceed three square feet of copy area
for each linear foot of building frontage which is parallel to the sign
placement direction or 200 square feet total, whichever is less.



         (e)   One projecting sign is permitted within a
developed parcel for each street lot frontage and it shall not exceed a total
area of two square feet for each linear foot of building occupancy. The
projecting sign may not extend more than ten feet horizontally from the
building to which it is attached.



         (f)   Portable signs may be used to display a business
name or products sold on the premises during business hours. Signs must be
removed during nonbusiness hours.



         (g)   One directional sign is permitted for each exit
and entrance for each street frontage. Each sign shall not exceed two square
feet in area and shall not be considered as part of the total allowable sign
area permitted. The maximum permitted height for the signs is 12 feet above
the street grade.



         (h)   Signs on awnings, canopies and marquees shall be
affixed flat to the surface thereof and shall not be illuminated. These types
of signs shall be exempted from the limitations applied to projecting signs.



         (i)   In addition to permitted signs, one additional
name sign or sign advertising products sold on the premises may be installed
provided the sign does not exceed 50 feet in area and contains no flashing,
moving or intermittent illumination. Signs shall not exceed six feet in
height.



   (U)   The following signs are only permitted in the C-2 District and
all M Districts:



      (1)   Primary highway signs (division (X) below); and



      (2)   Off-premises advertising signs (division (Y) below).



   (V)   Special event signs are defined as portable signs placed on
private property for the purpose of informing the public of upcoming events,
open houses, grand openings or special sale events. Although building permits
are not required, placement of special event signs is subject to the
requirements of this chapter.



      (1)   Special events sponsored by non-profit entities that are
open to the general public including, but not limited to, fairs, festivals,
dinners, special days and commemorative celebrations. These signs shall not
contain any advertisement for a product or service offered for sale. These
signs may be placed in any district on private property, but not earlier than
21 days preceding the event and shall be removed not later than seven days
following the end of the event.



      (2)   Special sale and grand opening signs shall be permitted
only in commercial and industrial districts and may be displayed no more than
15 consecutive days prior to the event for every two months. Signs must be
removed immediately upon termination of the sale or event they advertise.



      (3)   Portable sign. Any sign not permanently fixed can be
used as a special event sign subject to the restrictions of this section.



   (W)   Signs in public right-of-way. In addition to the sign
regulations herein, all signs in public rights-of-way shall also meet the
following regulations.



      (1)   No sign shall overhang any public right-of-way or public
property except in compliance with the regulations contained herein.



      (2)   The owner of any sign referred to in this division shall
deposit with the Clerk a public liability policy of insurance issued by a
company authorized to transact business in the state for a principal sum of
not less than $100,000 liability to any one person, and shall carry an
endorsement protecting the city, as its interests may appear, as the result
of any accident or injury for which it might become in any manner liable.
Should the insurance be terminated for any reason or should the same not be
kept in force at any time, the building permit for the sign shall be revoked
and the sign removed at once.



      (3)   No sign or banner, or part of any sign or banner, shall
be placed on or overhang the traveled portion of any public street or alley,
except on a temporary basis and upon a finding of the City Administrator that
the sign or banner advertises a public event of general importance to the
city, and only if the City Engineer determines the proposed sign or banner
can be suspended safely without obstructing sight-lines or obstructing travel
on the roadway. Any such sign or banner shall be approved by City
Administrator stating the reasons why the sign or banner complies with this
division (W)(3), the dates during which the sign or banner may be hung, the
exact location and height of the sign or banner, and an exhibit depicting the
sign or banner proposed. No sign or banner shall be affixed to any city pole
or other city property without the express written consent of the City
Administrator. The applicant shall be civilly liable for any damage to city
poles or other property resulting from the fastening or erection of any
banner on said poles or other property.



      (4)   No sign, except as provided for in this division, shall
be erected on or overhang any public right-of-way. Wall or facia signs
(division (T)(3)(c) above), projecting signs (division (T)(3)(e) above) and
signs on awnings, canopies and marquees (division (T)(3)(h) above) may
overhang a public right-of-way, excluding the traveled portion of a public
street or alleyway.



      (5)   No sign, awning, canopy or other similar structure may
extend over any public property without Council approval more than ten feet
or beyond a vertical plane two feet from the curb line on the property side.



      (6)   When awnings, canopies or similar structures are
attached to a building and project over a public right-of-way, it shall be
approved by the Fire Marshal and the framework shall not be less than eight
and one-half feet above the right-of-way. All support posts shall be placed
on private property.



         (a)   Canopy and marquee signs shall maintain a vertical
clearance of not less than ten feet above grade.



         (b)   Awning signs shall maintain a vertical clearance
of not less than eight feet above grade.



      (7)   The total area of a projecting sign shall not exceed one
and one-half feet for each linear foot of building frontage facing the
right-of-way or a maximum of 150 square feet.



      (8)   All overhanging signs shall meet or exceed the following
specifications:



         (a)   No sign shall have a greater weight than 2,000
pounds.



         (b)   When a sign is erected on a metal supporting post,
the support post must be placed on private property.



   (X)   Signs along primary highways. All signs located along primary
highways within the city must comply with the standards in the Iowa Code
Chapter 306C. Within the city, Highways 30, 67 and 136 are designated primary
highways. Signs are subject to control under this law if they are visible
from the highway. The following regulations provide a summary of the
regulations contained in the Iowa Code Chapter 306C. These regulations are in
addition to the requirements of the city.



      (1)   Regulated signs.  Signs regulated by Iowa Code Chapter
306C include:



         (a)   On-premises signs.  Signs advertising the
principal products sold or the activity conducted on the property at the sign
site;



         (b)   Off-premises signs.  Signs displaying message of
general advertisement about products or services available at locations other
than at the sign site;



         (c)   Municipal recognition signs.  Signs displaying a
message of “Welcome” or a similar community-spirited message; and



         (d)   Church or service club signs.  Signs displaying a
message to the facility location, services or meetings.



      (2)   State permit required.  State approval is required for
all signs located along a primary highway except for on-premises signs.



      (3)   Off-premises sign control.  Any off-premises signs must
conform to the permit, zoning, size, lighting and spacing criteria of the
state and the city.



         (a)   The display area of all off-premises advertising
signs shall not exceed 400 square feet.



         (b)   A maximum of two faces may be oriented in the same
direction.



         (c)   New signs must be a minimum of 800 feet from any
other off-premises sign facing in the same direction.



         (d)   An outdoor advertising permit must be obtained
prior to the installation of any new off-premises sign.



         (e)   No off-premises sign shall be permitted within 100
feet of a residential district boundary unless the sign is completely
screened from vision from the residential district.



         (f)   No off-premises sign shall exceed 35 feet in
height.



   (Y)   Off-premises signs not on a primary highway.  All
off-premises signs not located on a primary highway must conform to the
permit, zoning, size, lighting and spacing criteria of the city.



      (1)   In the C District, the display area shall not exceed 200
square feet. In any M District, the display area shall not exceed 300 square
feet.



      (2)   New signs must be a minimum of 800 feet from any other
off-premises sign.



      (3)   No off-premises sign shall be permitted within 200 feet
of a residential boundary unless the sign is completely screened from vision
from the residential district.



      (4)   No off-premises sign shall exceed 35 feet in height.



      (5)   No off-premises sign located on the side of a building
shall exceed 25 feet in height from the street grade.



   (Z)   The following sections have special sign regulations. Consult
the specific section or sign requirements.



      (1)   Section 159.027, SP Special Purpose Commercial and
Historical Overlay District; and



      (2)   Section 159.025, PWC Parkway Commercial District.



(1999 Code, § 165.26)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2352, passed
7-24-2007; Ord. 2368, passed 5-27-2008; Ord. 2569, passed 3-27-2018; Ord.
2590, passed 8-14-2018; Ord. 2595, passed 10-9-2018)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.049  SPECIAL USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Generally.  Special uses are those uses having some special
or unique characteristic which require a careful review of their location,
design, configuration and special impact to determine the desirability of
permitting their establishment on any given site. They are uses which may or
may not be appropriate in a particular location depending upon consideration
in each case of the public need and benefit and the local impact and all
within the context of the intent and purpose of this chapter. Subject to the
provisions of divisions (B) and (C) below of this section, the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, by a majority vote, may, by resolution, grant a special use
permit for the special uses enumerated in division (D) below of this section.
These special uses are allowed in any district unless their location is
restricted by district regulations or the special use is specifically
restricted to a particular district.



   (B)   Appeals for special use permits.



      (1)   Applications to permit new construction, extensions or
alteration of existing uses and uses authorized by this section, with site
plans and the necessary descriptive material relating to the intensity and
extent of use shall be made to the Zoning Board of Adjustment to investigate
as to the effect of the building or use upon the comprehensive plan, traffic
and fire hazards, the character of the neighborhood and the general welfare
of the community. A public hearing shall be held in relation to the plan
before the Zoning Board of Adjustment, notice and publication of the item and
place for which shall conform to the procedure prescribed in § 159.052.



      (2)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall determine whether
the building or use will:



         (a)   Substantially increase traffic hazards or
congestion;



         (b)   Substantially increase fire hazards;



         (c)   Adversely affect the character of the neighborhood;



         (d)   Adversely affect the general welfare of the
community;



         (e)   Overtax public utilities; and



         (f)   Be in conflict with the comprehensive plan.



      (3)   If the Board’s findings appear to be negative as to
all subjects referred to in divisions (B)(2)(a) through (f) listed above,
then the application shall be granted. If the findings are affirmative as to
any subject, then the permit shall be denied.



   (C)   Proposed special use.  Any proposed special use shall
otherwise comply with all of the regulations set forth in this chapter for
the district in which the use is located, except that the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may permit hospitals and institutions to exceed the height
limitation of any district.



   (D)   Special uses.  If a special use is listed with a zoning
district in parentheses, the special use is restricted to that district.



      (1)   Airport landing field or landing strip for all forms of
aircraft;



      (2)   Amusement park, but not within 300 feet of any
residential district;



      (3)   Cemetery, crematorium or mausoleum;



      (4)   Circus or carnival grounds, but not within 300 feet of
any residential district;



      (5)   Commercial, recreational or amusement development for
temporary or seasonal periods;



      (6)   Hospital or institution, provided that any hospital or
institution permitted in any residential district shall be located on a site
of not less than five acres, shall not occupy more than 10% of the total lot
area and shall be set back from all yard lines at least two feet for each
foot of building height. These regulations shall not apply to the presently
existing hospitals:  Mercy Medical;



      (7)   Marina;



      (8)   Medical/dental clinics, health care facilities and
nursing, rest or convalescent homes in residential districts;



      (9)   Office building of a civic, religious or charitable
organization, conducting activities primarily by mail and not handling
merchandise or rendering services on the premises, but only within the R-4
district;



      (10)   Privately operated community building or recreation
field;



      (11)   Any public or government building not permitted in a
particular district;



      (12)   Commercial stables as well as noncommercial stables on
less than five acres;



      (13)   Any structure that is intended for transmitting or
receiving radio, television or telephone communications, excluding those used
exclusively for dispatch communications;



      (14)   Waste processing, storage and transfer. All new and
existing facilities must meet the special use requirements for salvage yards;



      (15)   The extraction of sand, gravel and other raw materials
requiring the removal of an overburden above the deposit, provided, however,
any bulk storage of extracted materials or overburden and any processing or
extraction machinery or the open face of any outcrop shall be at least 500
feet from any residential structure, street or place. The owner/operator of a
facility must provide an operation/restoration plan before a permit can be
issued;



      (16)   Parking lots on land within 300 feet from any
commercial, business or industrial district, provided the following standards
are met:



         (a)   Ingress and egress to the lot shall be from a
major street or from a street directly serving the commercial or business
district;



         (b)   No business involving the repair or service of
vehicles or the sale or display thereof shall be conducted from or upon the
parking areas;



         (c)   No structures shall be erected or remain on any
portion of the lot except as provided for under division (D)(16)(g) below;



         (d)   No signs shall be erected on the parking area
except as approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment;



         (e)   Parking areas shall be used for parking patrons’
passenger vehicles only and no charge shall be made for parking within the
premises;



         (f)   The parking shall be set back in conformity with
the established or required yards for residential uses and where a parking
area adjoins a residential use, it shall have a minimum side yard of ten
feet; and



         (g)   The parking area shall be suitably screened or
fenced, paved and drained, lighted properly and maintained free of debris.



      (17)   Salvage yards, used vehicle parts dealer and vehicle
salvager. All new and existing facilities must be maintained according to the
requirements of this division and the requirements established in the Iowa
Code § 306C.2 for junk yards. In addition, used parts dealers and vehicle
salvagers must also meet the requirements of the Iowa Code § 321H. Salvage
yards, used parts dealer and vehicle salvage are restricted to the M-3
Industrial (Park) District.



         (a)   No facility shall be located so as to seriously
expose adjoining or adjacent properties.



         (b)   The burning of wrecked or dismantled vehicles or
any parts thereof, salvage or waste materials is prohibited.



         (c)   Handling and storage of large quantities of waste
paper, rags or other combustible material shall not be in a building of wood
frame or ordinary construction unless the building is sprinkled. Vertical
openings shall be enclosed in an approved manner.



         (d)   Picking rooms shall be separated from storage
rooms by construction having a fire resistance rating of not less than one
hour, with each door opening provided with an approved, self closing fire
door. Picking rooms shall be enclosed with exhaust systems of sufficient
capacity to adequately remove dust and lint.



         (e)   Where acetylene or other types of torches are used
for cutting operations, a suitable fire extinguisher must be available.



         (f)   The property used for these purposes must be
screened with a six-foot high solid visual barrier.



         (g)   At least ten off-street parking spaces must be
provided.



         (h)   One off-street loading space not less than ten
feet in width and 25 feet in length must be provided.



      (18)   Special uses listed in district use regulations;



      (19)   Bed and breakfast inn and bed and breakfast home in any
residential district provided the following conditions are met:



         (a)   Shall be located only on properties that are
single-family, owner occupied;



         (b)   Special use permits are not transferable to
subsequent owners or to other properties unless a new special use permit is
issued;



         (c)   Only short-term (less than 14 nights) lodging is
permitted;



         (d)   Occupancy for a bed and breakfast inn shall be
limited to no more than ten guest rooms. A bed and breakfast home shall be
limited to no more than three guest rooms;



         (e)   No cooking facilities are permitted in guest rooms;



         (f)   One off-street parking space for each guest room;



         (g)   One freestanding ground sign not exceeding six
square feet in area and no higher than 6 feet in height is permitted. Signs
shall only be illuminated with direct light. One wall mounted sign may exist
instead of but not in addition to a freestanding ground sign. The wall
mounted sign may not exceed 6 square feet in area, may not be internally
illuminated, and with direct lighting only; and



         (h)   Be subject to all applicable state and local codes.



      (20)   Office uses without limitation to the number of
employees allowed in any commercial district.



      (21)   Vehicle rebuilder.  All new and existing vehicle
rebuilders must follow the requirements of the Iowa Department of
Transportation pursuant to the Iowa Code Chapter 321H and the following
regulations.



         (a)   All repairs/rebuilding are conducted within a
completely enclosed building.



         (b)   All outdoor storage areas for vehicles and vehicle
parts must be completely screened with a six foot solid visual barrier.



         (c)   No more than seven vehicles waiting
repair/rebuilding may be stored.



         (d)   No vehicles waiting repair/rebuilding may be
located outside the motor vehicle storage yard.



         (e)   Vehicle rebuilding will only be allowed in the C-2
and M Districts.



      (22)   Recycling processing center. All new and existing
recycling processing centers shall meet the requirements of division
(D)(17)(a) through (h) above.



      (23)   Pet crematorium in the R-1A One-Family Residential
District provided the following conditions are met:



         (a)   Minimum lot size of one acre;



         (b)   Limited to pets which weigh no more than 200
pounds;



         (c)   The crematory shall be within an enclosed building;



         (d)   All remains of the cremation shall be returned to
the pet owner or disposed of in a sanitary landfill;



         (e)   The cremation process shall emit no odor that is
objectionable to surrounding property owners;



         (f)   All pets shall be cremated within 24 hours after
being received or stored in freezers to prevent odor or decomposition;



         (g)   The crematory shall operate in compliance with all
local and state regulations;



         (h)   Minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be
provided;



         (i)   A permit for a pet crematory is not transferable
to subsequent owners or to other properties unless a new permit is issued; and



         (j)   No advertising sign shall be displayed except for
an unlighted business name sign flat against the building not exceeding two
square feet in area. No advertisement shall list the address of the business.



      (24)   (a)   It is the intent of these regulations to
ensure the proper design, siting, and installation of wind energy conversion
systems in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of
surrounding property owners and the community.



         (b)   The city recognizes the importance of reducing
dependence on non-renewable sources of energy by promoting alternative energy
sources.  The city also recognizes wind energy is an abundant and
non-polluting energy resource available to the city.  As such, the city
understands wind energy conversion systems have the potential to adversely
affect surrounding properties in terms of noise, aesthetic issues, shadow
flickers, fall zone damage, etc. if not sited and regulated properly.



            1.   Definitions.  For the purposes of this
division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.



                  COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM.
A wind energy conversion system (horizontal or vertical axis) intended to
produce electricity for sale to a rate regulated or non-regulated utility or
for use off site.



                  FAA.  The Federal Aviation
Administration of the United States Department of Transportation.



                  FALL ZONE.  The area, defined as the
furthest distance from the tower base, in which a wind energy conversion
system will collapse in the event of a structural failure.



                  GUY WIRE.  Any wire extending from a
wind energy conversion system for the purpose of supporting the structure.



                  HEIGHT, TOTAL SYSTEM. The height above
grade of the system, or above the roofline if roof-mounted, including the
wind generator and the highest vertical extension of any blade or rotor.



                  MET (METEOROLOGICAL) TOWER.  A tower
with an aggregation of parts including any anchor, base, base plate, boom,
cable, electrical or electronic equipment, guy wire, hardware, indicator,
instrument, telemetry device, vane, or wiring used to collect or transmit
meteorological data, including wind speed and wind flow information, in order
to monitor or characterize wind resources at or near a wind energy conversion
system.



                  NON-COMMERCIAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION
SYSTEM. A wind energy conversion system (horizontal or vertical axis) which
has a rated capacity of up to 100 kilowatts and which is incidental and
subordinate to a permitted use on the same parcel.  A system is considered a
non-commercial wind energy conversion system only if it supplies electrical
power solely for on site use, except that when a parcel on which the system
is installed also receives electrical power supplied by a utility company,
excess electrical power generated and not presently needed for on site use
may be used by the utility company in accordance with I.A.C. Section 199,
Chapter 15.11(5).  Any wind energy conversion system not falling under this
definition shall be treated as a commercial wind energy conversion system.



                  SHADOW FLICKER.  Any alternating change
in light intensity caused by the rotating blades of a wind energy conversion
system casting shadows on the ground or a stationary object.



                  TOWER.  The vertical component of a wind
energy conversion system that elevates the wind generator above the ground.



                  USE TERMINATION.  The point in time at
which a wind energy conversion system owner provides notice to the city that
the wind energy conversion system is no longer used to produce electricity
unless due to a temporary shutdown for repairs.  The notice of use
termination shall occur no less than 30 days after actual use termination.



                  WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS). 
An aggregation of parts including the base, tower, generator, rotor, blades,
supports, guy wires and accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and
battery banks, etc., in such configuration as necessary to convert the power
of wind into mechanical or electrical energy, e.g., wind charger, windmill or
wind turbine.



                  WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM (WECS),
ABANDONED.  Any wind energy conversion system which remains non-functional
or inoperative for a period of one year.



                  WIND GENERATOR.  The blades and
associated mechanical and electrical conversion components mounted on the top
of the tower.



            2.   General regulations.



               a.   General. 



                     i.   Wind energy conversion
systems shall be allowed as a special use accessory to a permitted use in all
zoning districts.



                     ii.   MET towers are subject to
all regulations and restrictions set for wind energy conversion systems set
forth in division (D)(24).



               b.   Prohibited.  Commercial wind energy
conversion systems are prohibited within the city.



               c.   Number of systems per property.  No
property shall contain more than one wind energy conversion system.  The
Zoning Board of Adjustment may permit additional wind energy conversion
systems if the property owner can demonstrate a need for the extra system(s)
in order to further reduce on-site energy consumption and help satisfy the
intent of the ordinance.  However, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
consider the potential adverse impacts resulting from visual clutter and
noise.  Under no circumstances shall the combination of all wind energy
conversion systems on a lot exceed a total rated output capacity of 100 kW.



               d.   Permit required.  All wind energy
conversion systems require a special use permit to be obtained from the
Zoning Board of Adjustment prior to site grading and installation in any
zoning district.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment can revoke a special use
permit at any time if the requirements set forth in this ordinance and/or any
conditions imposed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment are not met.  The
Zoning Board of Adjustment will revoke the special use permit of an abandoned
wind energy conversion system.



               e.   Insurance.  The owner/operator of a
wind energy conversion system must demonstrate adequate liability insurance.



               f.   FAA regulations.  Wind energy
conversion systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any
necessary approvals for installations close to airports.  The applicant has
the responsibility of determining applicable FAA regulations and must provide
evidence of securing the necessary approvals.



               g.   Maintenance.  All wind energy
conversion systems shall be properly maintained in operational condition at
all times, subject to reasonable maintenance and repair outages.  The owner
of any wind energy conversion system deemed unsafe by the building official
or his/her designee shall repair the structure to meet all federal, state and
local safety standards or remove it within six months.



               h.   Nonconforming.  Properly maintained
wind energy conversion systems constructed prior to the effective date of
this Section shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section;
provided, however, that any such pre-existing wind energy conversion system
which does not provide energy for a continuous period of 12 months shall meet
the requirements of this section prior to recommencing production of
energy.  However, no modification or alteration to an existing wind energy
conversion system, other than routine maintenance, shall be allowed unless in
compliance with this section.



            3.   Bulk regulations.



               a.   Setbacks.  The minimum distance
between a wind energy conversion system and any property line shall be no
less than a distance equivalent to 110% of the total system height.  The
setback shall be measured from the center of the tower's base.  Associated
guy wires, if applicable, must be set back a distance of ten feet from all
property lines.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment may authorize lesser setback
distances if a registered engineer licensed by the State of Iowa specifies in
writing that the collapse of the system will occur within a lesser distance
under all foreseeable circumstances.



               b.   Maximum total system height.



                  i.   The maximum height for a wind
energy conversion system is 80 feet.



                  ii.   The maximum height for a
roof-mounted wind energy conversion system is 15 feet above the maximum
building height allowed in the zoning district in which it is located.



            4.   Location.



               a.   No wind energy conversion system shall
be located over any public road right-of-way unless the governmental entity
with jurisdiction over the road provides written permission.



               b.   No wind energy conversion system shall
be located over any adjacent properties unless the affected land owner(s)
provides written permission.  This permission shall come in the form of a
recorded easement or other recorded instrument.



               c.   No wind energy conversion system shall
be located within or over any drainage, utility or other established
easements.



               d.   Wind energy conversion systems shall be
located entirely within the rear yard of a property unless mounted on a roof.



            5.   Design and technical standards.



               a.   Tower. Wind generators must be attached
to a freestanding or guy wired monopole tower or mounted on a roof.  Lattice
towers are prohibited.



               b.   Color.  Wind energy conversion systems
shall be white, grey or another non-obtrusive color unless other color
patterns or colors are required by state or federal regulations.  Blades may
be black to facilitate de-icing.  Finishes shall be non-reflective or matte.



               c.   Lighting.  Minimum lighting necessary
for safety and security purposes shall be permitted.  Security lighting
shall be directed downward and shaded or concealed so as to not shine
directly on adjacent properties.  No other lighting is allowed unless
required to meet state or federal regulations.



               d.   Signage permitted.  Wind energy
conversion systems shall include warning signage, not to exceed four square
feet, highlighting the risk of electrical shock, high voltage, harm from
revolving machinery, hazard from falling ice and the name and emergency
contact telephone number of the system's owner.  Required signage must be
placed on the tower at a height of five feet.  In addition, a system or
tower's manufacturer's logo may be displayed on a wind energy conversion
system in an un-obstructive manner.  Permitted signage shall not be
considered as part of a property's total allowable sign area permitted.  All
other signs are prohibited.



               e.   Climbing apparatus.  Climbing
apparatuses must be located 12 feet from the ground and the tower must be
designed to prevent climbing within the first 12 feet.  Roof-mounted wind
energy conversion systems are exempt from this requirement as long as roof
access is restricted.



               f.   Fencing.  All wind energy conversion
systems and associated guy wire anchor points shall be enclosed by a six-foot
high fence with a securely locked gate to limit uncontrolled access and
reduce safety hazards.  Roof-mounted wind energy conversion systems are
exempt from this requirement.



               g.   Electrical wires.  All electrical
wires associated with a wind energy conversion system, other than wires
necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower wiring, the tower wiring
to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires shall be located
underground.



               h.   Noise.  Wind energy conversion systems
shall not exceed 65 decibels (dBA), except during short-term events such as
severe wind storms and utility outages, as measured under test procedures
established by § 93.10 of the code of ordinances. Maximum sound pressures
will be measured from the closest point on the closest property line.



               i.   Blade clearance.  No wind energy
conversion system shall have any portion of a blade extend within 20 feet of
the ground.



               j.   Automatic overspeed controls.  All
wind energy conversion systems shall be equipped with manual and automatic
overspeed controls to limit the blade rotation speed to within the design
limits of the wind energy conversion system.



               k.   Electromagnetic interference.  No wind
energy conversion system shall produce electromagnetic interference so as to
disrupt transmissions such as those from radio, television or microwave
towers.



               l.   Waste disposal.  Solid and hazardous
wastes, including but not limited to crates, packaging materials, damaged or
worn parts, as well as used oils and lubricants, shall be removed from the
site promptly and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state
and federal regulations.



               m.   Ice shedding.  Wind energy conversion
system owners shall ensure that ice from the rotor blades does not impact any
off-site properties.



               n.   Shadow flicker.  Wind energy
conversion systems shall not cause a shadow flicker upon any off-site
properties or traveled roadways.



            6.   Abandonment and removal procedure.



               a.   All wind energy conversion systems
shall be removed from the site within six months of use termination notice to
the city by the owner of the facility or within three months of a special use
permit revocation by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.



               b.   The site shall be stabilized, graded
and cleared of any debris by the property owner.



               c.   Any foundation shall be removed to a
minimum depth of four feet below grade, or to the level of the bedrock if
less than four feet below grade.



               d.   If the removal of the wind energy
conversion system is required, the city will assess the costs of removal
against the property upon which the wind energy conversion system is located
for collection in the same manner as a property tax.



            7.   Application and approval requirements. 
Applications for a special use permit shall be submitted with the following
information:



               a.   A properly completed and signed
application.



               b.   A statement from the applicant that the
wind energy conversion system will be installed in compliance with
manufacturer's specifications, and a copy of the manufacturer's
specifications.



               c.   A statement indicating what hazardous
materials will be used or stored on the site and how those materials will be
stored.



               d.   Documentation demonstrating adequate
liability insurance for the wind energy conversion system.



               e.   A description of the wind energy
conversion system's height and design, including a cross section, elevation,
and diagram of how the wind energy conversion system will be anchored to the
ground or attached to the roof, prepared by a professional engineer licensed
in the State of Iowa.



               f.   A site plan including the following
information:



                  i.   Legal description of the property;



                  ii.   Parcel boundaries ;



                  iii.   Existing buildings;



                  iv.   Easements;



                  v.   Fencing;



                  vi.   Proposed location of wind energy
conversion system;



                  vii.   Setbacks;



                  viii.   Travel ways;



                  ix.   Overhead utility lines;



                  x.   Contour map with contours at
intervals of two feet, if the general slope is less than 10%, and at vertical
intervals of five feet if the general slope is greater than 10%;



                  xi.   If connection to the publicly
regulated utility grid is proposed, a copy of the contract between applicant
and utility verifying that the proposed connection is acceptable, and/or
other evidence making clear that the utility is aware of the proposed
connection and finds it acceptable.



   (E)   Temporary buildings.  Temporary buildings may be used in
conjunction with construction only and may be permitted in any district
during the period that the construction work is in progress, and the
temporary buildings shall be removed upon completion of the construction work.



(1999 Code, § 165.28)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2255, passed
5-20-2002; Ord. 2352, passed 7-24-2007; Ord. 2360, passed 2-12-2008; Ord.
2403, passed 4-14-2009; Ord. 2404, passed 6-14-2009)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.050  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no
change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or
portion thereof shall be made until the Building Official has issued a
certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall not be constructed as an approval of a
violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the
jurisdiction.



   (B)   Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any of the
following.



      (1)   Certificates of occupancy for nonconforming uses.



         (a)   A certificate of occupancy shall be required for
all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by the adoption of
this Chapter. It shall be the duty of the Building and Neighborhood Services
Director or his or her designee to issue a certificate of occupancy for a
lawful nonconforming use.



         (b)   Failure to receive the certificate of occupancy
for a nonconforming use or refusal of the Building and Neighborhood Services
Director or his or her designee to issue a certificate of occupancy for the
nonconforming use shall be prima facia evidence that the nonconforming use
was either illegal or did not lawfully exist at the effective date of this
chapter.



      (2)   Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.  No
occupancy, use or change of use shall take place until a certificate of
occupancy therefore shall have been issued by the Building and Neighborhood
Services Director or his or her designee.



   (C)   Certificates of occupancy are not required for fences,
accessory buildings or signs, but the Planning Department is to be notified
when these improvements are completed.



(1999 Code, § 165.29)  (Ord. 2368, passed 5-27-2008)  Penalty, see §
159.999



§ 159.051  PLANS.



   (A)   All applications for zoning permits shall be accompanied by
accurate site plans, showing the size and location of new construction and
existing structures on the site and distances from lot lines. Applications
for zoning permits will be inspected within three business days of
application.



   (B)   All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location
and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on the actual survey, if
available, but the permit applicant is responsible to know the location of
all property lines and is responsible for any error in calculating lot lines.
The lot shall be staked out on the ground before construction is started on
any new project.



(1999 Code, § 165.30)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2368, passed
5-27-2008)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.052  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   For the manner in which the boundaries of the districts shall
be determined, established and enforced and from time to time amended,
supplemented or changed. However, no regulation, restriction or boundary
shall become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at
which time all interested parties and citizens shall have an opportunity to
be heard. At least seven days notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the city. However, in
case of a protest against the change, signed by the owners of 20% or more
either of the area of the lots included in the proposed change or of owners
of property located within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the
property (excluding street or alley rights-of-way) for which the change is
proposed, the change shall not become effective except by the favorable vote
of at least three-fourths of all of the members of the Council.



   (B)   A property owner, lessee, developer or option holder may
petition the Council for an amendment to the text or district map of this
chapter, provided that before any action shall be taken as provided in this
section, the party or parties petitioning for an amendment shall deposit with
the Clerk a zoning amendment filing fee in an amount established by Council
resolution. Once the petition is received for an amendment, supplement,
change or modification to the zoning regulations, it shall be forwarded to
the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee for
scheduling of a hearing before the Plan Commission and recorded as a referred
item at the following Council meeting. The filing fee or any part thereof
shall not be refunded for failure of the proposed amendment to be enacted
into law. A party shall not initiate action for a zoning amendment affecting
the same land more often than once every 12 months, unless approved by the
Council.



   (C)   If more than one petitioner is included, each petitioner or
parcel should not be combined as one rezoning request or one petition or if
the Plan Commission feels the combining of the changes would affect the
surrounding area as defined under the comprehensive plan.



   (D)   Site development plan. Any request for an amendment to the
zoning district map shall be accompanied by a site development plan. Zoning
map amendments involving a change to a single-family residential
classification (R-1A, R-1B and R-1C) are excluded from these requirements.



      (1)   Sketch plan.  The Building and Neighborhood Services
Director or his or her designee may require the property owner or developer
to submit a sketch plan before submitting a final site plan showing all
significant features of the development to determine compliance with the
requirements of this section.



      (2)   Site development plan requirements.  With each petition
to rezone a property or properties, the following information must be
provided:



         (a)   Written petition.  A signed petition shall
include the following information:



            1.   Applicant name, address and legal interest in
the subject property;



            2.   Title holder’s name and address, if
different than the applicant, and evidence of consent to filing of the
petition;



            3.    Existing and proposed zoning classification;



            4.    Complete legal description;



            5.    List of all proposed land uses; and



            6.    Proposed construction schedule.



         (b)   Site development plan.



            1.   One complete site development plans must be
submitted and must include the following information:



               a.    Property dimensions;



               b.    Location and dimensions of all present
and proposed buildings, structures, streets, driveways, pedestrian walkways
and parking lots;



               c.    General nature, location and size of
all significant natural land features including trees, waterways, drainage
areas and floodplain areas;



               d.    Landscaping plans;



               e.    Signage plans;



               f.    Stormwater detention/erosion control
plans;



               g.    Utility locations;



               h.   Architectural renderings of all sides
of each building/structure, including accessory buildings;



               i.    Location map; and



               j.   Proposed land uses.



            2.   Site development plans shall be legibly drawn
to scale of one inch to 100 feet or less. Sheet size shall not exceed 24
inches by 36 inches. If CAD is available, one 8-1/2 inches by 11 inches may
also be submitted.



      (3)   Plan Commission review.



         (a)   In addition to reviewing the zoning map amendment,
the Plan Commission shall also review all site development plans. The Plan
Commission shall consider the following in making its recommendations to the
City Council:



            1.   Relationship to future land use plans;



            2.   A characteristic of the general area
including any changing conditions;



            3.   Effect on and compatibility with the
neighborhood;



            4.   The suitability of the property for all uses
permitted in the proposed district; and



            5.   Adequacy of streets and utilities.



         (b)   The Plan Commission may place conditions on the
plans that the Commission deems necessary to carry out the intent and purpose
of this section. The conditions may include, but are not limited to increases
in lot or yard sizes, number and location of vehicular access points,
limitations on signs, limitations to coverage and height of buildings
situated on the property to protect adjacent properties and
screening/landscaping where necessary to reduce noise and glare.



      (4)   Site development plan.  Any request for an amendment to
the zoning district map shall be accompanied by a site development plan.
Zoning map amendments involving a change to a single-family residential
district (R-1A, R-1B and R-1C) may submit a detailed description in lieu of
the requirements of a site development plan. City Council approval of site
development plans. Site development plans must be approved, by City Council
resolution, before any rezoning is approved or any building permits can be
issued. If the improvements identified in the site development plan have not
been completed within five years from the date of City Council approval, the
site development plan shall be void unless an extension of time has been
granted prior to the expiration date. The City Council may grant a two-year
extension.



      (5)   Plan amendments or revisions.



         (a)   If at any time, the owner/developer of land
included in an approved site development plan desires to amend, change or
modify the plan, the proposed change must be submitted to the city to
determine if the change is major or substantial. If major or substantial, the
plan must be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as originally
considered. Examples of major or substantial change include, but are not
limited to:



            1.   Land use changes;



            2.   Building locations;



            3.   Densities;



            4.   Street alignments;



            5.   Parking lot arrangements;



            6.   Screening and signage standards;



            7.   Building design elements; and



            8.   Traffic circulation.



         (b)   If the amendment or revision is considered not to
be major or substantial, the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or
his or her designee can approve the change.



   (E)   Moratorium on property rezoning in the Camanche Avenue
Corridor.



      (1)   The City Council shall not give final approval to any
reclassification (rezoning) request for property in the Camanche Avenue
Corridor that lies within the corporate limits of the city, as described as
follows below.



         Commencing as a point of reference at a point on the
centerline of South Fourteenth Street and Camanche Avenue; thence
northeasterly on the centerline of Camanche Avenue to the centerline of
Eleventh Avenue South; thence easterly on the centerline of Eleventh Avenue
South to centerline of South Fourth Street; thence southerly on the
centerline of South Fourth Street to the northern boundary on the
right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad property (formally the
Chicago and Northwestern Railroad); thence southwesterly on the  northern
boundary of the Union Pacific Railroad property to the centerline of South
Fourteenth Street, thence northeasterly on the centerline of South Fourteenth
Street to the centerline of Camanche Avenue (being the point of beginning)
all within the city until March 31, 2009, except where a vested right to the
issuance of the approval accrued to any person, firm or corporation as a
matter of law prior to the effective date of this section.



      (2)   Exceptions.  Any person, firm or corporation so
aggrieved by or adversely affected by the Planning/Community Development
Director’s refusal to issue a permit pursuant to this moratorium shall
appeal therefrom to the City Council. The City Council may direct the
Planning/Community Development Director to issue a permit during the
moratorium for any work in the Camanche Avenue Corridor which the City
Council determines would not negatively impact the redevelopment plan, upon
showing good cause by the person, firm or corporation. This moratorium shall
not apply to any required repairs that pose a health or safety hazard to the
occupants or the general public or to any repair or replacement of any lawful
sign as long as the repair or replacement does not change the size, shape or
location of the sign. The moratorium shall not apply to any new wall signs
placed on existing buildings or any fence.



(1999 Code, § 165.31)  (Ord. 2107, passed 1-11-2000; Ord. 2234, passed
4-10-2001; Ord. 2264, passed 2-25-2003; Ord. 2275, passed 3-9-2004; Ord.
2296, passed 6-28-2005; Ord. 2317, passed 2-28-2006)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.053  INTERPRETATION, PURPOSE AND CONFLICT.



   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be construed to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public
health, safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare. It is not intended
by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any other resolution
or rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall
be adopted or issued, not in conflict with any of the provisions of this
chapter except ordinances and/or regulations specifically repealed by this
chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or
agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon
the area than that imposed or required by other resolutions, easements,
covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control. This
chapter should be reviewed periodically to assure the use of good practical
principles of planning, dealing with zoning and land use.



(1999 Code, § 165.32)



§ 159.054  ZONING PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   It shall be necessary to obtain a zoning permit for all
prefabricated, freestanding carports, sheds (measuring from 60 square feet to
120 square feet), fences up to six feet in height, retaining walls up to four
feet (measured from the bottom of the footing up to the top of the wall)
unless supporting a surcharge, awnings with less than 54-inch projection and
handicapped ramps.



   (B)   Application for a zoning permit shall be submitted in a form
as the Planning/Community Development Director may prescribe and on forms
supplied by the city. Application shall be made by the owner or his or her
duly authorized representative. The application shall contain the full name
and address of the owner and the applicant.



   (C)   The application must briefly describe the proposed work, the
use and occupancy of the building and the grounds and shall give additional
information as may be required by the Planning/Community Development Director
for an intelligent understanding of the proposed work.



   (D)   All applications for zoning permits shall be accompanied by a
plan as defined under § 159.051, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to
be built upon, the size of the building or buildings to be erected, distances
to lot lines from buildings and any other information as may be necessary to
furnish for the enforcement of these regulations. A careful record of the
application and plats shall be kept in the office of the Planning/Community
Development Director. No court, yard or other open space provided about any
building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of these
regulations shall again be used as a yard, court or other open space for
another building.



   (E)   It shall be the duty of the Planning/Community Development
Director to inspect applications for zoning permits within three business
days after receipt of the application. If, after examination, he or she finds
no objection to the same and it appears that the proposed work will be in
compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable thereto, he or she shall
approve the application and issue a zoning permit for the proposed work as
soon as practical. If his or her examination reveals otherwise, he or she
will reject the application, noting his or her findings in a report to be
attached to the application and delivering a copy to the applicant. The
applicant shall have the right of appeal from the Building and Neighborhood
Services Director or his or her designee’s decision to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment; any appeal must be submitted within 15 business days from the
date of application.



   (F)   All work performed under a zoning permit issued by the
Planning/Community Development Director shall conform to the approved
application and approved amendments thereto. The location of all new
construction, as shown on the approved plat or an approved amendment thereof,
shall be strictly adhered to.



   (G)   It is unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of a lot or plot
of which a plot diagram has been filed and has been used as the basis for a
zoning permit unless a revised plot diagram, showing the proposed change in
condition, shall have been filed and approved, provided, however, that this
shall not apply when the lot is reduced by reason of a street opening or
widening or other public improvements.



   (H)   The Planning/Community Development Director shall be given at
least three business days notice of the starting of work under the zoning
permit. Construction pursuant to the permit must begin within 90 days from
the application date. The permit will expire at the end of one year from the
application date.



   (I)   It shall be the duty of the Planning/Community Development
Director or his or her designated representative to inspect the layout of the
proposed work within three business days after receipt of the application. He
or she shall satisfy himself or herself that the proposed work is conforming
to the plot plan submitted with the application for a zoning permit. If work
started does not conform to the plot, diagram or other information given in
the application he or she is hereby granted authority to stop work until the
provisions of the permit are complied with.



   (J)   The Planning/Community Development Director may revoke a
zoning permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case
there have been any false statements or misrepresentation as to a material
part in the application or drawings on which the permit or approval was based.



   (K)   A permanent record shall be kept of all applications for
zoning permits and it shall be unlawful to change the use or occupancy of a
building or land to a use or occupancy other than that described in the
application. If it is desired to change to another conforming use or
occupancy, a new application must be submitted and approved.



   (L)   Fees for zoning permits and Zoning Board of Adjustment
appeals, permits or amendments for work shall be in amounts established by
resolution, from time to time, by the Council. The fees shall be paid at the
time of zoning application is approved. If construction has commenced prior
to the issuance of a permit, the fee for the permit shall be twice the amount
of the actual zoning permit fee.



   (M)   The property owner is responsible for compliance with any
private subdivision covenant.



   (N)   Zoning permits will not be required for dog houses, dog pens
less than 60 square feet in area, sheds less than 60 square feet in area,
yard ornaments, play equipment, playhouses, fencing for gardens and flower
beds, ornamental fencing less than ten feet in length and prefabricated
and/or inflatable swimming pools that are not permanently installed.



   (O)   (1)   Moratorium on building permits in the Camanche Avenue
Corridor as described in § 159.052. The Planning/Community Development
Director shall not issue any building permits for any new construction or
remodeling work which changes the size, outline, area, location on lot,
height of structure or yard requirements until March 31, 2004, except where a
vested right to the issuance of the approval accrued to any person, firm or
corporation as a matter of law prior to the effective date of this section.



      (2)   Exceptions. Any person, firm or corporation so aggrieved
by or adversely affected by the Planning/Community Development Director’s
refusal to issue a permit pursuant to this moratorium shall appeal therefrom
to the City Council. The City Council may direct the Planning/Community
Development Director to issue a permit during the moratorium for any work in
the Camanche Avenue Corridor which the City Council determines would not
negatively impact the redevelopment plan, upon good showing cause by the
person, firm or corporation. This moratorium shall not apply to any required
repairs that pose a health or safety hazard to the occupants or the general
public or to any repair or replacement of any lawful sign as long as the
repair or replacement does not change the size, shape or location of the
sign. The moratorium shall not apply to any new wall signs placed on existing
buildings or any fence.



(1999 Code, § 165.33)  (Ord. 2234, passed 4-10-2001; Ord. 2247, passed
10-9-2001; Ord. 2264, passed 2-25-2003; Ord. 2352, passed 7-24-2007; Ord.
2368, passed 5-27-2008)



OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



§ 159.065  OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All new or expanded off-street parking areas shall follow the
parking requirements established by the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990 (42 U.S.C. § 1281).



   (B)   Landscaping of all off-street parking areas is required within
all districts in order to protect and preserve the appearance, character and
value of surrounding neighborhoods and to reduce noise and glare. Special
fencing requirements also apply to parking areas in or abutting residential
districts.



      (1)   All new parking areas or existing parking lots adding
ten or more parking spaces in or abutting a residential zoning district or
intervening alley shall be suitably screened on each side that abuts a
residential district with fencing or suitable plantings that provide at a
minimum a three-foot high solid visual barrier except those areas that abut a
street right-of-way. Landscaping material such as trees or shrubs may be used
instead of solid visuals barriers for screening along these street
rights-of-way. If located on a corner lot, corner visual clearance zone
requirements must be followed. The Board of Adjustment may waive screening
requirements if the parking area is at least 100 feet from the nearest
residential property line.



      (2)   No off-street parking area of 25 or more parking spaces
shall be constructed or enlarged until a landscaping plan has been approved
by the city. Landscaping plans shall include dimensions and distances, and
clearly delineate the existing and proposed parking spaces or other vehicle
use areas, access aisle, driveways and the location, size and description of
all landscape material.



      (3)   Landscaping standards. All off-street parking areas
measuring one acre or larger in size shall be required to landscape the
interior and outside perimeter of the off-street parking area. Not less than
5% of the parking area shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs or other
acceptable landscape material. Off-street parking areas measuring less than
one acre shall have the option of providing either interior or peripheral
landscaping.



   (C)   In all districts except the C-3 Central Business District,
there shall be provided, at any time any building or structure is erected or
structurally altered (except as otherwise provided in this chapter),
off-street parking spaces, to be maintained by the owner or lessee if used
under an agreement in accordance with the following requirements:



 

Residential
 





Rooming and boarding house
 
1 space/sleeping room


One- and two-family dwelling
 
2 spaces/dwelling unit


Apartment dwelling
 




   Efficiency apartment

 
1 space/dwelling unit



   One bedroom apartment

 
1 space/dwelling unit



   Two or more bedroom apartment

 
2 spaces/dwelling unit


Mobile home
 
2 spaces/home space


Elderly and handicap apartment
 
1 space/dwelling unit


Nursing and convalescent home
 
1 space/4 beds


College and university housing
 
1 space/2 beds


Hotel and motel
 
1 space/2 beds 1 space/guest room plus 6 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. of ballroom,
meeting room, bar and restaurant areas; 1 additional space/2 employees on
largest shift


Office
 



Medical and dental
 
1 space/150 sq. ft.


Other office
 
1 space/250 sq. ft.


Sales and Service Establishments
 



Bowling alley
 
5 spaces/lane


Carwash
 
2 spaces plus 3 spaces/wash bay


Day care
 
2 spaces plus 1 space/employee


Financial institution
 
1 space/250 sq. ft. plus 3 spaces for each drive-in window


Fuel sales and convenience store
 
1 space/200 sq. ft.(spaces at pumps can be counted towards this requirement)


Furniture and appliance
 
1 space/500 sq. ft. display area


Grocery store
 
1 space/200 sq. ft.


Mortuary and funeral home
 
1 space/500 sq. ft. of funeral service area


Motor vehicle sales and service
 
2 spaces plus 1 space/500 sq. ft. over 1,000 sq. ft. in showroom plus 2
spaces/service bay


Motor vehicle service and repair
 
3 spaces plus 2 spaces/service bay


Recreation and health facility
 
1 space/1,000 sq. ft.


Restaurant, tavern and entertainment
 
1 space/100 sq. ft. plus 4 spaces for each drive-in window


Retail sales and service-general
 
1 space/200 sq. ft.; other than ground level; 1 space/250 sq. ft.


Tennis, handball, racquetball courts, (enclosed) and the like
 
4 spaces/court plus 1 space/200 sq. ft. for rest of building


Wholesale
 
1 space/500 sq. ft.


Industrial
 



Industrial service, manufacturing and production
 
1 space/500 sq. ft. plus 1sq. ft. plus 1 space/company vehicle


Warehouse
 
1 space/2,000 sq. ft. plus 1 space/employee


Institutional and Miscellaneous
 



Athletic fields
 
1 space/5,000 sq. ft.


Auditoriums, theaters stadiums and arenas
 
Greater of 1 space/5 seats or 10 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. with 20 spaces minimum


Hospital
 
1 space/4 beds plus 1 space/2 employees


Place of worship
 
1 space/4 seats within worship area; other than worship area: 1 space/1,000
sq. ft.


Private club, libraries, museums, community buildings and the like
 
1 space/200 sq. ft.


Schools, high schools and college
 
Greater of 1-space/2 students or 10 spaces/classroom or 1 space/4 seats in
auditorium


Schools primarily serving  children younger that age 16
 
Greater of 2 spaces/classroom or 1 space/4 seats in auditorium


For uses not listed, parking space determination shall be based on similar
uses




 



   (D)   In computing the number of parking spaces required, the
following rules shall govern:



      (1)   FLOOR AREA means the floor space within the outside line
of walls, and includes the total of all floors of a building. It does not
include porches, garages or space in a basement or cellar when the space is
used for storage or incidental uses.



      (2)   Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces
required shall be figured to the nearest whole number.



      (3)   The parking space requirement for a use not specifically
mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of a similar nature,
as determined by the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or
her designee.



      (4)   Whenever a building or use constructed or established
after the effective date of this section is changed or enlarged in floor
area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or
otherwise to create a need for an increase of 10% or more in the number of
existing parking spaces, the spaces shall be provided on the basis of the
enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the
effective date of this section is enlarged to the extent of 50% or more in
floor area or in the area used, the building or use shall then and thereafter
comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.



      (5)   In the case of mixed or joint uses, the parking spaces
required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed
separately.



   (E)   All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the
same lot with the building or use served except that where an increase in the
number of spaces is required by a change or where the spaces are provided
collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the
required spaces may be located and maintained not to exceed 300 feet from an
institution or other nonresidential building served. All parking lots will be
maintained free of snow or debris and will be accessible at all times.



      (1)   Up to 50% of the parking spaces required for theatres,
public auditoriums, bowling alleys, dance halls, night clubs or cafes and up
to 100% of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium may
be provided and used jointly by two banks, offices, retail stores, repair
shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or
operated during the same hours as those businesses listed above, provided,
however, that a written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as
specified below.



      (2)   In any case where the required parking spaces are not
located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where the parking
spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement
thereby assuring their retention for those purposes, shall be properly drawn
and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form and executed by
the City Attorney and shall be filed with the application for a building
permit.



      (3)   Off-street parking spaces may be located within a front
yard in a C or M District if it is located on a hard surfaced lot and is
reserved for patrons and employees of a business located on the property.
Off-street parking is allowed in the front yard of an R District if located
on an approved driveway providing access to a garage, carport or side yard
parking area for a dwelling.



(1999 Code, § 165.23)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2352, passed
7-24-2007)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.066  OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.



   All nonresidential structures containing more than 10,000 square feet
of gross floor area shall provide at least one off-street loading space that
meets the following requirements:



   (A)   There shall be provided, at the time any building is erected
or altered, in any district, having a gross floor area of 10,000 square feet
or more, which is to be occupied by manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods
display, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary,
laundry or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by
vehicle of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on
the same lot with the building, at least one off-street loading space plus
one additional loading space for each 20,000 square feet or major fraction
thereof of gross floor area so used in excess of 10,000 square feet.



   (B)   Each loading space shall be not less than ten feet in width,
25 feet in length.



   (C)   No loading space shall be located in a required front yard
except when parking is permitted therein.



   (D)   All off-street loading spaces which are within or abut a
residential district or intervening street or alley shall be completely
screened therefrom by a six-foot high solid visual barrier. If the loading
area is located on a corner lot, corner visual clearance requirements must be
followed.



   (E)   Loading areas shall be designed with appropriate means of
vehicular access to a street or alley which least interferes with traffic
movements.



   (F)   No building or part thereof shall be enlarged or altered
unless off-street loading spaces are provided in accordance with this chapter.



(1999 Code, § 165.24)  Penalty, see § 159.999



ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT



§ 159.080  ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Creation and membership. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is
established. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members who
are residents of the city, appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of
the Council. Each member shall be appointed for a term of five years. The
terms of office shall be staggered. Each term of office shall expire on June
30. Members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall not be reappointed if
they have served two consecutive full terms. A majority of the members of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be persons representing the public at large
and shall not be involved in the business of purchasing and selling real
estate.



   (B)   Vacancies. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the approval of
the Council, persons to fill all vacancies as they occur.



   (C)   Meetings. All meetings of the Board shall be held at the call
of the Chairperson and at times as the Board may determine. All hearings
conducted by the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating the fact, and the
Board shall also keep records of its hearings and other official actions.
Findings of fact shall be included in the minutes of each case of a requested
variation and the reasons for recommending or denying the variation shall be
specified. Each decision or determination of the Board shall be filed
immediately in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. The
Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with this
chapter or with the Iowa statutes in the case made and provided, and may
select or appoint the officers as it deems necessary.



   (D)   Appeals. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment by any person, firm, corporation, or any officer, department,
board or bureau affected by a decision of the administrative officer, but the
appeal may be taken only when the action involves a subject or instance upon
which the Board is authorized to act. The appeal shall be taken within the
time as prescribed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment general rules, by filing
with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Zoning Board of
Adjustment a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The officer
from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all of
the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken. The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of
the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and shall render a
decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may appeal and
testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or
attorney. Fees for Zoning Board of Adjustment appeals, variances and special
use permits shall be in amounts established by resolution, from time to time,
by the Council. The fees shall be paid at the time of filing.



   (E)   Governmental jurisdiction. The Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall have the following powers:



      (1)   All special use permits.



      (2)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
an error of law in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designated
representative in the enforcement of this chapter.



      (3)   In hearing and deciding appeals, the Board shall have
the power to grant an exception in the following instances:



         (a)   Permit the extension of a district where the
boundary line of a district divides a lot or tract under a single ownership
at the time of passage of this section;



         (b)   Interpret the provisions of this section in such a
way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the
maps fixing the several districts, accompanying and made a part of this
chapter where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street
layouts as shown on the maps aforesaid;



         (c)   To permit the erection and use of a building or
use of premises in any location for a public service corporation for public
utility purposes which the Board deems reasonably necessary for the public
convenience or welfare;



         (d)   All reconstruction of the structural components
because of fire or an act of God on a nonconforming building is to be
approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment where the Board finds some
compelling reason to continue the nonconforming use;



         (e)   Waive or reduce the parking and loading
requirements in any of the districts whenever the character or use of the
building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision of parking or
loading facilities, or where the regulations would impose an unreasonable
hardship upon the use of a lot as contrasted with merely granting an
advantage or a convenience;



         (f)   Permit land within 200 feet of a multiple dwelling
to be improved for the parking spaces required in connection with a multiple
dwelling but only when there is positive assurance that the land will be used
for the purpose during the existence of the multiple dwelling; and



         (g)   Add more uses to the list of those permitted in
the C-2, M-1, M-2 and M-3 Districts, provided that the uses are comparable,
in general character, as those listed insofar as the emission of odor, dust,
noise, gas or smoke is concerned.



      (4)   The Board shall have the authority to grant the
following variations:



         (a)   Permit a variation in the yard requirements of any
district where there are unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships in the carrying out of these provisions due to an irregular shape
of the lot, topographical or other conditions, provided that the variation
will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare.



         (b)   Authorize, upon appeal, whenever a property owner
can show that a strict application of the terms of this chapter relating to
the use, construction or alterations of buildings or structures, or the use
of land will impose an unusual and practical difficulty or particular
hardship, and that the variations of the strict application of the terms of
this section are in harmony with its general purpose and intent, but only
when the Board is satisfied that the granting of a variation will not merely
serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable
and unusual hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variation from
the comprehensive plan as established by this section and at the same time,
the surrounding property will be properly protected.



      (5)   The Board shall have the power to grant an exemption
from screening requirements for solid waste containment if located within a
developed area of the city where there is no yard space. Public notice and
public hearing requirements will not be needed for this exemption appeal.



      (6)   In considering all appeals and all proposed exception or
variations to this chapter, the Board shall, before making any exceptions or
variations from this chapter in a specific case, first determine that it will
not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or
unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets or increase the danger
of fire or endanger the public safety or unreasonably diminish or impair
established property values within the surrounding area or in any other
respect impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the
inhabitants of the city.



      (7)   The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of
the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her designee or to
decide in favor of the applicant upon any matter upon which it is authorized,
by this chapter, to render a decision.



      (8)   Nothing contained herein shall be constructed to give or
grant to the Zoning Board of Adjustment the power of authority to alter or to
change the Zoning Ordinance or the district map, the power and authority
being reserved for the Council in the manner provided in § 159.052. No
member shall participate in any action of the Board if the member has a
financial interest in the property being considered or is related to any of
the parties or has any connection whatsoever with the property in question or
the parties involved.



   (F)   Notice. The Board shall make no recommendation except in a
specific case and after a public hearing conducted by the Board. A notice of
the time and place of a public hearing shall be published in a Clinton
publication of general circulation not less than four days nor more than 20
days of the meeting date.



   (G)   Notification. The applicant for any appeal, variance or
special use permit shall notify all adjacent property owners of the purpose
of the application.



   (H)   Relief. Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved
by any decision of the Board, or any taxpayer or any officer, department,
board or bureau of the city shall have recourse to the relief as it is
provided by statute.



(1999 Code, § 165.27)  (Ord. 2247, passed 10-9-2001; Ord. 2255, passed
5-20-2002)  Penalty, see § 159.999



WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES



§ 159.095  PURPOSE.



   This subchapter implements § 6409(a) of the Middle-Class Tax Relief
and Job Creation Act of 2012 ("Spectrum Act"), as interpreted by the Federal
Communications Commission's ("FCC") Acceleration of Broadband Deployment
Report and Order; and Iowa Code Chapter 8C.  This subchapter does not apply
to micro or small wireless facilities as defined pursuant to the provisions
of Iowa Code Chapter 8C; FCC licensed amateur (ham) radio facilities;
satellite dishes and/or antennas used for private television reception not
exceeding one meter in diameter; or towers or transmission equipment erected
by the city, county, or state for public safety or other public purposes.



(Ord. 2598, passed 12-11-2018)



§ 159.096  DEFINITIONS. 



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
The Building and Neighborhood Services Director shall construe any word,
phrase, or term not defined herein or otherwise defined by state or federal
law or regulation.  Such construal shall be based upon the word's, phrase's,
or term's common and ordinary usage in the region.  The definitions defined
herein are in addition to definitions provided elsewhere in the zoning
chapter of the City of Clinton, Iowa ("Zoning Chapter").



   APPLICANT. Any person engaged in the business of providing wireless
telecommunications services or the wireless telecommunications infrastructure
required for wireless telecommunications services and who submits an
application.



   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the city to
construct a new tower, for the initial placement of transmission equipment on
a wireless support structure, for the modification of an existing tower or
existing base station that constitutes a substantial change to an existing
tower or existing base station, or any other request to construct or place
transmission equipment that does not meet the definition of an eligible
facilities request.



   BASE STATION.



      (1)   A structure or equipment at a fixed location that
enables wireless communications licensed by the FCC or authorized wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network.



      (2)   Does not mean a tower or equipment associated with a
tower.



      (3)   Includes but is not limited to equipment associated with
wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public
safety services and unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services
such as microwave backhaul.



      (4)   Includes but is not limited to radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial or fiberoptic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and
comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.



      (5)   Includes a structure other than a tower that, at the
time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government,
supports or houses equipment described in this section that has been reviewed
and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another
state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built
for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support.



      (6)   Does not include any structure that at the time the
relevant application is filed with the state or local government does not
support or house equipment described in this division.



   BUILDING AND NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES DIRECTOR. The Building and
Neighborhood Services Director or his/her designee ("BNS Director").



   COLLOCATION. The mounting or installation of transmission equipment on
a support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio
frequency signals for communications purposes. 



   ELECTRIC UTILITY. Any owner or operator of electric transmission or
distribution facilities subject to the regulation and enforcement activities
of the Iowa Utilities Board relating to safety standards.



   ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST. A request for modification of an existing
tower or base station that does not substantially change the physical
dimensions of the tower or base station and involves collocation of new
transmission equipment, the removal of transmission equipment, or the
replacement of transmission equipment.



   EXISTING TOWER or EXISTING BASE STATION. A tower or base station that
has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process,
or under another state or local regulatory review process. EXISTING TOWER
includes a tower that was not reviewed and approved because it was not in a
zoned area when it was built and lawfully constructed.



   FAA. Federal Aviation Administration of the United States.



   FCC. Federal Communications Commission of the United States.



   INITIAL PLACEMENT or INSTALLATION. The first time transmission
equipment is placed or installed on a wireless support structure.



   MONOPOLE CONSTRUCTION. A tower consisting of a single vertical
structure not supported by radiating guy wires or support structure, and
distinguishable from a lattice or truss tower.



   SITE. For towers not in the public right-of-way, the current boundaries
of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower and any access or
utility easements currently related to the site.  For support structures
other than towers, an area in proximity to the structure and to other
transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.



   SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE.



      (1)   A change in an existing support structure which results
in one or more of the following: 



         (a)   Increase in the height of a tower other than
towers in the public rights-of-way by more than 10% or by the height of one
additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna
not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater;



         (b)    Increase in the height of existing support
structures, other than a tower, by more than 10% or more than ten feet,
whichever is greater;



         (c)   Addition of an appurtenance to the body of a
tower, other than a tower in the public right-of-way, that would protrude
from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the
tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater;



         (d)   Addition of an appurtenance to an existing support
structure, other than a tower that would protrude from the edge of the
structure by more than six feet;



         (e)   Installation of more than the standard number of
new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four
cabinets;



         (f)   Installation of any new equipment cabinets on the
ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with a tower
in the public right-of-way or base station;



         (g)   Installation of ground cabinets that are more than
10% larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets
associated with a tower in the public right-of-way or base station;



         (h)   Excavation or deployment outside the current site;



         (i)   Defeat of concealment elements of the existing
support structure; or



         (j)   Noncompliance with conditions associated with the
siting approval of the construction or modification of the existing support
structure or base station equipment, except if the change is noncompliant
only in a manner that does not exceed the thresholds identified in divisions
(a) through (h) of this division (1).



      (2)   Height shall be measured from the original support
structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally,
such as on buildings' rooftops. Otherwise, height shall be measured from the
dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved
appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage
of the Spectrum Act, Pub. L. No. 112-96, Tit. VI.



   TOWER. Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of
supporting an antenna and associated facilities authorized or licensed by the
FCC.  The term includes structures constructed for wireless communications
services, including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public
safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless
services, such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site.



   TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT. Equipment that facilitates transmission for a
wireless communication service licensed by the FCC, including, but not
limited to radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and
regular and backup power supply.  The term includes equipment associated
with wireless communications services, including, but not limited to private,
broadcast, and public safety services, such as wireless local area network
services and services utilizing a set of specifications developed by the
institute of electrical and electronics engineers for interface between a
wireless client and a base station or between two wireless clients, as well
as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services, such as
microwave backhaul.



   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables the
transmission of wireless communications or information of any kind between
user equipment and a communications network, except that a wireless facility
does not include coaxial or fiberoptic cable that is not immediately adjacent
to, or directly associated with, a particular antenna.



   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A structure that exists at the time an
application is submitted and is capable of supporting the attachment or
installation of transmission equipment in compliance with applicable codes,
including, but not limited to, water towers, buildings, and other structures,
whether within or outside the public right-of-way.  WIRELESS SUPPORT
STRUCTURE does not include a tower or existing base station.



(Ord. 2598, passed 12-11-2018)



§ 159.097  ZONING AND LAND USE. 



   (A)   Generally.  The city exercises zoning, land use, planning,
and permitting authority regarding the siting of wireless facilities within
the city's territorial boundaries and within the two-mile limit of the city's
territorial boundaries, subject to the provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 8C and
federal law.



   (B)   Specially permitted uses. Towers may be permitted by special
use permit, as provided in this subchapter, in any zoning district in the
city except the city's R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, R-4, R-5, C-3 and SP zoning
districts.  Base stations and the placement of transmission equipment on
wireless support structures may be permitted by special use permit, as
provided in this subchapter, in any zoning district in the city.



   (C)   Pre-existing wireless facilities. Existing towers, existing
base stations, transmission equipment or other wireless facilities approved
prior to the effective date of this subchapter, as last amended, shall be
considered nonconforming and shall not be required to meet the requirements
of this subchapter, provided requests for modifications with respect to the
same falling within the purview of §§ 159.102 and 159.104 shall comply with
the provisions thereof and such other provisions of this subchapter
implicated thereby.



   (D)   Allowable uses. Allowable uses within the city's wireless
communication facility overlay districts will include all allowable uses
pursuant to provisions governing the underlying zoning districts as well as
wireless facilities permitted pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (E)   Zoning for airports and airspace.  The city has implemented
airport zoning regulations as set forth in Chapter 157 of this city code
pursuant to the provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 329 for the protection of
navigable airspace and may administer and enforce such regulations not in
conflict with any standards or regulations of the FAA, or other state or
federal requirements



   (F)   Historic properties and districts. Applicants shall comply
with all federal and state historic property laws.  The city’s Historic
Preservation Commission shall further have the authority to approve or deny
requests to alter exterior features within any area designated as an area of
historic significance and designated local historic landmarks. 



   (G)   Relationship to other ordinances. The provisions of this
subchapter shall supersede all conflicting requirements of other ordinances
regarding wireless facilities.



(Ord. 2598, passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.098  SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED. 



   All applications, except applications for eligible facilities requests,
shall require a special use permit.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment may,
following public hearing, and subject to applicable state and/or federal
requirements, by majority vote, approve, approve with conditions, or deny
requests for special use permits relative to an application.  All decisions
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment with respect to an application submitted
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be supported by written
findings of fact and conclusions of law.



(Ord. 2598, passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.099  SPECIAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESS. 



   (A)   Initial requirements. A special use permit shall not be
considered by the Zoning Board of Adjustment unless and until the following
requirements are met:



      (1)   An application for special use permit and all
submissions required pursuant to the provisions of § 159.101(D), deemed
relevant by the BNS Director, are submitted to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
for review, which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consider in approving,
approving with conditions, or denying a special use permit.  In the event of
a conflict between provisions of this subchapter and provisions generally
applicable to a special use permit, the provisions of this subchapter shall
control. 



      (2)   Notice of a public hearing on an application for special
use permit shall be published in accordance with the provisions of Iowa Code
§ 362.3 not less than four and not more than 20 days in advance of such
hearing. 



   (B)   Review criteria. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall apply
the following criteria, as applicable, in approving, approving with
conditions, or denying a special use permit relative to an application:



      (1)   Height, setback, fall zone, and lot area requirements.



         (a)   No tower shall exceed a height of 190 feet above
grade, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in
accordance with the provisions of § 159.100.  A lightning rod, up to ten
feet in height, shall not be included within this height limitation.



         (b)   No transmission equipment installed upon or
affixed to a base station or proposed to be installed upon a wireless support
structure, shall exceed the height of the base station or wireless support
structure, at its highest point, by more than 20 feet unless otherwise
approved by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
of § 159.100. 



         (c)   Towers shall be located so the distance from the
base of the tower (or distance from guy wires if used in conjunction with a
tower) to any adjoining property satisfies the minimum building setback
requirement for the zoning district in which the tower is located.  Base
stations shall similarly comply with such minimum building setbacks. 
Transmission equipment extending horizontally beyond the edge of a tower or
base station shall not encroach upon an adjoining parcel.



         (d)   Notwithstanding compliance with minimum building
setback requirements for the zoning district in which a tower is located, all
towers shall be situated to provide a sufficient fall zone such that the
distance from the base of the tower to the nearest occupied structure, public
right-of-way, railroad, residential zoning district, and/or property
designated for residential use pursuant to the city's comprehensive plan,
exceeds the height of the tower by 105%.  Provided, if the tower is
constructed utilizing breakpoint design technology, the required fall zone
shall be equal to 125% of the distance from the top of the tower to the
designed breakpoint.  For example, on a 100-foot monopole tower with a
designed breakpoint at 80 feet, the required fall zone would be 25 feet from
the base of the tower (125% of 20 feet, the distance from the top of the
tower to the designed breakpoint).  The required fall zone shall not exceed
the boundaries of the parcel upon which the tower is situated unless the
applicant obtains and submits to the city appropriate easements from the
owners of each parcel located within the fall zone.



         (e)   For the purposes of determining compliance with
setbacks, lot coverage, and other such requirements for the zoning district
in which a tower and base station are located, the dimensions of the entire
lot or parcel shall control, even if located on a leased area situated within
such lot or parcel.



      (2)   Collocation. In furtherance of the city's objective of
encouraging collocation, towers exceeding 150 feet in height must be
engineered, designed, and constructed to accommodate additional communication
antennas when technically feasible.



      (3)   Fencing. Towers (and guy wires if used in conjunction
with a tower) shall be enclosed by a security fence not less than six feet in
height, provided this requirement shall not prevent fencing required to
satisfy state or federal requirements.  If necessary for security, an
additional one foot of barb wire may be added to the top of a fence.



      (4)   Lighting.  Towers, transmission equipment, base
stations, and/or other wireless facilities shall not be illuminated unless
required to conform to FCC, FAA, or other state or federal requirements.  If
lighting is required, the lighting alternative or design chosen must cause
the least disturbance to surrounding views and/or surrounding properties. 
Security lighting may be provided around the base of a tower if zero cut-off
luminaries with a maximum mounting height of 12 feet are used to limit
lighting to the site.



      (5)   Finishing.  Towers shall be painted or coated silver or
have a galvanized finish or be painted a neutral color to reduce visual
obtrusiveness to the maximum extent possible, unless otherwise required by
state or federal requirements.  Towers and transmission equipment shall not
be painted in such a manner as to convey a company identity, and all
transmission equipment shall be of a color that matches the tower, unless
otherwise required by state or federal requirements.



      (6)   Signage.  No signage, logos, decals, symbols, or
messages of a commercial nature may be displayed upon a tower, base station,
or required fencing, except for warning and identification signs and
notifications, and such other signs as may be required by local, state, or
federal requirements.



      (7)   Landscaping/buffering.



         (a)   Towers shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
material that effectively screens from view the base of the tower from
adjacent properties and/or streets.  The plantings installed shall be of a
size and species that can achieve a height of six feet and 75% opacity during
at least three seasons.



         (b)   In locations where the visual impact of the tower
would be minimal, as determined by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the
landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.  Existing mature tree
growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum
extent possible.  Natural growth around the perimeter of the site may be
considered a sufficient buffer for a tower, as determined by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment.



      (8)   Concealment.



         (a)   Transmission equipment installed upon or affixed
to a base station shall be installed so as to camouflage, disguise, or
conceal them to make them closely compatible with and blend into the base
station.



         (b)   Transmission equipment installed upon or affixed
to a building shall be concealed within existing architectural features to
the maximum extent feasible.  Any new architectural features proposed to
conceal the transmission equipment shall be designed to mimic the
architectural features of the building, shall be proportional to the
building, and shall utilize materials of a similar quality finish, color, and
texture as the building.



         (c)   Transmission equipment mounted upon the roof of a
building shall be set back from all roof edges to the maximum extent feasible
taking into consideration need for line-of-sign transmission and reception of
signals.



      (9)   Sounds.  Objectionable sound emissions such as alarms,
bells, buzzers, or the like are prohibited unless required to conform to FCC,
FAA, or other state or federal requirements.



      (10)   Outdoor storage prohibited. Except during a reasonable
period during construction or maintenance, as determined by the Building and
Neighborhood Services Director, outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment,
tools, supplies, materials, and other items at any site is prohibited.



      (11)   Vehicular access. All sites shall have vehicular access
to and from the site and a public street.



(Ord. 2598, passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.100  EXCEPTIONS.



   The Zoning Board of Adjustment may, in approving a special use permit,
grant exceptions from the criteria set forth in § 159.099(B) if supported by
a technical study submitted by the applicant, acceptable to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, which confirms the exception is essential to the provision of
service and no reasonable alternative is available that conforms to the
criteria in question, provided in no event shall any tower exceed 300 feet
above grade; a lightning rod up to ten feet in height, shall not be included
within this height limitation.



(Ord. 2598, passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.101  APPLICATION PROCESS FOR ALL APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Application.  Applicant shall complete an application form
and indicate whether its application and intended use is for:



      (1)   An eligible facilities request;



      (2)   Construction of a new tower;



      (3)   Initial placement of transmission equipment on a
wireless support structure;



      (4)   Modification of an existing tower or existing base
station that constitutes a substantial change to an existing tower or
existing base station; or



      (5)   Any other request to construct or place transmission
equipment that does not meet the definition of an eligible facilities request.



   (B)   Application fee.  A deposit equal to 50% of the maximum
allowable application fee for a specific type of application, as provided
below, shall be submitted with each application.  This deposit shall be
applied toward the application fee with any balance returned to the applicant
upon completion of the application process; in the event the deposit is not
sufficient to satisfy the application fee, the applicant shall be required to
pay the difference to the city upon demand.  The application fee, including
all city and third-party fees for review or technical consultation, shall be
reasonably related to actual and direct administrative costs according to
Iowa law and are as follows:



      (1)   Up to $500 for an eligible facilities request;



      (2)   Up to $3,000 for a new tower;



      (3)   Up to $3,000 for the initial placement or installation
of transmission equipment on a wireless support structure;



      (4)   Up to $3,000 for modification of an existing tower that
constitutes a substantial modification; and



      (5)   Up to $3,000 for any other application to construct or
place transmission equipment.



   (C)   Third-party review or technical consultation. The city may
retain the services of third-party entities of its choosing to provide review
or technical consultation of applications, including, but not limited to,
attorneys, surveyors, and engineers.  Such third-party review may include
without limitation:



      (1)   The accuracy and completeness of applications, including
items submitted therewith;



      (2)   The validity of analysis, techniques, and methodologies
proposed by applicant;



      (3)   The validity of conclusion reached by applicant; and



      (4)   Whether the application satisfies applicable criteria
set forth in this subchapter.



   (D)   Required submissions. Applications submitted pursuant to this
subchapter shall include the following materials except to the extent the
same are not applicable to eligible facilities requests:



      (1)   Identifying information.  The legal name of applicant
and name, title, mailing address, telephone number, and email address of the
individual responsible for filing and processing applicant's application.



      (2)   Application designation.  An attestation from applicant
stating whether the application constitutes an eligible facilities request;
an application for new tower construction; or an application for the initial
placement or installation of transmission equipment on wireless support
structures, modification of an existing tower or existing base station that
constitutes a substantial change, or other requests for construction or
placement of transmission equipment that do not constitute an eligible
facilities request.



      (3)   Explanation regarding request for new tower. An
explanation regarding the reason for choosing the proposed location for
construction of a new tower and the reason applicant did not choose
collocation.  The explanation shall include a sworn statement from an
individual who has responsibility over placement of the tower attesting that
collocation within the area determined by applicant to meet applicant's radio
frequency engineering requirements for the placement of a site would not
result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity, is
technically infeasible, or is economically burdensome to applicant.



      (4)   Special use permit application. All applications, except
applications for eligible facilities requests, shall require submission of a
special use permit application. 



      (5)   FCC documentation.  A copy of applicant's FCC license
or registration for the site.



      (6)   FAA documentation. An affidavit attesting conformity
with applicable FAA lighting and marking requirements.



      (7)   Evidence of site control. A legally binding document
demonstrating applicant has control of the site for purposes set forth in
applicant's application.



      (8)   Fall zone easements. One or more legally binding
easements obtained from owners of each offsite parcel situated within a
required fall zone.



      (9)   Site plan.  Complete and accurate plans and drawings,
drawn to scale, prepared signed and sealed by an Iowa-licensed engineer, land
surveyor, and/or architect, including:



         (a)   A depiction of all proposed transmission
equipment, wireless facilities, tower, base station, and/or wireless support
facilities;



         (b)   Elevation drawings demonstrating compliance with
applicable height requirements;



         (c)   A depiction of required fencing, landscaping,
and/or screening;



         (d)   A depiction of all proposed utility runs and
points of contact; and



         (e)   A depiction and description of the site (and
leased or licensed area if applicable) showing the relative location of all
proposed transmission equipment, wireless facilities, towers, base stations,
and/or wireless support facilities, with all rights-of-way and/or easements
for access and utilities, setbacks, and fall zone clearly identified.



      (10)   Site photos. Color photographs showing unobstructed
views of the site from no less than four angles, at least one of which shall
depict an outline of the area(s) to be fenced.



      (11)   Design justification. A clear and complete written
analysis that explains how the proposed design complies with applicable
criteria set forth in § 159.099(B) to the maximum extent feasible and
identifies all applicable design standards complete with a factually detailed
explanation of how and why the proposed design either complies or cannot
feasibly comply.



      (12)   Design certification/structural assessment.  A
certificate prepared by an Iowa-licensed engineer indicating a tower, base
station, or wireless support structure is sufficiently designed (in the case
of new tower) or sufficiently constructed (in the case of an existing base
station, wireless support structure, or tower) to support the transmission
equipment and/or wireless facilities it is proposed to serve, and that it
complies, or is designed to comply with applicable building codes and/or
safety standards; and applicable regulations and standards of the FCC, FAA,
and any other state or federal agency with the authority to regulate the same.



      (13)   Other published materials.  All other information or
materials the city may reasonably require from time to time, provided notice
of the same is made publicly available and designated as part of the
application requirements.



   (E)   Limitation of information. The information requested for an
application shall not include information about or evaluate applicant's
business decisions with respect to its application, applicant's designed
service, customer demand for service, or quality of applicant's service to or
from a particular area or site.



   (F)   Disclosure of public records. All records, documents, and
electronic data submitted by applicant in the possession or custody of the
city are subject to the provisions of Iowa Code Chapter 22.  Disclosure of
such records shall be consistent with applicable law.



   (G)   Limitations on review. 



      (1)   Other potential locations or collocation. The city's
review will not:



         (a)   Include evaluating the availability of other
potential locations for the placement or construction of a tower or
transmission equipment; or



         (b)   Require applicants to establish other options for
collocation instead of the construction of a new tower or modification of an
existing tower or existing base station that constitute a substantial change
to an existing tower or existing base station.



      (2)   Transmission equipment and technology. The city shall
not dictate the type of transmission equipment or technology to be used by
applicant or discriminate between different types of infrastructure or
technology.



      (3)   Radio frequency and environmental impacts. The city
shall not:



         (a)   Deny an application, in whole or in part, based on
perceived or alleged environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, as
provided in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B)(iv);



         (b)   Establish or enforce regulations or procedures for
radio frequency signal strength or the adequacy of service quality; or



         (c)   Impose environmental testing, sampling or
monitoring requirements or other compliance measures for radio frequency
emissions from transmission equipment that are categorically excluded under
FCC rules for radio frequency emissions pursuant to 47.C.F.R. § 1.1307(b)(1).



      (4)   Removal.  The city shall not require the removal of
existing towers, existing base stations, or existing transmission equipment,
wherever located, as a condition to approval of an application.



      (5)   Emergency power systems.  The city shall not prohibit
the placement of emergency power systems that comply with federal and state
environmental requirements.



      (6)   Surety requirements. The city shall not impose surety
requirements, including bonds, escrow, deposits, letters of credit, or any
other type of financial surety, to ensure that abandoned or unused towers or
transmission equipment can be removed.



      (7)   Tower space.  The city shall not condition the approval
of an application on applicant's agreement to:



         (a)   Provide space on or near the tower, base station,
or wireless support structure for the city or local governmental or
nongovernmental services at less than the market rate for such space; or



         (b)   Provide other services via the structure or
facilities at less than the market rate for such services.



      (8)   Discrimination. The city shall not discriminate based on
the ownership, including ownership by the city, of any property, structure,
or tower when promulgating rules or procedures for siting wireless facilities
or for evaluating applications.



   (H)   Duration of approval.  The duration of an application
approval shall not be limited, except that construction of the approved
structure or facilities shall be commenced within two years of final
approval, including the disposition of any appeals, and diligently pursued to
completion.



   (I)   Final inspection.



      (1)   A certificate of occupancy for towers, transmission
equipment, base stations, and/or other wireless facilities will only be
granted upon satisfactory evidence applicant's work pursuant to a granted
application:



         (a)   Substantially complies with approved plans,
submissions, and specifications;



         (b)   Meets or exceeds current standards and regulations
of the FCC, FAA, and any other state or federal agency with the authority to
regulate the same; and



         (c)   Complies with standards set forth in applicable
state and/or local building codes and industry safety standards, including
but not limited to the most recent version of the Electronics Industries
Association's/Telecommunications Industries Association's (EIA/TIA)
Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Support Structures (or equivalent).



      (2)   If it is found applicant's work does not satisfy the
requirements of § 159.101(I)(1), applicant shall make all changes required
to bring such work into compliance promptly and prior to operation.



(Ord. 2598, passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.102  APPLICATION REVIEW FOR APPLICATIONS IDENTIFIED AS ELIGIBLE
FACILITIES REQUESTS.



   (A)   Application for eligible facilities requests. For those
applications identified by applicant and determined by the BNS Director to be
an eligible facilities request, the application shall be limited to the
information necessary for the BNS Director to determine whether an
application is an eligible facilities request.  The application may not
require applicant to demonstrate a need or business case for the proposed
modification.



   (B)   Type of review. Upon receipt of an application for an eligible
facilities request pursuant to this subchapter, the BNS Director shall review
such application to determine whether the application so qualifies.



   (C)   Timeframe for review.  Within 60 days of the date applicant
submits an application seeking approval under this subchapter, the BNS
Director  shall approve the application unless the BNS Director determines
the application is not covered by this subchapter. 



   (D)   Tolling of the timeframe for review. The 60-day review period
begins to run when the application is filed and may be tolled only by
agreement between the BNS Director and applicant, or in cases where the BNS
Director determines that the application is incomplete.  The timeframe for
review is not tolled by a moratorium on the review of applications.



      (1)   To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the BNS
Director must provide written notice to applicant within 30 days of receipt
of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or
information required for the application. 



      (2)   The timeframe for review begins running again when
applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the BNS Director's
notice of incompleteness.



      (3)   Following a supplemental submission, the BNS Director
will notify applicant within ten  days that the supplemental submission did
not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating
missing information. The timeframe is again tolled in the case of second or
subsequent notices. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not
specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the
original notice of incompleteness. 



   (E)   Interaction with § 332(c)(7) of the United States Federal
Code.  If the BNS Director determines applicant's request is not an eligible
facilities request, the BNS Director shall notify applicant in writing the
application is being construed otherwise and the basis of its
determination.  The timeframes under §§ 159.103 and 159.104 will begin to
run from the issuance of the BNS Director's decision that the application is
not an eligible facilities request. To the extent such information is
necessary, the BNS Director may request additional information from applicant
to evaluate the application under §§ 159.103 and 159.104, pursuant to the
limitations applicable to said sections.



   (F)   Failure to act. In the event the BNS Director fails to approve
or deny a request seeking approval under this subchapter within the timeframe
for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed
granted.  The deemed grant does not become effective until applicant
notifies the BNS Director in writing after the review period has expired
(accounting for any tolling) that the application has been deemed granted. 



(Ord. 2598, passed 12-11-2018)



§ 159.103  APPLICATION REVIEW FOR APPLICATIONS IDENTIFIED FOR NEW TOWER
CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Application. For those applications identified by applicant
and determined by the BNS Director to propose construction of a new tower,
applicant shall submit the necessary copies and attachments of the
application to the Building and Neighborhood Services Department and comply
with applicable local ordinances concerning land use and the appropriate
permitting processes.



   (B)   Explanation for proposed location.  Notwithstanding the
provisions of § 159.101(G)(1), the BNS Director may require applicant to
provide an explanation regarding the reason for choosing the proposed
location for construction of a new tower and the reason applicant did not
choose collocation.  The explanation shall include a sworn statement from an
individual who has responsibility over placement of the tower attesting that
collocation within the area determined by applicant to meet applicant's radio
frequency engineering requirements for the placement of a site would not
result in the same mobile service functionality, coverage, and capacity, is
technically infeasible, or is economically burdensome to applicant.



2019 S-13



   (C)   Timeframe for review.  Within 150 days of the date on which
applicant submits an application seeking approval to construct a new tower,
the BNS Director shall approve or deny the application, unless another date
is specified in a written agreement between the BNS Director and applicant. 
The BNS Director shall review the application for conformity with applicable
local zoning regulations, building permit requirements, consistency with Iowa
Code Chapter 8C, and all other requirements of this subchapter.



   (D)   Tolling of the timeframe for review.  The 150-day review
period begins to run when the application is filed and may be tolled only by
agreement between the BNS Director and applicant, or in cases where the BNS
Director determines that the application is incomplete.  The BNS Director
shall review the application for conformity with applicable local zoning
regulations, building permit requirements, and consistency with this
subchapter. The timeframe for review is not tolled by a moratorium on the
review of applications.



      (1)   To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the BNS
Director must provide written notice to applicant within 30 days of receipt
of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or
information required for the application.  The BNS Director's timeframe to
review is tolled beginning on the date the notice is sent.



      (2)   The BNS Director's timeframe of 150 days for review
begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in
response to the BNS Director's notice of incompleteness.



      (3)   The BNS Director's 150-day timeframe for review does not
toll if the BNS Director requests any information the BNS Director may not
lawfully consider pursuant to the provisions of Iowa Code § 8C.3.



      (4)   Following a supplemental submission, the BNS Director
will notify applicant within ten  days that the supplemental submission did
not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating
missing information. The timeframe is again tolled in the case of second or
subsequent notices. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not
specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the
original notice of incompleteness. 



      (5)   The BNS Director shall make his/her final decision to
approve or disapprove the application in writing within the timeframe
provided (accounting for any tolling).



   (E)   Failure to act.  In the event the BNS Director fails to
approve or deny a request seeking approval within the timeframe for review
(accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted.



(Ord. 2598, passed 12-11-2018)



2019 S-13



§ 159.104  APPLICATION REVIEW FOR APPLICATIONS IDENTIFIED FOR THE INITIAL
PLACEMENT OR INSTALLATION OF TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT ON WIRELESS SUPPORT
STRUCTURES, MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING TOWER OR EXISTING BASE STATION THAT
CONSTITUTES A SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE, OR OTHER REQUESTS FOR CONSTRUCTION OR
PLACEMENT OF TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT THAT DO NOT CONSTITUTE ELIGIBLE
FACILITIES REQUESTS.



   (A)   Application. For those applications identified by applicant
and determined by the BNS Director to be for the initial placement or
installation of transmission equipment on wireless support structures,
modification of an existing tower or existing base station that constitutes a
substantial change, or other requests for construction or placement of
transmission equipment that do not constitute eligible facilities requests,
applicant shall submit the necessary copies and attachments of the
application to the Building and Neighborhood Services Department and comply
with applicable local ordinances concerning land use or regulations
concerning land use and zoning and the appropriate local permitting processes.



   (B)   Timeframe for review. Within 90 days of the date on which
applicant submits an application seeking approval to construct a new tower,
the BNS Director shall approve or deny the application, unless another date
is specified in a written agreement between the BNS Director and applicant. 
The BNS Director shall review the application for conformity with applicable
local zoning regulations, building permit requirements, consistency with Iowa
Code Chapter 8C, and all other requirements of this subchapter.



   (C)   Tolling of the timeframe for review. The 90-day review period
begins to run when the application is filed and may be tolled only by
agreement by the BNS Director and applicant, or in cases where the BNS
Director determines that the application is incomplete.  The BNS Director
shall review the application for conformity with applicable local zoning
regulations, building permit requirements, and consistency with this
subchapter.  The timeframe for review is not tolled by a moratorium on the
review of applications.



      (1)   To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the BNS
Director must provide written notice to applicant within 30 days of receipt
of the application, specifically delineating all missing documents or
information required in the application and the BNS Director's timeframe to
review is tolled beginning the date the notice is sent.



      (2)   The BNS Director's timeframe of 90 days for review
begins running again when applicant makes a supplemental submission in
response to the BNS Director's notice of incompleteness.



      (3)   The BNS Director's 90-day timeframe for review does not
toll if the BNS Director requests information regarding any of the
considerations the BNS Director may not consider as described in Iowa Code §
8C.3.



      (4)   Following a supplemental submission, the BNS Director
will notify applicant within ten  days that the supplemental submission did
not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating
missing information. The timeframe is again tolled in the case of second or
subsequent notices. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not
specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the
original notice of incompleteness. 



      (5)   The BNS Director shall make his/her final decision to
approve or disapprove the application in writing within the timeframe.



   (D)   Failure to act.  In the event the BNS Director fails to
approve or deny a request seeking approval within the timeframe for review
(accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted.



(Ord. 2598, passed 12-11-2018)



§ 159.105  PROPRIETARY LEASING OF CITY OWNED OR CONTROLLED PROPERTY.



   (A)   Leasing of city owned or controlled property. The city
reserves all rights to leasing of city owned or controlled property but shall
offer the market rate value for use of the property as provided in Iowa Code
§ 8C.6.



   (B)   Lease term.  Leases shall be for no less than 20 years, but
all or a portion of the property may be subject to release for public
purposes after 15 years as provided in Iowa Code § 8C.6.



   (C)   Appraisal process for market value determination. If the city
and applicant cannot agree on the market rate for a lease on real property or
structures owned by the city, the city and applicant shall follow the process
set forth in Iowa Code § 8C.6.



(Ord. 2598, passed 12-11-2018)



§ 159.106  REMOVAL OF ABANDONED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.



   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any tower, base station,
transmission equipment, and/or wireless facilities regulated pursuant to this
subchapter that are not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall
be considered abandoned.  This presumption may be rebutted by showing the
same serves as auxiliary, backup, or emergency equipment or is otherwise not
abandoned.  For any tower, base station, transmission equipment, and/or 
wireless facilities deemed abandoned, all related equipment shall be removed
within 90 days following receipt of notice from the city to remove the
same.  Irrespective of any agreement between them to the contrary, the owner
or operator of the abandoned facilities and the owner of the land or building
to which they are affixed, shall be jointly and severally responsible for
their removal.  If the abandoned tower, base station, transmission
equipment, and/or wireless facilities are not removed within 90 days of
written notice from the city, the city may remove the same and recover from
the owner or operator of the same, or the owner of the land or building, all
costs incurred by the city as a result, including reasonable attorneys' fees
and court costs.  If there are two or more users of a tower, base station,
transmission equipment, and/or wireless facility, the same shall not be
considered abandoned until all users cease using the same.



(Ord. 2598, passed 12-11-2018)  Penalty, see § 159.999



§ 159.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Generally.  Any person, who is responsible for the violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter or who fails to comply therewith or
with any part of the requirements thereof or who shall build or alter any
building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and
approved hereunder shall be deemed guilty of a municipal infraction. After
notice in writing by the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his
or her designee, each day that a violation is permitted to exist beyond the
expiration of time as set out in the notice, a minimum of one day shall
constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or
premises or part thereof where anything in violation of this section shall be
placed or shall exist, any architect, building contractor, individual or
corporation employed in connection therewith who assisted in the Commission
of any violation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense. It shall be
the duty of the Building and Neighborhood Services Director or his or her
designee to make inspections to determine the existence of violations of this
chapter. A complete report of any violations discovered shall be made to the
Council for further action and copies of the report shall also be sent to the
occupant of the property and, if known, to the owner. In case any building or
structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired,
converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of this chapter, the Council, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any proper action or proceedings in the name of the city to correct
the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use to restrain, correct or abate the violations
to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises.



(1999 Code, § 165.34)



   (B)   Wireless communication facilities. The fine or penalty for
violating any provisions of §§ 159.095 through 159.105  shall, upon
conviction in the magistrate court, not exceed $500 for any one specified
offense or violation further, that if a thing prohibited or rendered unlawful
is, in its nature, continuous in respect to time, the fine or penalty for
allowing the continuance thereof in violation of §§ 159.095 through 159.105
shall not exceed $750 for each day that it may be unlawfully continued.



(Ord. 2097, passed 6-22-1999; Ord. 2367, passed 5-27-2008; Ord. 2560, passed
12-12-2017)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



   Table



      I.   FRANCHISES



      II.   STREET GRADES



      III.   NAMING OF STREETS



      IV.   VACATIONS



      V.   ZONING



TABLE I:  FRANCHISES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1592
 
11-22-1976
 
Water franchise granted to Clinton Water Works Company, the right,
permission, privilege, and franchise for a period of 25 years.


1857
 
12-13-1988
 
Electric franchise granted to Interstate Power Company the right, permission,
privilege and franchise, for a period of 25 years.


1858
 
12-13-1988
 
Natural gas franchise granted to Interstate Power Company the right,
permission, privilege and franchise for a period of 25 years.


1894
 
5-22-1990
 
Cable television franchise granted to Heritage Cablevision, Inc., to
establish, construct, operate, maintain, repair, replace, renew, reconstruct
and remove a cable television system across public property in the city
limits for a term of 15 years.


2315
 
1-25-2006
 
Cable franchise renewal the non-exclusive rights, privileges and authority to
construct, operate, maintain, repair, replace, reconstruct and remove a cable
television system across the public way in the city limits for a term of ten
years.


2483
 
10-9-2012
 
Electric franchise renewed and granted to Interstate Power and Light Company,
for a period of 25 years.


2484
 
10-9-2012
 
Natural gas franchise granted to Interstate Power and Light Company, for a
period of 25 years.


2487
 
3-12-2013
 
Franchise granted to ITC Midwest LLC for a transmission system for electric
power, for a period of 25 years.


 
 




 



TABLE II:  STREET GRADES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




88
 
- -
 
Street grade.


119
 
- -
 
Street grade.


120
 
- -
 
Street grade.


121
 
- -
 
Street grade.


122
 
- -
 
Street grade.


127
 
- -
 
Street grade.


129
 
- -
 
Street grade.


139
 
- -
 
Street grade.


141
 
- -
 
Street grade.


142
 
- -
 
Street grade.


143
 
- -
 
Street grade.


149
 
- -
 
Street grade.


154
 
- -
 
Street grade.


156
 
- -
 
Street grade.


157
 
- -
 
Street grade.


159
 
- -
 
Street grade.


162
 
- -
 
Street grade.


163
 
- -
 
Street grade.


164
 
- -
 
Street grade.


166
 
- -
 
Street grade.


176
 
- -
 
Street grade.


177
 
- -
 
Street grade.


178
 
- -
 
Street grade.


179
 
- -
 
Street grade.


180
 
- -
 
Street grade.


181
 
- -
 
Street grade.


182
 
- -
 
Street grade.


183
 
- -
 
Street grade.


187
 
- -
 
Street grade.


196
 
- -
 
Street grade.


200
 
- -
 
Street grade.


201
 
- -
 
Street grade.


203
 
- -
 
Street grade.


204
 
- -
 
Street grade.


205
 
- -
 
Street grade.


206
 
- -
 
Street grade.


209
 
- -
 
Street grade.


214A
 
- -
 
Street grade.


216
 
- -
 
Street grade.


217
 
- -
 
Street grade.


220
 
- -
 
Street grade.


227
 
- -
 
Street grade.


228
 
- -
 
Street grade.


230
 
- -
 
Street grade.


231
 
- -
 
Street grade.


237
 
- -
 
Street grade.


242
 
- -
 
Street grade.


243
 
- -
 
Street grade.


257
 
- -
 
Street grade.


263
 
- -
 
Street grade.


286
 
- -
 
Street grade.


287
 
- -
 
Street grade.


289
 
- -
 
Street grade.


292
 
- -
 
Street grade.


302
 
- -
 
Street grade.


306
 
- -
 
Street grade.


315
 
- -
 
Street grade.


317
 
- -
 
Street grade.


319
 
- -
 
Street grade.


383
 
- -
 
Street grade.


389
 
- -
 
Street grade.


396
 
- -
 
Street grade.


411
 
- -
 
Street grade.


424
 
- -
 
Street grade.


445
 
- -
 
Street grade.


456
 
- -
 
Street grade.


465
 
- -
 
Street grade.


467
 
- -
 
Street grade.


469
 
- -
 
Street grade.


471
 
- -
 
Street grade.


486
 
- -
 
Street grade.


489
 
- -
 
Street grade.


490
 
- -
 
Street grade.


496
 
- -
 
Street grade.


498
 
- -
 
Street grade.


581
 
- -
 
Street grade.


614
 
- -
 
Street grade.


616
 
- -
 
Street grade.


721
 
- -
 
Street grade.


749
 
- -
 
Street grade.


770
 
- -
 
Street grade.


774
 
- -
 
Street grade.


803
 
- -
 
Street grade.


805
 
- -
 
Street grade.


821
 
- -
 
Street grade.


850
 
- -
 
Street grade.


872
 
- -
 
Street grade.


879
 
- -
 
Street grade.


913
 
- -
 
Street grade.


917
 
- -
 
Street grade.


930
 
- -
 
Street grade.


933
 
- -
 
Street grade.


989
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1039
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1044
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1045
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1143
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1164
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1234
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1270
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1307
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1326
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1327
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1333
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1359
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1360
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1421
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1427
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1430
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1448
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1452
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1457
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1473
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1475
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1503
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1507
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1513
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1534
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1583
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1602
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1606
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1622
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1624
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1642
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1646
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1647
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1649
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1653
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1668
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1672
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1680
 
- -
 
Street grade.


1743
 
5-10-1983
 
Street grade.


1762
 
3-13-1984
 
Street grade.


1795
 
4-9-1985
 
Street grade.


1802
 
7-23-1985
 
Street grade.


1805
 
9-24-1985
 
Street grade.


1818
 
6-24-1986
 
Street grade.


1822
 
9-9-1986
 
Street grade.


1831
 
4-29-1987
 
Street grade.


1832
 
5-12-1987
 
Street grade.


1838
 
7-28-1987
 
Street grade.


1851
 
5-10-1988
 
Street grade.


1908
 
5-28-1991
 
Street grade.


1939
 
8-11-1992
 
Street grade.


1948
 
3-23-1993
 
Street grade.


1955
 
6-15-1993
 
Street grade.


2001
 
9-13-1994
 
Street grade.


2019
 
5-23-1995
 
Street grade.


2046
 
3-25-1997
 
Street grade.


2063
 
11-25-1997
 
Street grade.


2347
 
4-10-2007
 
Elevation of the centerline of South Eighteenth Street at certain
intersections.


 
 




 



TABLE III:  NAMING OF STREETS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description


2226
 
10-24-2000
 
Establishing the street name of Mill Creek Parkway.


2286
 
1-25-2005
 
Renaming Fourth Avenue Southeast of the I.C.E. Railroad tracks to the flood
control levee to Rotary Place.


2287
 
2-8-2005
 
Naming of Sixteenth Avenue South.


2322
 
4-25-2006
 
Naming the entrance roadway adjacent to Alliant Energy Stadium into Riverview
Park from Second Avenue South to Sixth Avenue North Ball Park Drive.


 
 



 



TABLE IV:  VACATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




2
 
- -
 
Vacation.


23
 
- -
 
Vacation.


33
 
- -
 
Vacation.


86
 
- -
 
Vacation.


103
 
- -
 
Vacation.


104
 
- -
 
Vacation.


106
 
- -
 
Vacation.


107
 
- -
 
Vacation.


110
 
- -
 
Vacation.


144
 
- -
 
Vacation.


151
 
- -
 
Vacation.


158
 
- -
 
Vacation.


160
 
- -
 
Vacation.


175
 
- -
 
Vacation.


184
 
- -
 
Vacation.


185
 
- -
 
Vacation.


188
 
- -
 
Vacation.


211
 
- -
 
Vacation.


212
 
- -
 
Vacation.


213
 
- -
 
Vacation.


214
 
- -
 
Vacation.


221
 
- -
 
Vacation.


232
 
- -
 
Vacation.


234
 
- -
 
Vacation.


235
 
- -
 
Vacation.


244
 
- -
 
Vacation.


254
 
- -
 
Vacation.


255
 
- -
 
Vacation.


264
 
- -
 
Vacation.


276
 
- -
 
Vacation.


284
 
- -
 
Vacation.


296
 
- -
 
Vacation.


298
 
- -
 
Vacation.


299
 
- -
 
Vacation.


300
 
- -
 
Vacation.


303
 
- -
 
Vacation.


313
 
- -
 
Vacation.


324
 
- -
 
Vacation.


325
 
- -
 
Vacation.


329
 
- -
 
Vacation.


330
 
- -
 
Vacation.


331
 
- -
 
Vacation.


332
 
- -
 
Vacation.


348
 
- -
 
Vacation.


363
 
- -
 
Vacation.


364
 
- -
 
Vacation.


365
 
- -
 
Vacation.


376
 
- -
 
Vacation.


386
 
- -
 
Vacation.


387
 
- -
 
Vacation.


390
 
- -
 
Vacation.


397
 
- -
 
Vacation.


398
 
- -
 
Vacation.


402
 
- -
 
Vacation.


417
 
- -
 
Vacation.


421
 
- -
 
Vacation.


429
 
- -
 
Vacation.


430
 
- -
 
Vacation.


431
 
- -
 
Vacation.


438
 
- -
 
Vacation.


439
 
- -
 
Vacation.


440
 
- -
 
Vacation.


442
 
- -
 
Vacation.


443
 
- -
 
Vacation.


444
 
- -
 
Vacation.


446
 
- -
 
Vacation.


462
 
- -
 
Vacation.


476
 
- -
 
Vacation.


497
 
- -
 
Vacation.


499
 
- -
 
Vacation.


502
 
- -
 
Vacation.


511
 
- -
 
Vacation.


517
 
- -
 
Vacation.


536
 
- -
 
Vacation.


544
 
- -
 
Vacation.


556
 
- -
 
Vacation.


560
 
- -
 
Vacation.


569
 
- -
 
Vacation.


571
 
- -
 
Vacation.


572
 
- -
 
Vacation.


582
 
- -
 
Vacation.


584
 
- -
 
Vacation.


585
 
- -
 
Vacation.


603
 
- -
 
Vacation.


608
 
- -
 
Vacation.


617
 
- -
 
Vacation.


621
 
- -
 
Vacation.


624
 
- -
 
Vacation.


626
 
- -
 
Vacation.


644
 
- -
 
Vacation.


646
 
- -
 
Vacation.


650
 
- -
 
Vacation.


651
 
- -
 
Vacation.


664
 
- -
 
Vacation.


683
 
- -
 
Vacation.


701
 
- -
 
Vacation.


704
 
- -
 
Vacation.


705
 
- -
 
Vacation.


706
 
- -
 
Vacation.


707
 
- -
 
Vacation.


708
 
- -
 
Vacation.


712
 
- -
 
Vacation.


713
 
- -
 
Vacation.


715
 
- -
 
Vacation.


720
 
- -
 
Vacation.


723
 
- -
 
Vacation.


724
 
- -
 
Vacation.


725
 
- -
 
Vacation.


726
 
- -
 
Vacation.


732
 
- -
 
Vacation.


733
 
- -
 
Vacation.


734
 
- -
 
Vacation.


738
 
- -
 
Vacation.


739
 
- -
 
Vacation.


748
 
- -
 
Vacation.


750
 
- -
 
Vacation.


753
 
- -
 
Vacation.


755
 
- -
 
Vacation.


756
 
- -
 
Vacation.


763
 
- -
 
Vacation.


766
 
- -
 
Vacation.


769
 
- -
 
Vacation.


771
 
- -
 
Vacation.


775
 
- -
 
Vacation.


780
 
- -
 
Vacation.


782
 
- -
 
Vacation.


787
 
- -
 
Vacation.


788
 
- -
 
Vacation.


789
 
- -
 
Vacation.


790
 
- -
 
Vacation.


799
 
- -
 
Vacation.


801
 
- -
 
Vacation.


802
 
- -
 
Vacation.


804
 
- -
 
Vacation.


806
 
- -
 
Vacation.


811
 
- -
 
Vacation.


817
 
- -
 
Vacation.


819
 
- -
 
Vacation.


822
 
- -
 
Vacation.


823
 
- -
 
Vacation.


824
 
- -
 
Vacation.


833
 
- -
 
Vacation.


834
 
- -
 
Vacation.


842
 
- -
 
Vacation.


845
 
- -
 
Vacation.


847
 
- -
 
Vacation.


849
 
- -
 
Vacation.


851
 
- -
 
Vacation.


858
 
- -
 
Vacation.


878
 
- -
 
Vacation.


891
 
- -
 
Vacation.


893
 
- -
 
Vacation.


897
 
- -
 
Vacation.


914
 
- -
 
Vacation.


921
 
- -
 
Vacation.


922
 
- -
 
Vacation.


923
 
- -
 
Vacation.


924
 
- -
 
Vacation.


926
 
- -
 
Vacation.


929
 
- -
 
Vacation.


934
 
- -
 
Vacation.


935
 
- -
 
Vacation.


938
 
- -
 
Vacation.


939
 
- -
 
Vacation.


941
 
- -
 
Vacation.


942
 
- -
 
Vacation.


951
 
- -
 
Vacation.


954
 
- -
 
Vacation.


955
 
- -
 
Vacation.


957
 
- -
 
Vacation.


959
 
- -
 
Vacation.


962
 
- -
 
Vacation.


968
 
- -
 
Vacation.


969
 
- -
 
Vacation.


970
 
- -
 
Vacation.


971
 
- -
 
Vacation.


973
 
- -
 
Vacation.


975
 
- -
 
Vacation.


976
 
- -
 
Vacation.


977
 
- -
 
Vacation.


978
 
- -
 
Vacation.


979
 
- -
 
Vacation.


981
 
- -
 
Vacation.


986
 
- -
 
Vacation.


988
 
- -
 
Vacation.


995
 
- -
 
Vacation.


997
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1001
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1004
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1009
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1017
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1022
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1025
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1033
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1034
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1040
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1046
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1048
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1049
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1050
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1051
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1052
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1059
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1060
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1062
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1063
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1068
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1069
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1077
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1078
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1081
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1082
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1110
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1115
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1116
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1128
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1129
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1130
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1134
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1138
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1145
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1146
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1149
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1155
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1157
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1159
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1165
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1178
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1186
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1233
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1244
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1245
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1256
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1266
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1267
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1272
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1274
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1286
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1294
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1300
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1311
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1330
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1336
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1337
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1343
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1355
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1357
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1366
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1372
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1373
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1386
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1399
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1410
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1478
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1500
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1511
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1525
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1527
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1531
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1535
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1537
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1543
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1567
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1580
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1581
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1582
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1584
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1599
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1620
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1625
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1657
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1658
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1664
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1667
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1669
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1675
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1676
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1711
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1724
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1733
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1735
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1736
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1738
 
- -
 
Vacation.


1740
 
4-26-1983
 
Vacation.


1749
 
8-23-1983
 
Vacation.


1753
 
9-27-1983
 
Vacation.


1785
 
1-8-1985
 
Vacation.


1803
 
9-24-1985
 
Vacation.


1811
 
3-11-1986
 
Vacation.


1813
 
4-8-1986
 
Vacation.


1836
 
6-23-1987
 
Vacation.


1844
 
12-8-1987
 
Vacation.


1848
 
3-22-1988
 
Vacation.


1849
 
5-10-1988
 
Vacation.


1863
 
11-9-1988
 
Vacation.


1866
 
12-13-1988
 
Vacation.


1867
 
12-13-1988
 
Vacation.


1868
 
12-13-1988
 
Vacation.


1871
 
1-10-1989
 
Vacation.


1873
 
2-14-1989
 
Vacation.


1877
 
5-9-1989
 
Vacation.


1886
 
12-12-1989
 
Vacation.


1896
 
6-12-1990
 
Vacation.


1899
 
9-25-1990
 
Vacation.


1902
 
1-22-1991
 
Vacation.


1903
 
2-12-1991
 
Vacation.


1904
 
2-12-1991
 
Vacation.


1911
 
6-25-1991
 
Vacation.


1914
 
7-9-1991
 
Vacation.


1923
 
11-26-1991
 
Vacation.


1935
 
6-9-1992
 
Vacation.


2020
 
5-23-1995
 
Vacation.


2021
 
6-27-1995
 
Vacation.


2023
 
6-27-1995
 
Vacation.


2031
 
2-27-1996
 
Vacation.


2032
 
2-27-1996
 
Vacation.


2047
 
4-8-1997
 
Vacation.


2048
 
4-8-1997
 
Vacation.


2050
 
5-13-1997
 
Vacation.


2051
 
6-24-1997
 
Vacation.


2053
 
7-22-1997
 
Vacation.


2058
 
8-12-1997
 
Vacation.


2061
 
10-28-1997
 
Vacation.


2066
 
12-23-1997
 
Vacation.


2075
 
5-12-1998
 
Vacation.


2076
 
5-12-1998
 
Vacation.


2077
 
5-12-1998
 
Vacation.


2094
 
5-25-1999
 
Vacating of easterly three feet of the westerly ten feet of Cleveland Street
abutting 248 Main Avenue.


2101
 
9-28-1999
 
Vacating and sale of the east/west alley, Block 10, Manufacturer’s Addition.


2108
 
1-11-2000
 
Vacating of north ten feet of part of 400 block of Thirty-Second Avenue North.


2110
 
2-8-2000
 
Vacating part of 400 block of Thirty-Second Avenue North from the east line
of North Fifth Street.


2111
 
2-22-2000
 
Vacating of an easement for street right-of-way in the 700 block of Stockwell
Lane North.


2113
 
4-11-2000
 
Vacating of part of the east/west alley, Block 5 of the Danish Brotherhood
Addition.


2114
 
5-9-2000
 
Vacating of part of east-west alley in Block 8, Manufacturer’s Addition.


2118
 
8-8-2000
 
Vacating of 200 feet of the 16 foot wide alley, Block 10, Manufacturer’s
Addition.


2220
 
8-8-2000
 
Vacating part of 800 Block of Fourth Avenue North.


2224
 
9-12-2000
 
Vacating and sale of part of the north/south alley  between the 200 block of
Sixth Avenue South and Seventh Avenue South.


2225
 
10-10-2000
 
Vacating and sale of east/west alley, abutting lots 1—3 and 22—24,
Manufacturer’s Addition.


2230
 
12-12-2000
 
Vacating part of Twelfth Avenue South, Manufacturer’s Addition.


2243
 
8-14-2001
 
Vacating and conveyance of the west 200 feet of the 1400 block of Twelfth
Avenue South.


2267
 
6-24-2003
 
Vacating and conveyance of various streets and alleys adjacent to Washington
Middle and Jefferson Elementary Schools.


2272
 
12-9-2003
 
Vacating and conveyance of part of Twelfth Avenue South, Blocks 7 and 8,
Manufacturer’s Addition.


2273
 
2-10-2004
 
Vacating unused utility easement in Block 3, Danish Brotherhood Addition.


2279
 
7-27-2004
 
Vacating and conveyance of north-south alley in the 100 block of South Fourth
Street.


2285
 
12-14-2004
 
Vacating and conveyance 50 feet of Twelfth Avenue South in Blocks 7 and 8,
Manufacturer’s Addition.


2288
 
2-22-2005
 
Vacating and conveyance a part of Valley West Court in Valley West
Subdivision No. 4.


2291
 
5-17-2005
 
Vacating and conveyance of the northerly 100 feet of the 1600 block of North
Seventh Street.


2294
 
5-24-2005
 
Vacating and conveyance of certain streets and alleys in South Clinton.


2306
 
11-8-2005
 
Vacating and conveyance of a portion of east/west alley in the 200 block of
Pershing Boulevard.


2318
 
3-14-2006
 
Vacating and conveyance of street right-of-way abutting the property line of
1016 Brookside Road.


2327
 
7-11-2006
 
Vacating of 2400 block of Liberty Avenue Street right-of-way.


2328
 
8-8-2006
 
Vacating of east one-half of the fractional street known as the 1600 block
North Eleventh Street.


2334
 
10-10-2006
 
Vacating of Eight Street rights-of-way located in South Clinton.


2337
 
10-24-2006
 
Vacating of east one-half of the fractional street known as the 1600 block
North Eleventh Street.


2348
 
2-27-2007
 
Vacating street/alley rights-of-way located in South Clinton.


2362
 
3-11-2008
 
Vacating east/west alley right-of-way, lying north of Lot 1, Block 12,
Broadmoor Addition.


2363
 
3-11-2008
 
Vacating of north/south alley right-of-way, Block 8, Range 7, Buell’s
Addition to Lyons.


2364
 
4-8-2008
 
Vacating of .683 acre street right-of-way in Valley Bluff Horizons First
Addition.


2384
 
8-12-2008
 
Vacating alley and street rights-of-way and land located in South Clinton.


2402
 
3-31-2009
 
Vacating a 1.516-acre parcel of street right-of-way of South 62 Street and a
1.54-acre parcel of street right-of-way of Harts Mill Road.


2408
 
10-13-2009
 
Vacating of a 0.28-acre parcel of land, a part of Lot 5 Lyons Business and
Technology Park.


2409
 
10-13-2009
 
Vacating of a 0.05-acre parcel of land located on the northeast side of lot 6
in Lyons Business and Technology Park.


2448
 
5-24-2011
 
Vacating and conveyance of the 16-foot wide east/west alley located adjacent
to Lots 6 through 10, Block 8, Buell’s Park Addition to Patrick and Eloise
O’Brien for $900.


2452
 
7-12-2011
 
Vacating and conveyance of the 16 feet by 200 feet east/west alley adjacent
to Lots 9 through 16, Block 7, Manufacturer’s Addition to Bryan Burgess for
$1,920 and other consideration.


2453
 
7-12-2011
 
Vacating and conveyance of certain street right-of-ways and lots in old
Liberty Avenue and 24th Place to Archer Daniels Midland for $13,200,
retaining utility easements.


2477
 
6-26-2012
 
Vacating and conveyance of an alley right-of- way in Manufacturer’s
Addition to Jeff and Cheri Saxby for $905.76.


2482
 
9-25-2012
 
Vacating and conveyance of the east/west alley right-of-way in Block 6,
Oaklawn Addition, replat of Lots 31 through 38.


2494
 
6-11-2013
 
Vacating and conveyance of street right-of-way to Marc and Pamela Petersen
for $1,170.


2501
 
9-24-2013
 
Vacating the alley right-of-way in Block 5, Iowa Land Company’s West
Addition.


2523
 
9-22-2015
 
Vacating and conveyance of a 20-foot by 140-foot alley right-of-way adjacent
to 600 South 4th Street for $1.00.


2537
 
5-10-2016
 
Vacating and conveyance of a 452-square foot parcel of land at 2300 Lincoln
Way for $2,200.


2540
 
8-23-2016
 
Vacating and conveyance of a 12-foot by 200-foot east/west alley right-of-
way located in Block 3, Weston & Lambertson’s Sunnyside Addition at $.50
per square foot.


2546
 
11-8-2016
 
Vacating and conveyance of a 16-foot by 120-foot alley right-of-way adjacent
to 315 Ruth Place for $960.00.


2547
 
11-8-2016
 
Vacating and conveyance of a 20-foot by 140-foot alley right-of-way adjacent
to 600 South 4th Street for $1.


2552
 
12-13-2016
 
Vacating and conveyance of a 20-foot by 140-foot alley right-of-way adjacent
to 600 South 4th Street for $1.


2557
 
11-14-2017
 
Vacating and conveyance of a two-foot by 125-foot alley right-of-way adjacent
to 1821 Roosevelt Street to Gary Lee Langrehr for $100.


2564
 
2-5-2018
 
Vacating and conveyance of Wild Rose Circle South, containing 45, 632 square
feet, to Valley Bluff Corporation for $114,000.


2583
 
6-12-2018
 
Vacating and conveyance of the west 40 feet of the 3600 block of Cleveland
Street right-of-way to Dixie Lee Leeper for $1,200.


2597
 
11-13-2018
 
Vacating and conveyance of an east/west alley situated upon the former
Washington Middle School property and a portion of South 8th Street between
2nd Avenue South and 3rd Avenue South.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE V:  ZONING



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1885
 
11-28-1989
 
Amending the zoning district map.


1891
 
3-27-1990
 
Amending the zoning district map.


1898
 
9-11-1990
 
Amending the zoning district map.


1909
 
6-11-1991
 
Amending the zoning district map.


1910
 
6-11-1991
 
Amending the zoning district map.


1912
 
7-9-1991
 
Amending the zoning district map.


1936
 
6-9-1992
 
Amending the zoning district map.


1943
 
12-8-1992
 
Amending the zoning district map.


1990
 
3-22-1994
 
Amending the zoning district map.


1999
 
8-9-1994
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2009
 
12-13-1994
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2010
 
12-20-1994
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2013
 
5-9-1995
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2033
 
3-12-1996
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2034
 
3-26-1996
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2038
 
7-9-1996
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2040
 
8-27-1996
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2045
 
3-11-1997
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2060
 
10-14-1997
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2069
 
2-24-1998
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2071
 
3-24-1998
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2073
 
4-28-1998
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2074
 
4-28-1998
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2078
 
5-12-1998
 
Amending the zoning district map.


2100
 
7-27-1999
 
Rezoning property, Block D, Ringwood, from R-1C to M-1.


2103
 
11-9-1999
 
Rezoning property in Blocks 7 and 8, Manufacturer’s Addition from R-1C, R-4
and C-1 to C-2; Block 6 Manufacturer’s Addition from C-1 to R-1C.


2231
 
1-9-2001
 
Rezoning property on Fourth Avenue, Block 10, North Addition from R-2 to R-4.


2232
 
3-13-2001
 
Rezoning property in Kunz First Addition from R-1A to R-1C and C-1 to R-1C.


2235
 
4-10-2001
 
1.  Land south of Second Avenue South and northwest of the Mill Creek
Parkway from R-1B to R-1A.


 
 
 
 
2.  North half of the block between Thirty-First Avenue North and
Thirty-Second Avenue North, east of McKinley Street from C-2 to R-4.


 
 
 
 
3.  1200 block of Thirteenth Avenue North (National Guard Armory) from R-1B
to R-4.


 
 
 
 
4.  South side of the 1500 block of Main Avenue northwest of the Mill Creek
Parkway from C-2M, R-1A and R-1B to C-2M.


 
 
 
 
5.  Area known as the West View Heights Subdivision (north of Thirteenth
Avenue North and east of North Eleventh Street, if extended) from C-2M, R-1A
and R-1B to R-1B.


 
 
 
 
6.  100 and 200 blocks of South Fourth Street from C-1 and R-4 to C-2.


 
 
 
 
7.  Block bounded by the Mississippi River, South Second Street, Seventh
Avenue South and Eighth Avenue South from C-2 to C-3.


 
 
 
 
8.  1421 South Bluff Boulevard (Bluff Elementary School) from M-1 to R-1C.


 
 
 
 
9.  4625—4735 Bellevue Road from C-2 and R-1A to R-1A and C-2.


 
 
 
 
10.  5000 Lincoln Way from C-2 to MH.


 
 
 
 
11.  1900 block of Roosevelt Street from C-1 to C-2.


 
 
 
 
12.  1900 block of Nineteenth Avenue North from R-1A to R-1B.


 
 
 
 
13.  400 and 500 blocks of Mill Ridge Road from R-2 to R-5.


 
 
 
 
14.  3000 block of Valley Oaks Court from R-2 to R-5.


 
 
 
 
15.  3300 and 3400 blocks of Valley Oaks Drive from R-2 to R-5.


 
 
 
 
16.  Area known as the downtown business district from C-3 to CBD Fringe
Zone.


 
 
 
 
17.  100 and 200 blocks abutting Fifth Avenue South from C-3 to CBD Core
Zone.


 
 
 
 
18.  200 block Fourteenth Avenue South (MTA area) from R-4 to M-2.


 
 
 
 
19.  Camanche Avenue/Eleventh Avenue South Commercial Corridor from South
Fourteenth Street to South Fourth Street from C-2 to LSO.


2238
 
5-8-2001
 
Rezoning property on Third Avenue South, Block 20, Clinton Original Plat,
from R-4 to C-3.


2251
 
12-11-2001
 
Rezoning classification of property on 801 South 03 Street from M-2 to C-2.


2269
 
10-14-2003
 
Rezoning southeast of the Mill Creek Parkway and north of West View Heights
Subdivision from R-1A to C-2M.


2277
 
6-8-2004
 
Rezoning property located on Harts Mill Road from M-1 to A-1.


2281
 
8-10-2004
 
Rezoning property in 200 block of Main Avenue from R-4 to C-2.


2292
 
5-17-2005
 
Rezoning property owned by ADM in South Clinton from R-4 to M-2.


2295
 
6-28-2005
 
Rezoning property at southeast corner of 13 Avenue North and the Mill Creek
Parkway.


2301
 
9-13-2005
 
Rezoning property located in 1400 and 1500 blocks of Thirteenth Avenue from
C-2 to M-1.


2304
 
10-12-2005
 
Rezoning property located on Liberty Avenue from C-2 to M-2.


2307
 
11-22-2005
 
Rezoning property south of intersection of North 18 Street and Mill Creek
Parkway from R-1A to C-1.


2310
 
12-6-2005
 
Rezoning properties abutting Main Avenue to be classified as in the Main
Street Overlay Zone District.


2311
 
12-6-2005
 
Rezoning a 40-acres parcel of land located north and west of Harts Mill Road
and south of Valley Oaks Golf Course.


2333
 
9-12-2006
 
Rezoning property located on Lincoln Way.


2342
 
2-13-2007
 
Rezoning property located within South Clinton.


2349
 
6-12-2007
 
Rezoning Mill Creek Crossing.


2353
 
7-24-2007
 
Rezoning Tract 4 in Mill Creek Crossing.


2354
 
8-28-2007
 
Rezoning property located within and adjacent to area known as Valley Bluff
Horizons Subdivision.


2355
 
8-28-2007
 
Rezoning 303 Twenty-Third Avenue North.


2369
 
5-27-2008
 
Rezoning Mill Creek Crossing.


2387
 
10-14-2008
 
Rezoning 2631 Harts Mill Road.


2412
 
5-25-2010
 
Rezoning 1335 9th Avenue.


2467
 
10-25-2011
 
Rezoning the village cooperative from R-1B to R-4.


2505
 
4-22-2014
 
Rezoning 801 South 3rd Street from C-2 to M-2.


2519
 
4-28-2015
 
Rezoning a parcel of land located in the 700 block of North 18th Street from
R-1A to R-5.


2524
 
9-22-2015
 
Rezoning 600 South 4th Street from C-3 to R-4.


2525
 
9-22-2015
 
Rezoning parcels of land from M-3 to C-2.


2526
 
9-22-2015
 
Rezoning 3 parcels of land from M-3 to C2-M.


2529
 
11-24-2015
 
Rezoning portions of land from R-1B and C-1 to R-4.


2531
 
12-18-2015
 
Rezoning Lots 10 through 18 from C-2M to C-2.


2532
 
1-26-2016
 
Rezoning Lots 1 and 14 in Block 3 from R-1C to R-4.


2554
 
3-14-2017
 
Rezoning a parcel of land from C-2 to R-1A.


2605
 
3-12-2019
 
Rezoning certain real property from R-1C to C-R.


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Iowa Code





References to 1999 Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO IOWA CODE



 

Iowa Code Section
 
Code Section




Chapter 8C
 
159.095; 159.097; 159.103; 159.104


8C.3
 
159.103; 159.104


8C.6
 
159.105


Chapter 9C
 
112.06


Chapter 21
 
30.50


21.3
 
30.50


21.4
 
30.50


21.5
 
30.50


21.7
 
30.50


21.8
 
30.50


Chapter 22
 
159.101


22.2
 
30.48


22.3A
 
30.48


Chapter 28E
 
32.075


Chapter 35C
 
31.073; 32.074


63.1
 
30.45


63.10
 
30.45


63A.2
 
30.45


64.13
 
30.46


64.19
 
30.46


64.24(3)
 
30.46


64.23(6)
 
30.46


Chapter 65
 
159.004


Chapter 68B
 
30.60


68B.22
 
30.60


80B.11
 
33.20


80B.11(2)
 
33.21


Chapter 100
 
34.05


100.1
 
95.17


100.2
 
34.36


100.3
 
34.36


100.4
 
34.36


100.12
 
34.36


100.13
 
34.36


100.19
 
95.15; 95.17


100.41
 
34.05


102.2
 
34.36


102.3
 
34.36


102.4
 
70.04


Chapter 103A
 
154.01


103A.10A(3)
 
154.01


103A.12
 
154.01


Chapter 123
 
110.01; 110.02; 110.05


123.2
 
110.02


123.30
 
110.03


123.32(2)
 
110.04


123.39
 
110.02; 110.05


123.46
 
133.02


123.47(1)
 
133.01


123.47(2)
 
133.01


123.49(3)
 
133.01


123.50
 
110.02


Chapter 124
 
133.16; 133.17; 133.18; 133.19; 133.20; 133.21


124.101
 
90.02


Chapter 135B
 
115.04


Chapter 135C
 
115.04; 159.016


Chapter 137C.35
 
159.004


Chapter 145A
 
115.04


Chapter 148
 
115.04


Chapter 148A
 
115.04


Chapter 148B
 
115.04


Chapter 148C
 
115.04


Chapter 149
 
115.04


Chapter 151
 
115.04


Chapter 152
 
115.04


Chapter 152B
 
115.04


Chapter 152C
 
115.02; 115.03; 115.10


Chapter 157
 
115.04


Chapter 158
 
115.04


Chapter 162
 
91.001


Chapter 169
 
91.026


Chapter 216
 
32.136; 32.138


216C.9
 
97.031


232.19
 
133.02


Chapter 237
 
159.016


Chapter 237A
 
159.004; 159.046


257.19
 
35.058; 35.062; 35.065


298.2
 
35.058; 35.061 —35.065


Chapter 306A
 
83.01


306A.1
 
83.01


306A.2
 
83.02


306A.4
 
83.03


Chapter 306C
 
159.048


306C.2
 
159.049


Chapter 321
 
159.004


321.1
 
70.02; 93.03


321.1(1)
 
50.02


321.1(58)
 
82.01


321.20B
 
72.01


321.32
 
72.01


321.37
 
72.01


321.38
 
72.01


321.79
 
72.01


321.89(1)(a)
 
99.01


321.89(1)(b)
 
99.01


321.89(2)
 
99.02


321.89(3)(a)
 
99.03; 99.06


321.89(3)(b)
 
99.04


321.89(3)(c)
 
99.05


321.89(4)
 
99.07; 99.09


321.90(2)(e)
 
99.08


321.90(3)(a)
 
99.10


321.98
 
72.01


321.174
 
72.01


321.174A
 
72.01


321.180
 
72.01


321.180B
 
72.01


321.193
 
72.01


321.194
 
72.01


321.216
 
72.01


321.216B
 
72.01


321.218
 
114.20


321.219
 
72.01


321.220
 
72.01


321.221
 
72.01


321.222
 
72.01


321.223
 
72.01


321.224
 
72.01


321.229
 
70.07


321.231
 
73.04


321.232
 
72.01


321.234
 
81.02


321.234(3)
 
81.03


321.234(4)
 
81.03


321.234A
 
72.01


321.236(1)
 
70.25; 79.06; 79.07; 79.09


321.236(1)(a)
 
70.22


321.236(2)
 
70.04


321.236(4)
 
78.01


321.236(10)
 
81.01; 81.04—81.09; 81.12; 81.13; Ch. 84, Sch. VIII


321.241
 
114.20


321.241(1)
 
114.05


321.241(2)
 
114.03


321.247
 
72.01


321.249
 
75.02


321.254
 
71.02


321.255
 
71.02; 71.04; 71.05; 74.02


321.256
 
71.03


321.259
 
72.01


321.260
 
132.02


321.262
 
72.01


321.263
 
72.01


321.264
 
72.01


321.265
 
72.01


321.266(2)
 
114.13


321.271
 
70.05


321.273
 
70.05


321.275
 
72.01


321.277
 
72.09; 114.20


321.277A
 
72.10


321.278
 
72.01


321.279
 
72.07


321.284
 
72.15


321.285
 
73.01; 73.02


321.285(1)
 
73.02


321.285(2)
 
73.02


321.285(4)
 
73.02


321.288
 
72.01


321.290
 
Ch. 84, Sch. III


321.294
 
73.03


321.295
 
72.01


321.297
 
72.01


321.298
 
72.01


321.299
 
72.01


321.302
 
72.01


321.303
 
72.01


321.304
 
72.01


321.307
 
72.01


321.308
 
72.01


321.309
 
72.01


321.310
 
72.01


321.311
 
74.01


321.312
 
72.01


321.313
 
72.01


321.314
 
72.01


321.315
 
72.01


321.316
 
72.01


321.317
 
72.01


321.319
 
72.01


321.320
 
72.01


321.321
 
72.01


321.322
 
72.01


321.323
 
72.01


321.324
 
72.01


321.324A
 
72.05


321.326
 
77.01


321.327
 
75.05


321.328
 
77.03


321.329
 
72.01


321.330
 
72.01


321.331
 
77.02


321.332
 
72.01


321.333
 
72.01


321.340
 
72.01


321.341
 
72.01


321.342
 
72.01


321.343
 
72.01


321.344
 
72.01


321.353
 
75.03


321.354
 
72.01


321.358(1)
 
79.07


321.358(2)
 
79.07


321.358(3)
 
79.07


321.358(4)
 
79.07


321.358(5)
 
79.07


321.358(6)
 
79.07


321.358(8)
 
79.07


321.358(9)
 
79.07


321.358(10)
 
79.07


321.358(11)
 
79.07


321.358(13)
 
79.07


321.358(15)
 
79.07


321.359
 
72.01


321.360
 
79.07


321.361
 
79.02; 79.03; 79.05


321.362
 
72.01


321.363
 
72.01


321.364
 
72.01


321.365
 
72.01


321.366
 
83.05


321.367
 
72.01


321.368
 
72.01


321.369
 
72.01; 97.003


321.370
 
72.01


321.371
 
72.01


321.372
 
72.01


321.381
 
72.01


321.382
 
72.01


321.383
 
72.01


321.384
 
72.01


321.385
 
72.01


321.386
 
72.01


321.387
 
72.01


321.388
 
72.01


321.389
 
72.01


321.390
 
72.01


321.392
 
72.01


321.393
 
72.01


321.394
 
72.01


321.395
 
72.01


321.397
 
81.13


321.398
 
72.01


321.402
 
72.01


321.403
 
72.01


321.404
 
72.01


321.405
 
72.01


321.406
 
72.01


321.408
 
72.01


321.409
 
72.01


321.415
 
72.01


321.417
 
72.01


321.418
 
72.01


321.419
 
72.01


321.420
 
72.01


321.421
 
72.01


321.422
 
72.01


321.423
 
72.01


321.430
 
72.01


321.431
 
72.01


321.432
 
72.01


321.433
 
72.01


321.434
 
72.01


321.436
 
72.01


321.437
 
72.01


321.438
 
72.01


321.439
 
72.01


321.440
 
72.01


321.441
 
72.01


321.442
 
72.01


321.444
 
72.01


321.445
 
72.01


321.446
 
72.01


321.449
 
72.01


321.450
 
72.01


321.454
 
72.01


321.455
 
72.01


321.456
 
72.01


321.457
 
72.01


321.458
 
72.01


321.460
 
50.27; 72.01


321.461
 
72.01


321.462
 
72.01


321.463
 
72.01


321.465
 
72.01


321.466
 
72.01


321.471
 
76.01; 76.04


321.472
 
76.01


321.473
 
76.02; 76.03


321.475
 
76.03


321.485
 
70.20


321.492
 
70.06


321A.32, subsection 1
 
114.20


321E.1
 
76.02


Chapter 321G
 
80.03


321G.1(20)
 
80.02


321G.9(2)
 
80.04


321G.9(4)(a)
 
80.04


321G.9(4)(c)
 
80.04


321G.9(4)(f)
 
80.04


321G.13(8)
 
80.04


321G.18
 
80.05


321H
 
159.004; 159.049


321H.2(6)
 
159.004


Chapter 321I
 
80.03


321I.1
 
80.02


321I.11
 
80.06


321J.2
 
114.20


321J.2A
 
114.20


321J.21
 
114.20


Chapter 321N
 
114.25


325A.6(2017)
 
114.17


327G.13
 
82.02


327G.32
 
82.03


Chapter 329
 
159.097


329.3
 
157.02


330.20
 
32.050—32.055


330.21
 
32.056


330.22
 
32.057


346.27(22)
 
35.058; 35.062—35.065


351.33
 
91.083; 91.084


Chapter 354
 
158.03


354.9
 
158.01


354.12
 
158.05


354.26
 
97.092


362.3
 
30.61; 159.099


362.3(1)
 
31.048


362.3(2)
 
31.048


362.5
 
30.51; 31.003


362.5(1)
 
30.51


362.5(2)
 
30.51


362.5(3)
 
30.51


362.5(4)
 
30.51


362.5(5)
 
30.51


362.5(6)
 
30.51


362.5(7)
 
30.51


362.5(8)
 
30.51


362.5(9)
 
30.51


362.5(10)
 
30.51


362.5(12)
 
30.51


Chapter 364
 
120.020; 156.01


364.1
 
10.03; 132.02


364.2(1)
 
31.031


364.3(2)
 
10.99


364.4(2)
 
34.04; 34.05; 52.006


364.4(3)
 
34.04; 34.05; 52.006


364.7
 
97.059


364.7(3)
 
97.060


364.11
 
82.04


364.12(1)(c)
 
97.008


364.12(2)
 
97.004; 97.010; 97.039; 131.08


364.12(2)(a)
 
97.055


364.12(2)(b)
 
32.038


364.12(2)(c)
 
97.028; 98.06


364.12(2)(d)
 
97.029; 98.06


364.12(2)(e)
 
97.009; 97.029; 98.06


364.12(3)
 
52.034


364.12(3)(b)
 
98.06; 98.08


364.12(3)(f)
 
52.004; 52.005; 52.065; 52.071


364.12(3)(h)
 
90.09; 90.11; 90.12; 98.08; 150.06


364.14
 
10.05


364.15
 
97.058


364.16
 
34.01


364.17
 
154.20


364.22
 
120.999


364.22(1)
 
10.99


364.22(3)
 
10.99


364.22(4)
 
10.99


364.22(8)
 
10.99


364.22(11)
 
10.99


372.4
 
11.01; 31.003


372.13(2)
 
30.55


372.13(2)(a)
 
30.55


372.13(2)(b)
 
30.55


372.13(3)
 
31.052


372.13(4)
 
30.47; 30.49; 31.052—31.055; 33.36; 34.20; 34.21; 34.36; 52.003; 70.03;
71.04; 71.05


372.13(5)
 
31.052


372.13(6)
 
31.047


372.13(7)
 
11.01


372.13(8)
 
Charter, § 2.04; 31.004; 31.018; 31.033


372.13(9)
 
30.52


372.14(1)
 
31.002


372.14(2)
 
31.002


372.14(3)
 
31.015—31.017


372.15
 
30.53


Chapter 376
 
30.01


376.2
 
31.001


376.3
 
30.01


376.4
 
31.056


376.6
 
30.03; 31.056


376.9
 
30.04—30.07


380.2
 
10.07


380.4
 
Charter, § 2.03


380.6(1)(a)
 
Charter, § 2.03


380.6(1)(b)
 
Charter, § 2.03


380.6(1)(c)
 
Charter, § 2.03


380.6(2)
 
Charter, § 2.03


380.6(3)
 
Charter, § 2.03


380.7(1)
 
31.048


380.7(2)
 
31.048


380.7(4)
 
31.050


380.7(5)
 
31.052


380.10
 
32.136


380.11
 
31.051


Chapter 384
 
97.030


384.16
 
31.031


384.20
 
32.077


384.100
 
31.031


384.38
 
97.030


384.38(1)
 
31.031


384.84
 
50.32; 52.092; 52.092A; 52.093


Chapter 386
 
35.085


386.3(1)(c)
 
35.085


392.1
 
32.185—32.189; 97.056


392.5
 
32.075; 32.077


Chapter 400
 
32.104


400.1
 
32.096


400.2
 
32.097—32.099


400.4
 
32.100—32.102


400.5
 
32.103


400.13
 
33.35


403.9
 
35.039; 35.051—35.065


403.12
 
35.051—35.065


403.19
 
35.058; 35.062; 35.065


403.19(2)
 
35.058; 35.061 —35.065


Chapter 403A
 
32.170


403A.5
 
32.170—32.172


Chapter 404
 
35.075


404.1
 
35.075


404.1(2)
 
35.075


Chapter 414
 
32.189


414.6
 
32.185; 32.189


414.12
 
157.14


414.15
 
157.17


Chapter 423A
 
35.003


427.1(27)
 
35.037


427A.1(1)(e)
 
35.016


Chapter 427B
 
35.042


427B.1
 
35.041


427B.3
 
35.017; 35.018


427B.4
 
35.020; 35.021; 35.037; 35.040


427B.5
 
35.022


427B.6
 
35.023


Chapter 453A; Division I
 
111.09


453A.1
 
111.01


453A.2
 
111.07; 111.99; 134.03


453A.22
 
111.07; 111.09; 111.99


453A.13
 
111.02—111.04; 111.06


453A.36(6)
 
111.07; 111.08; 111.99


453A.36A
 
111.08


Chapter 455B
 
10.99; 103.07


455B.101
 
50.02


455B.171
 
102.01


455B.301
 
50.02


455B.307
 
50.08


455B.361(1)
 
50.02


455B.361(2)
 
50.02


455B.363
 
50.07


455B.381(1)
 
34.66


455B.381(4)
 
34.66


455B.381(5)
 
34.66


455B.381(7)
 
34.66


461C.8
 
101.02


476.20
 
52.092A


481A.1
 
91.001


Chapter 499
 
35.036; 35.037


Chapter 499B
 
159.004; 159.019


Chapter 504
 
112.18


Chapter 554; Article 7
 
35.016


Chapter 657
 
50.03


657.1
 
99.03


657A.10A
 
104.01


Chapter 661
 
31.074


Chapters 687—747
 
10.99


708.1
 
130.01


708.1(1)
 
130.01


708.1(2)
 
130.01


708.1(3)
 
130.01


708.7
 
130.02


709A.1
 
134.04


708.11
 
130.08


712.5
 
131.07


714.1
 
32.080; 132.19


714.5
 
32.080; 32.081


714.8
 
132.18


716.1
 
32.079; 52.004; 97.001; 97.002; 97.038; 132.01; 132.04; 132.17


716.7
 
132.15


716.7(2)(a)
 
132.15


716.7(2)(b)
 
132.15


716.7(2)(c)
 
132.15


716.7(2)(d)
 
132.15


716.7(3)
 
132.15


716.8
 
132.15


717.1
 
91.001


717.2
 
91.007


717B.2
 
91.001; 91.005


717B.3
 
91.001; 91.005


717B.3.A
 
91.001; 91.005


717F.1
 
91.020


717F.1(5)
 
91.001


718.2
 
131.03


718.3
 
130.03


718.4
 
131.06


718.5
 
10.09


718.6
 
131.02


719.1
 
131.04


719.2
 
131.05


721.2(5)
 
30.58


723.1
 
130.05


723.2
 
130.06


723.3
 
130.07


723.4(1)
 
130.04


723.4(2)
 
130.04


723.4(3)
 
130.04


723.4(4)
 
130.04


723.4(5)
 
130.04


723.4(6)
 
130.04


723.4(7)
 
130.04


724.4
 
135.03


724.4(4)(a)
 
135.03


724.4(4)(b)
 
135.03


724.4(4)(c)
 
135.03


724.4(4)(d)
 
135.03


724.4(4)(e)
 
135.03


724.4(4)(f)
 
135.03


724.4(4)(g)
 
135.03


724.4(4)(i)
 
135.03


727.1
 
131.01


727.2
 
95.15—95.18


727.2(1)(a)
 
95.15


727.3
 
95.01


727.8
 
132.16


801.4
 
133.02


804.5
 
133.02


805.6
 
70.20; 70.21


805.8
 
70.21


805.8A(13)(c)
 
50.27


808.12
 
32.081


808.14
 
90.06


804.17
 
33.03


804.18
 
33.04


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1999 CODE



 

1999 Code
 
2010 Code




1.01
 
10.01


1.02
 
10.02


1.03
 
10.03


1.04
 
10.04


1.05
 
10.05


1.06
 
10.06


1.07
 
10.07


1.08
 
10.08


1.09
 
10.09


1.10
 
10.11


1.11
 
10.99


1.12
 
12.01


3.01
 
11.01


4.01
 
10.99


4.02
 
10.99


4.03
 
10.99


4.04
 
10.99


4.05
 
10.99


4.06
 
10.99


5.01
 
30.45


5.02
 
30.46


5.03
 
30.47


5.04
 
30.48


5.05
 
30.49


5.06
 
30.50


5.07
 
30.51


5.08
 
30.52


5.09
 
30.53


5.10
 
30.54


5.11
 
30.55


5.12
 
30.56


5.13
 
30.57


5.14
 
30.58


5.15
 
30.59


5.16
 
30.60


5.17
 
30.61


5.18
 
30.62


5.19
 
30.63


6.01
 
30.01


6.02
 
30.02


6.03
 
30.03


6.04
 
30.04


6.05
 
30.05


6.06
 
30.06


6.07
 
30.07


7.01
 
30.20


7.02
 
30.21


7.03
 
30.22


7.04
 
30.23


7.05
 
30.24


7.06
 
30.25


7.07
 
30.26


7.08
 
30.27


7.09
 
30.28


7.10
 
30.29


7.11
 
30.30


7.12
 
30.31


7.13
 
30.32


8.01
 
35.015


8.02
 
35.016


8.03
 
35.017


8.04
 
35.018


8.05
 
35.019


8.06
 
35.020


8.07
 
35.021


8.08
 
35.022


8.09
 
35.023


9.01
 
35.050


9.02
 
35.051


9.03
 
35.052


9.04
 
35.053


9.05
 
35.054


9.06
 
35.055


9.07
 
35.056


9.08
 
35.057


10.01
 
35.075


15.01
 
31.001


15.02
 
31.002


15.03
 
31.003


15.04
 
31.004


16.01
 
31.015


16.02
 
31.016


16.03
 
31.017


16.04
 
31.018


17.01
 
31.030


17.02
 
31.031


17.03
 
31.032


17.04
 
31.033


18.01
 
31.045


18.02
 
31.046


18.03
 
31.047


18.04
 
31.048


18.05
 
31.049


18.06
 
31.050


18.07
 
31.051


18.08
 
31.052


18.09
 
31.053


18.10
 
31.054


18.11
 
31.055


18.12
 
31.056


18.13
 
31.057


19.01
 
31.070


19.02
 
31.071


19.03
 
31.072


19.04
 
31.073


19.05
 
31.074


20.01
 
31.085


20.02
 
31.086


20.03
 
31.087


20.04
 
31.088


20.05
 
31.089


20.06
 
31.090


20.07
 
31.091


21.01
 
32.001


21.02
 
32.002


21.03
 
32.003


22.01
 
32.200


22.02
 
32.201


22.03
 
32.202


22.04
 
32.203


23.01
 
32.015


23.02
 
32.016


23.03
 
32.017


26.01
 
32.050


26.02
 
32.051


26.03
 
32.052


26.04
 
32.053


26.05
 
32.054


26.06
 
32.055


26.07
 
32.056


26.08
 
32.057


27.01
 
32.070


27.02
 
32.071


27.03
 
32.072


27.04
 
32.073


27.05
 
32.074


27.06
 
32.075


27.07
 
32.076


27.08
 
32.077


27.09
 
32.078


27.10
 
32.079


27.11
 
32.080


27.12
 
32.081


28.01
 
32.095


28.02
 
32.096


28.03
 
32.097


28.04
 
32.098


28.05
 
32.099


28.06
 
32.100


28.07
 
32.101


28.08
 
32.102


28.09
 
32.103


28.10
 
32.104


30.01
 
32.115


30.02
 
32.116


30.03
 
32.117


30.04
 
32.118


31.01
 
32.135


31.02
 
32.136


31.03
 
32.137


31.04
 
32.138


31.05
 
32.139


33.01
 
32.170


33.02
 
32.171


33.03
 
32.172


34.01
 
32.185


34.02
 
32.186


34.03
 
32.187


34.04
 
32.188


34.05
 
32.189


35.01
 
33.01


35.02
 
33.02


35.03
 
33.20


35.04
 
33.21


35.05
 
33.22


35.06
 
33.35


35.07
 
33.36


35.08
 
33.03


35.09
 
33.04


35.10
 
33.05


36.01
 
34.01


36.02
 
34.02


36.03
 
34.20


36.04
 
34.21


36.05
 
34.35


36.06
 
34.36


36.07
 
34.37


36.08
 
34.38


36.09
 
34.03


36.10
 
34.04


36.11
 
34.05


36.12
 
34.06


36.13
 
34.50


37.01
 
34.65


37.02
 
34.66


37.03
 
34.67


37.04
 
34.68


37.05
 
34.69


37.06
 
34.70


37.07
 
34.71


38.01
 
33.50


38.02
 
33.51


38.03
 
33.52


38.04
 
33.53


40.01
 
130.01


40.02
 
130.02


40.03
 
130.03


40.04
 
130.04


40.05
 
130.05


40.06
 
130.06


40.07
 
130.07


40.08
 
130.08


41.01
 
131.01


41.02
 
95.15—95.18


41.03
 
131.02


41.04
 
131.03


41.05
 
131.04


41.06
 
131.05


41.07
 
131.06


41.08
 
95.01


41.09
 
131.07


41.10
 
131.08


41.11
 
135.01


41.12
 
135.02


41.13
 
135.03


41.14
 
131.09


42.01
 
132.01


42.02
 
132.02


42.03
 
132.03


42.04
 
132.04


43.01
 
132.15


43.02
 
132.16


43.03
 
132.17


43.04
 
132.18


43.05
 
132.19


45.01
 
133.01


45.02
 
133.02


45.03
 
133.03


46.01
 
134.01; 134.99


46.02
 
134.02


46.03
 
134.03


46.04
 
134.04


47.01
 
96.01


47.02
 
96.02


47.03
 
96.03


47.04
 
96.04


47.05
 
96.05


47.06
 
96.06


47.07
 
96.07


47.08
 
96.08


48.01
 
133.15


48.02
 
133.16


48.03
 
133.17


48.04
 
133.18


48.05
 
133.19


48.06
 
133.20


48.07
 
133.21


52.01
 
92.01


52.02
 
92.02


52.03
 
92.03


52.04
 
92.04


52.05
 
92.05


52.06
 
92.06


52.07
 
92.07


52.08
 
92.08


53.01
 
93.01


53.02
 
93.02


53.03
 
93.03


53.04
 
93.04


53.05
 
93.05


53.06
 
93.06


53.07
 
93.07


53.08
 
93.08


53.09
 
93.09


53.10
 
93.10


53.11
 
93.11


53.12
 
93.12


53.13
 
93.13


53.14
 
93.14


53.15
 
93.15


53.16
 
93.16


53.17
 
93.99


54.01
 
94.01


54.02
 
94.02


54.03
 
94.03


54.04
 
94.04


54.05
 
94.05


54.06
 
94.06


54.07
 
94.07


60.01
 
70.01


60.02
 
70.02


60.03
 
70.03


60.04
 
70.04


60.05
 
70.05


60.06
 
70.06


60.07
 
70.07


60.08
 
70.08


60.09
 
70.09


61.01
 
71.01


61.02
 
71.02


61.03
 
71.03


61.04
 
71.04


61.05
 
71.05


61.06
 
71.06


61.07
 
71.07


61.08
 
71.08


62.01
 
72.01


62.02
 
72.02


62.03
 
72.03


62.04
 
72.04


62.05
 
72.05


62.06
 
72.06


62.07
 
72.07


62.08
 
72.08


62.09
 
72.09


62.10
 
72.10


62.11
 
72.11


62.12
 
72.12


62.13
 
72.13


62.14
 
72.14


62.15
 
72.15


63.01
 
73.01


63.02
 
73.02


63.03
 
Ch. 84; Sch. I


63.04
 
Ch. 84; Sch. II


63.05
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


63.06
 
73.03


63.07
 
73.04


64.01
 
74.01


64.02
 
74.02


64.03
 
74.03


65.01
 
75.01


65.02
 
75.02


65.03
 
75.03


65.04
 
75.04


65.05
 
75.05


66.01
 
76.01


66.02
 
76.02


66.03
 
76.03


66.04
 
76.04


66.06
 
76.06


66.07
 
76.07


66.08
 
76.08


66.09
 
76.09


67.01
 
77.01


67.02
 
77.02


67.03
 
77.03


68.01
 
78.01


69.01
 
79.01


69.02
 
79.02


69.03
 
79.03


69.04
 
79.04


69.05
 
79.05


69.06
 
79.06


69.07
 
79.07


69.08
 
79.08


69.09
 
79.09


69.10
 
79.10


69.11
 
79.11


69.12
 
79.12


69.13
 
79.13


70.01
 
70.20


70.02
 
70.21


70.03
 
70.22


70.04
 
70.23


70.05
 
70.24


70.06
 
70.25


75.01
 
80.01


75.02
 
80.02


75.03
 
80.03


75.04
 
80.04


75.05
 
80.05


75.06
 
80.06


76.01
 
81.01


76.02
 
81.02


76.03
 
81.03


76.04
 
81.04


76.05
 
81.05


76.06
 
81.06


76.07
 
81.07


76.08
 
81.08


76.09
 
81.09


76.10
 
81.10


76.11
 
81.11


76.12
 
81.12


76.13
 
81.13


80.01
 
99.01


80.02
 
99.02


80.03
 
99.03


80.04
 
99.04


80.05
 
99.05


80.06
 
99.06


80.07
 
99.07


80.08
 
99.08


80.09
 
99.09


80.10
 
99.10


81.01
 
82.01


81.02
 
82.02


81.03
 
82.03


81.04
 
82.04


81.05
 
82.05


90.01
 
51.01


95.01
 
52.001


95.02
 
52.002


95.03
 
52.003


95.04
 
52.004


95.05
 
52.005


95.06
 
52.006


95.07
 
52.007


95.08
 
52.008


95.09
 
52.009


95.10
 
52.010


95.11
 
52.999


96.01
 
52.025


96.02
 
52.026


96.03
 
52.027


96.04
 
52.028


96.05
 
52.029


96.07
 
52.031


96.08
 
52.032


96.09
 
52.033


96.10
 
52.034


97.01
 
53.06


97.02
 
53.07


97.03
 
52.047


97.04
 
52.048


97.05
 
52.049


97.06
 
52.050


97.07
 
52.051


97.08
 
52.052


97.09
 
52.053


97.10
 
52.054


98.01
 
52.065


98.02
 
52.066


98.03
 
52.067


98.04
 
52.068


98.05
 
52.069


98.06
 
52.070


98.07
 
52.071


98.08
 
52.072


98.09
 
52.073


99.01
 
52.085


99.02
 
52.086


99.03
 
52.087


99.04
 
52.088


99.05
 
52.089


99.06
 
52.090


99.07
 
52.091


99.08
 
52.092


99.09
 
52.093


99.10
 
52.094


99.11
 
52.095


99.12
 
52.096


99.13
 
52.097


100.01
 
52.110


100.02
 
52.111


100.03
 
52.112


100.04
 
52.113


100.05
 
52.114


100.06
 
52.115


100.07
 
52.116


100.08
 
52.117


100.09
 
52.118


100.10
 
52.119


101.01
 
52.130


101.02
 
52.131


101.03
 
52.132


101.04
 
52.133


101.05
 
52.134


101.06
 
52.135


101.07
 
52.136


101.08
 
52.137


101.09
 
52.138


101.10
 
52.139


101.11
 
52.140


101.12
 
52.141


101.13
 
52.142


101.14
 
52.143


101.15
 
52.144


101.16
 
52.145


101.17
 
52.146


101.18
 
52.147


101.19
 
52.148


101.20
 
52.149


101.21
 
52.150


101.22
 
52.151


101.23
 
52.999


105.01
 
50.01


105.02
 
50.02


105.03
 
50.03


105.04
 
50.04


105.06
 
50.06


105.07
 
50.07


105.08
 
50.08


105.09
 
50.09


105.10
 
50.10


105.11
 
50.11


105.12
 
50.12


106.01
 
50.25


106.02
 
50.26


106.03
 
50.27


106.04
 
50.28


106.05
 
50.29


106.06
 
50.30


106.07
 
50.31


106.08
 
50.32


120.01
 
110.01


120.02
 
110.02


120.03
 
110.03


120.04
 
110.04


120.05
 
110.05; 110.99


121.01
 
111.01


121.02
 
111.02


121.03
 
111.03


121.04
 
111.04


121.05
 
111.05


121.06
 
111.06


121.07
 
111.07; 111.99


121.08
 
111.08


121.09
 
111.09


122.01
 
112.01


122.02
 
112.02


122.03
 
112.03


122.04
 
112.04


122.05
 
112.05


122.06
 
112.06


122.07
 
112.07


122.08
 
112.08


122.09
 
112.09


122.10
 
112.10


122.11
 
112.11


122.12
 
112.12


122.13
 
112.13


122.14
 
112.14


122.15
 
112.15


122.16
 
112.16


122.17
 
112.17


122.18
 
112.18


123.01
 
113.01


123.02
 
113.02


123.03
 
113.03


123.04
 
113.04


123.05
 
113.05


123.06
 
113.06


123.07
 
113.07


123.08
 
113.08


123.09
 
113.09


123.10
 
113.10


123.11
 
113.11


125.01
 
115.01


125.02
 
115.02


125.03
 
115.03


125.04
 
115.04


125.05
 
115.05


125.07
 
115.06


125.08
 
115.07


125.09
 
115.08


125.10
 
115.09


125.11
 
115.10


125.13
 
115.99


126.01
 
116.01


126.02
 
116.02


126.03
 
116.03


126.04
 
116.04


127.01
 
117.01


127.02
 
117.02


127.03
 
117.03


127.04
 
117.04


127.05
 
117.05


127.06
 
117.06


127.07
 
117.07


127.08
 
117.08


128.01
 
118.01


128.02
 
118.02


128.03
 
118.03


128.04
 
118.04


128.05
 
118.05


129.01
 
35.001


129.02
 
35.002


129.03
 
35.003


130.01
 
119.01


130.02
 
119.02


135.01
 
97.001


135.02
 
97.002


135.03
 
97.003


135.04
 
97.004


135.05
 
97.005


135.06
 
97.006


135.07
 
97.007


135.08
 
97.008


135.09
 
97.009


135.10
 
97.010


135.11
 
97.011


136.01
 
97.025


136.02
 
97.026


136.03
 
97.027


136.04
 
97.028


136.05
 
97.029


136.06
 
97.030


136.07
 
97.031


136.08
 
97.032


136.09
 
97.033


136.10
 
97.034


136.11
 
97.035


136.12
 
97.036


136.13
 
97.037


136.14
 
97.038


136.15
 
97.039


136.16
 
97.040


136.17
 
97.041


137.01
 
97.055


137.02
 
97.056


137.03
 
97.057


137.04
 
97.058


137.05
 
97.059


137.06
 
97.060


138.01
 
97.075


138.02
 
97.076


139.01
 
97.090


139.02
 
97.091


139.03
 
97.092


139.04
 
97.093


139.05
 
97.094


140.01
 
83.01


140.02
 
83.02


140.03
 
83.03


140.04
 
83.04


140.05
 
83.05


140.06
 
83.06


141.01
 
97.105


141.02
 
97.106


141.03
 
97.107


141.04
 
97.108


141.05
 
97.109


141.06
 
97.110


141.07
 
97.111


141.08
 
97.112


141.09
 
97.113


141.10
 
97.114


145.01
 
150.01


145.02
 
150.02


145.03
 
150.03


145.04
 
150.04


145.05
 
150.05


145.06
 
150.06


145.07
 
150.07


145.08
 
150.08


145.09
 
150.09


145.10
 
150.10


Appendix to Chapter 145
 
Ch. 150, App. A


146.01
 
151.01


146.02
 
151.02


148.01
 
152.01


148.02
 
152.02


148.03
 
152.03


150.01
 
153.01


150.02
 
153.02


155.01
 
154.20


155.02
 
154.21


156.01
 
155.01


156.02
 
155.02


156.03
 
155.03


156.04
 
155.04


156.05
 
155.05


156.06
 
155.06


156.07
 
155.07


156.08
 
155.08


156.09
 
155.09


156.10
 
155.10


156.11
 
155.11


156.12
 
155.12


156.13
 
155.13


156.14
 
155.14


156.15
 
155.15


156.16
 
155.16


156.17
 
155.17


156.18
 
155.18


156.20
 
155.19


156.21
 
155.20


156.22
 
155.21


156.23
 
155.22


156.24
 
155.23


156.25
 
155.99


160.02
 
156.02


160.04
 
156.04


160.05
 
156.05


160.06
 
156.06


160.07
 
156.07


160.08
 
156.08


160.09
 
156.09


160.10
 
156.10


160.11
 
156.11


160.12
 
156.12


160.13
 
156.13


160.14
 
156.14


160.15
 
156.15


160.16
 
156.16


160.17
 
156.17


160.18
 
156.18


160.19
 
156.19


160.20
 
156.20


160.21
 
156.21


160.22
 
156.22


160.23
 
156.23


160.24
 
156.24


160.25
 
156.25


165.01
 
159.001


165.02
 
159.002


165.03
 
159.003


165.04
 
159.004


165.05
 
159.015


165.06
 
159.016


165.07
 
159.017


165.09
 
159.018


165.10
 
159.019


165.11
 
159.022


165.12
 
159.023


165.13
 
159.024


165.14
 
159.026


165.15
 
159.028


165.16
 
159.029


165.17
 
159.030


165.18
 
159.031


165.19
 
159.032


165.21
 
159.045


165.22
 
159.046


165.23
 
159.065


165.24
 
159.066


165.25
 
159.047


165.26
 
159.048


165.27
 
159.080


165.28
 
159.049


165.29
 
159.050


165.30
 
159.051


165.31
 
159.052


165.32
 
159.053


165.33
 
159.054


165.34
 
159.999


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


02-28
 
1-8-2002
 
11.01


 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




2
 
- -
 
TSO IV


23
 
- -
 
TSO IV


33
 
- -
 
TSO IV


86
 
- -
 
TSO IV


88
 
- -
 
TSO II


103
 
- -
 
TSO IV


104
 
- -
 
TSO IV


106
 
- -
 
TSO IV


107
 
- -
 
TSO IV


110
 
- -
 
TSO IV


119
 
- -
 
TSO II


120
 
- -
 
TSO II


121
 
- -
 
TSO II


122
 
- -
 
TSO II


127
 
- -
 
TSO II


129
 
- -
 
TSO II


139
 
- -
 
TSO II


141
 
- -
 
TSO II


142
 
- -
 
TSO II


143
 
- -
 
TSO II


144
 
- -
 
TSO IV


149
 
- -
 
TSO II


151
 
- -
 
TSO IV


154
 
- -
 
TSO II


156
 
- -
 
TSO II


157
 
- -
 
TSO II


158
 
- -
 
TSO IV


159
 
- -
 
TSO II


160
 
- -
 
TSO IV


162
 
- -
 
TSO II


163
 
- -
 
TSO II


164
 
- -
 
TSO II


166
 
- -
 
TSO II


175
 
- -
 
TSO IV


176
 
- -
 
TSO II


177
 
- -
 
TSO II


178
 
- -
 
TSO II


179
 
- -
 
TSO II


180
 
- -
 
TSO II


181
 
- -
 
TSO II


182
 
- -
 
TSO II


183
 
- -
 
TSO II


184
 
- -
 
TSO IV


185
 
- -
 
TSO IV


187
 
- -
 
TSO II


188
 
- -
 
TSO IV


196
 
- -
 
TSO II


200
 
- -
 
TSO II


201
 
- -
 
TSO II


203
 
- -
 
TSO II


204
 
- -
 
TSO II


205
 
- -
 
TSO II


206
 
- -
 
TSO II


209
 
- -
 
TSO II


211
 
- -
 
TSO IV


212
 
- -
 
TSO IV


213
 
- -
 
TSO IV


214
 
- -
 
TSO IV


214A
 
- -
 
TSO II


216
 
- -
 
TSO II


217
 
- -
 
TSO II


220
 
- -
 
TSO II


221
 
- -
 
TSO IV


227
 
- -
 
TSO II


228
 
- -
 
TSO II


230
 
- -
 
TSO II


231
 
- -
 
TSO II


232
 
- -
 
TSO IV


234
 
- -
 
TSO IV


235
 
- -
 
TSO IV


237
 
- -
 
TSO II


242
 
- -
 
TSO II


243
 
- -
 
TSO II


244
 
- -
 
TSO IV


254
 
- -
 
TSO IV


255
 
- -
 
TSO IV


257
 
- -
 
TSO II


263
 
- -
 
TSO II


264
 
- -
 
TSO IV


276
 
- -
 
TSO IV


284
 
- -
 
TSO IV


286
 
- -
 
TSO II


287
 
- -
 
TSO II


289
 
- -
 
TSO II


292
 
- -
 
TSO II


296
 
- -
 
TSO IV


298
 
- -
 
TSO IV


299
 
- -
 
TSO IV


300
 
- -
 
TSO IV


302
 
- -
 
TSO II


303
 
- -
 
TSO IV


306
 
- -
 
TSO II


313
 
- -
 
TSO IV


315
 
- -
 
TSO II


317
 
- -
 
TSO II


319
 
- -
 
TSO II


324
 
- -
 
TSO IV


325
 
- -
 
TSO IV


329
 
- -
 
TSO IV


330
 
- -
 
TSO IV


331
 
- -
 
TSO IV


332
 
- -
 
TSO IV


348
 
- -
 
TSO IV


363
 
- -
 
TSO IV


364
 
- -
 
TSO IV


365
 
- -
 
TSO IV


376
 
- -
 
TSO IV


383
 
- -
 
TSO II


386
 
- -
 
TSO IV


387
 
- -
 
TSO IV


389
 
- -
 
TSO II


390
 
- -
 
TSO IV


396
 
- -
 
TSO II


397
 
- -
 
TSO IV


398
 
- -
 
TSO IV


402
 
- -
 
TSO IV


411
 
- -
 
TSO II


417
 
- -
 
TSO IV


421
 
- -
 
TSO IV


424
 
- -
 
TSO II


429
 
- -
 
TSO IV


430
 
- -
 
TSO IV


431
 
- -
 
TSO IV


438
 
- -
 
TSO IV


439
 
- -
 
TSO IV


440
 
- -
 
TSO IV


442
 
- -
 
TSO IV


443
 
- -
 
TSO IV


444
 
- -
 
TSO IV


445
 
- -
 
TSO II


446
 
- -
 
TSO IV


456
 
- -
 
TSO II


462
 
- -
 
TSO IV


465
 
- -
 
TSO II


467
 
- -
 
TSO II


469
 
- -
 
TSO II


471
 
- -
 
TSO II


476
 
- -
 
TSO IV


486
 
- -
 
TSO II


489
 
- -
 
TSO II


490
 
- -
 
TSO II


496
 
- -
 
TSO II


497
 
- -
 
TSO IV


498
 
- -
 
TSO II


499
 
- -
 
TSO IV


502
 
- -
 
TSO IV


511
 
- -
 
TSO IV


517
 
- -
 
TSO IV


536
 
- -
 
TSO IV


544
 
- -
 
TSO IV


556
 
- -
 
TSO IV


560
 
- -
 
TSO IV


569
 
- -
 
TSO IV


571
 
- -
 
TSO IV


572
 
- -
 
TSO IV


581
 
- -
 
TSO II


582
 
- -
 
TSO IV


584
 
- -
 
TSO IV


585
 
- -
 
TSO IV


603
 
- -
 
TSO IV


608
 
- -
 
TSO IV


614
 
- -
 
TSO II


616
 
- -
 
TSO II


617
 
- -
 
TSO IV


621
 
- -
 
TSO IV


624
 
- -
 
TSO IV


626
 
- -
 
TSO IV


644
 
- -
 
TSO IV


646
 
- -
 
TSO IV


650
 
- -
 
TSO IV


651
 
- -
 
TSO IV


664
 
- -
 
TSO IV


683
 
- -
 
TSO IV


701
 
- -
 
TSO IV


704
 
- -
 
TSO IV


705
 
- -
 
TSO IV


706
 
- -
 
TSO IV


707
 
- -
 
TSO IV


708
 
- -
 
TSO IV


712
 
- -
 
TSO IV


713
 
- -
 
TSO IV


715
 
- -
 
TSO IV


720
 
- -
 
TSO IV


721
 
- -
 
TSO II


723
 
- -
 
TSO IV


724
 
- -
 
TSO IV


725
 
- -
 
TSO IV


726
 
- -
 
TSO IV


732
 
- -
 
TSO IV


733
 
- -
 
TSO IV


734
 
- -
 
TSO IV


738
 
- -
 
TSO IV


739
 
- -
 
TSO IV


748
 
- -
 
TSO IV


749
 
- -
 
TSO II


750
 
- -
 
TSO IV


753
 
- -
 
TSO IV


755
 
- -
 
TSO IV


756
 
- -
 
TSO IV


763
 
- -
 
TSO IV


766
 
- -
 
TSO IV


769
 
- -
 
TSO IV


770
 
- -
 
TSO II


771
 
- -
 
TSO IV


774
 
- -
 
TSO II


775
 
- -
 
TSO IV


780
 
- -
 
TSO IV


782
 
- -
 
TSO IV


787
 
- -
 
TSO IV


788
 
- -
 
TSO IV


789
 
- -
 
TSO IV


790
 
- -
 
TSO IV


799
 
- -
 
TSO IV


801
 
- -
 
TSO IV


802
 
- -
 
TSO IV


803
 
- -
 
TSO II


804
 
- -
 
TSO IV


805
 
- -
 
TSO II


806
 
- -
 
TSO IV


811
 
- -
 
TSO IV


817
 
- -
 
TSO IV


819
 
- -
 
TSO IV


821
 
- -
 
TSO II


822
 
- -
 
TSO IV


823
 
- -
 
TSO IV


824
 
- -
 
TSO IV


833
 
- -
 
TSO IV


834
 
- -
 
TSO IV


842
 
- -
 
TSO IV


845
 
- -
 
TSO IV


847
 
- -
 
TSO IV


849
 
- -
 
TSO IV


850
 
- -
 
TSO II


851
 
- -
 
TSO IV


858
 
- -
 
TSO IV


872
 
- -
 
TSO II


878
 
- -
 
TSO IV


879
 
- -
 
TSO II


891
 
- -
 
TSO IV


893
 
- -
 
TSO IV


897
 
- -
 
TSO IV


913
 
- -
 
TSO II


914
 
- -
 
TSO IV


917
 
- -
 
TSO II


921
 
- -
 
TSO IV


922
 
- -
 
TSO IV


923
 
- -
 
TSO IV


924
 
- -
 
TSO IV


926
 
- -
 
TSO IV


929
 
- -
 
TSO IV


930
 
- -
 
TSO II


933
 
- -
 
TSO II


934
 
- -
 
TSO IV


935
 
- -
 
TSO IV


938
 
- -
 
TSO IV


939
 
- -
 
TSO IV


941
 
- -
 
TSO IV


942
 
- -
 
TSO IV


951
 
- -
 
TSO IV


954
 
- -
 
TSO IV


955
 
- -
 
TSO IV


957
 
- -
 
TSO IV


959
 
- -
 
TSO IV


962
 
- -
 
TSO IV


968
 
- -
 
TSO IV


969
 
- -
 
TSO IV


970
 
- -
 
TSO IV


971
 
- -
 
TSO IV


973
 
- -
 
TSO IV


975
 
- -
 
TSO IV


976
 
- -
 
TSO IV


977
 
- -
 
TSO IV


978
 
- -
 
TSO IV


979
 
- -
 
TSO IV


981
 
- -
 
TSO IV


986
 
- -
 
TSO IV


988
 
- -
 
TSO IV


989
 
- -
 
TSO II


995
 
- -
 
TSO IV


997
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1001
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1004
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1009
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1017
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1022
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1025
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1033
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1034
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1039
 
- -
 
TSO II


1040
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1044
 
- -
 
TSO II


1045
 
- -
 
TSO II


1046
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1048
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1049
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1050
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1051
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1052
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1059
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1060
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1062
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1063
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1068
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1069
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1077
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1078
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1081
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1082
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1110
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1115
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1116
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1128
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1129
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1130
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1134
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1138
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1143
 
- -
 
TSO II


1145
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1146
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1149
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1155
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1157
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1159
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1164
 
- -
 
TSO II


1165
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1178
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1186
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1233
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1234
 
- -
 
TSO II


1244
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1245
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1256
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1266
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1267
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1270
 
- -
 
TSO II


1272
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1274
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1286
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1294
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1300
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1307
 
- -
 
TSO II


1311
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1326
 
- -
 
TSO II


1327
 
- -
 
TSO II


1330
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1333
 
- -
 
TSO II


1336
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1337
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1343
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1355
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1357
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1359
 
- -
 
TSO II


1360
 
- -
 
TSO II


1366
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1372
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1373
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1386
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1399
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1410
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1421
 
- -
 
TSO II


1427
 
- -
 
TSO II


1430
 
- -
 
TSO II


1448
 
- -
 
TSO II


1452
 
- -
 
TSO II


1457
 
- -
 
TSO II


1473
 
- -
 
TSO II


1475
 
- -
 
TSO II


1478
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1500
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1503
 
- -
 
TSO II


1507
 
- -
 
TSO II


1511
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1513
 
- -
 
TSO II


1525
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1527
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1531
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1534
 
- -
 
TSO II


1535
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1537
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1543
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1567
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1580
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1581
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1582
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1583
 
- -
 
TSO II


1584
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1599
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1602
 
- -
 
TSO II


1606
 
- -
 
TSO II


1620
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1622
 
- -
 
TSO II


1624
 
- -
 
TSO II


1625
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1642
 
- -
 
TSO II


1646
 
- -
 
TSO II


1647
 
- -
 
TSO II


1649
 
- -
 
TSO II


1653
 
- -
 
TSO II


1657
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1658
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1664
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1667
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1668
 
- -
 
TSO II


1669
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1672
 
- -
 
TSO II


1675
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1676
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1680
 
- -
 
TSO II


1711
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1724
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1733
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1735
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1736
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1738
 
- -
 
TSO IV


1872
 
- -
 
35.051


1882
 
- -
 
35.052


1893
 
- -
 
35.053


1981
 
- -
 
35.054


1991
 
- -
 
35.055


2036
 
- -
 
35.056


2054
 
- -
 
35.057


1592
 
11-22-1976
 
TSO I


1740
 
4-26-1983
 
TSO IV


1743
 
5-10-1983
 
TSO II


1749
 
8-23-1983
 
TSO IV


1753
 
9-27-1983
 
TSO IV


1762
 
3-13-1984
 
TSO II


1772
 
6-26-1984
 
Charter, § 2.05


1785
 
1-8-1985
 
TSO IV


1795
 
4-9-1985
 
TSO II


1802
 
7-23-1985
 
TSO II


1803
 
9-24-1985
 
TSO IV


1805
 
9-24-1985
 
TSO II


1811
 
3-11-1986
 
TSO IV


1813
 
4-8-1986
 
TSO IV


1818
 
6-24-1986
 
TSO II


1822
 
9-9-1986
 
TSO II


1831
 
4-29-1987
 
TSO II


1832
 
5-12-1987
 
TSO II


1836
 
6-23-1987
 
TSO IV


1838
 
7-28-1987
 
TSO II


1844
 
12-8-1987
 
TSO IV


1848
 
3-22-1988
 
TSO IV


1849
 
5-10-1988
 
TSO IV


1851
 
5-10-1988
 
TSO II


1863
 
11-9-1988
 
TSO IV


1857
 
12-13-1988
 
TSO I


1858
 
12-13-1988
 
TSO I


1866
 
12-13-1988
 
TSO IV


1867
 
12-13-1988
 
TSO IV


1868
 
12-13-1988
 
TSO IV


1871
 
1-10-1989
 
TSO IV


1873
 
2-14-1989
 
TSO IV


1877
 
5-9-1989
 
TSO IV


1885
 
11-28-1989
 
TSO V


1886
 
12-12-1989
 
TSO IV


1891
 
3-27-1990
 
TSO V


1894
 
5-22-1990
 
TSO I


1896
 
6-12-1990
 
TSO IV


1898
 
9-11-1990
 
TSO V


1899
 
9-25-1990
 
TSO IV


1902
 
1-22-1991
 
TSO IV


1903
 
2-12-1991
 
TSO IV


1904
 
2-12-1991
 
TSO IV


1908
 
5-28-1991
 
TSO II


1909
 
6-11-1991
 
TSO V


1910
 
6-11-1991
 
TSO V


1911
 
6-25-1991
 
TSO IV


1912
 
7-9-1991
 
TSO V


1914
 
7-9-1991
 
TSO IV


1923
 
11-26-1991
 
TSO IV


1935
 
6-9-1992
 
TSO IV


1936
 
6-9-1992
 
TSO V


1939
 
8-11-1992
 
TSO II


1943
 
12-8-1992
 
TSO V


1948
 
3-23-1993
 
TSO II


1955
 
6-15-1993
 
TSO II


1990
 
3-22-1994
 
TSO V


1999
 
8-9-1994
 
TSO V


2001
 
9-13-1994
 
TSO II


2009
 
12-13-1994
 
TSO V


2010
 
12-20-1994
 
TSO V


2013
 
5-9-1995
 
TSO V


2019
 
5-23-1995
 
TSO II


2020
 
5-23-1995
 
TSO IV


2021
 
6-27-1995
 
TSO IV


2023
 
6-27-1995
 
TSO IV


2031
 
2-27-1996
 
TSO IV


2032
 
2-27-1996
 
TSO IV


2033
 
3-12-1996
 
TSO V


2034
 
3-26-1996
 
TSO V


2038
 
7-9-1996
 
TSO V


2040
 
8-27-1996
 
TSO V


2045
 
3-11-1997
 
TSO V


2046
 
3-25-1997
 
TSO II


2047
 
4-8-1997
 
TSO IV


2048
 
4-8-1997
 
TSO IV


2050
 
5-13-1997
 
TSO IV


2051
 
6-24-1997
 
TSO IV


2053
 
7-22-1997
 
TSO IV


2058
 
8-12-1997
 
TSO IV


2060
 
10-14-1997
 
TSO V


2061
 
10-28-1997
 
TSO IV


2063
 
11-25-1997
 
TSO II


2066
 
12-23-1997
 
TSO IV


2069
 
2-24-1998
 
TSO V


2071
 
3-24-1998
 
TSO V


2073
 
4-28-1998
 
TSO V


2074
 
4-28-1998
 
TSO V


2075
 
5-12-1998
 
TSO IV


2076
 
5-12-1998
 
TSO IV


2077
 
5-12-1998
 
TSO IV


2078
 
5-12-1998
 
TSO V


2082
 
7-28-1998
 
35.061


2093
 
5-11-1999
 
94.04; 94.05


2094
 
5-25-1999
 
TSO IV


2095
 
6-8-1999
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


2098
 
7-27-1999
 
79.08


2099
 
7-27-1999
 
12.01


2100
 
7-27-1999
 
TSO V


2101
 
9-28-1999
 
TSO IV


2102
 
10-12-1999
 
79.07


2103
 
11-9-1999
 
TSO V


2104
 
11-9-1999
 
35.085


2105
 
11-9-1999
 
30.28


2106
 
11-9-1999
 
32.116—32.118; 32.122


2107
 
1-11-2000
 
159.052


2108
 
1-11-2000
 
TSO IV


2109
 
1-11-2000
 
96.08


2110
 
2-8-2000
 
TSO IV


2111
 
2-22-2000
 
TSO IV


2113
 
4-11-2000
 
TSO IV


2114
 
5-9-2000
 
TSO IV


2115
 
5-9-2000
 
34.02


2116
 
5-23-2000
 
52.073


2117
 
7-25-2000
 
70.25


2118
 
8-8-2000
 
TSO IV


2119
 
8-8-2000
 
159.046


2220
 
8-8-2000
 
TSO IV


2221
 
8-22-2000
 
34.02


2222
 
8-22-2000
 
33.02


2223
 
8-22-2000
 
50.10


2224
 
9-12-2000
 
TSO IV


2225
 
10-10-2000
 
TSO IV


2226
 
10-24-2000
 
TSO III


2227
 
10-24-2000
 
Ch. 84; Sch. IV


2228
 
10-24-2000
 
Ch. 84; Sch. V


2229
 
11-14-2000
 
70.22


2230
 
12-12-2000
 
TSO IV


2231
 
1-9-2001
 
TSO V


2232
 
3-13-2001
 
TSO V


2233
 
3-27-2001
 
79.10; Ch. 84; Sch. VI


2234
 
4-10-2001
 
159.052; 159.054


2235
 
4-10-2001
 
TSO V


2237
 
4-24-2001
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


2238
 
5-8-2001
 
TSO V


2239
 
6-12-2001
 
31.073; 31.088


2240
 
6-12-2001
 
34.22


2242
 
7-10-2001
 
72.16; 72.99


2243
 
8-14-2001
 
TSO IV


2244
 
8-28-2001
 
11.01


2245
 
8-28-2001
 
72.17; 72.18


2246
 
9-17-2001
 
35.002


2247
 
10-9-2001
 
159.002—159.004; 159.015—159.020; 159.022—159.024; 159.026—159.032;
159.045—159.049; 159.051; 159.054; 159.065; 159.080


2249
 
10-9-2001
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


2250
 
12-11-2001
 
11.01


2251
 
12-11-2001
 
TSO V


2252
 
1-8-2002
 
11.01


2253
 
2-12-2002
 
155.14; 155.17; 155.19; 155.22; 155.23


2254
 
2-12-2002
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


2255
 
5-20-2002
 
159.049; 159.080


2256
 
6-25-2002
 
159.022—159.024; 159.026; 159.028; 159.046


2259
 
9-24-2002
 
79.10


2260
 
11-12-2002
 
35.058


2261
 
12-10-2002
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


2262
 
12-10-2002
 
Ch. 84; Sch. VII


2263
 
1-14-2003
 
79.12


2264
 
2-25-2003
 
159.052; 159.054


2265
 
4-22-2003
 
102.01


2266
 
5-27-2003
 
80.02; 80.04


2269
 
10-14-2003
 
TSO V


2267
 
6-24-2003
 
TSO IV


2270
 
10-28-2003
 
33.51


2271
 
11-11-2003
 
50.30; 97.107; 97.114; 110.03; 112.04; 112.05; 113.01; 116.04; 117.04


2272
 
12-9-2003
 
TSO IV


2273
 
2-10-2004
 
TSO IV


2274
 
2-24-2004
 
35.059


2275
 
3-9-2004
 
159.052


2276
 
5-25-2004
 
32.115—32.122


2277
 
6-8-2004
 
TSO V


2278
 
7-13-2004
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


2279
 
7-27-2004
 
TSO IV


2281
 
8-10-2004
 
TSO V


2282
 
11-9-2004
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


2283
 
11-9-2004
 
79.14; 79.99; Ch. 85; Sch. I


2284
 
11-9-2004
 
79.12


2285
 
12-14-2004
 
TSO IV


2286
 
1-25-2005
 
TSO III


2287
 
2-8-2005
 
TSO III


2288
 
2-22-2005
 
TSO IV


2289
 
4-12-2005
 
52.002; 52.047; 52.087; 52.090; 52.118


2290
 
4-12-2005
 
35.035—35.042


2291
 
5-17-2005
 
TSO IV


2292
 
5-17-2005
 
TSO V


2294
 
5-24-2005
 
TSO IV


2295
 
6-28-2005
 
TSO V


2296
 
6-28-2005
 
159.017; 159.045; 159.046; 159.052


2297
 
7-12-2005
 
35.075


2298
 
8-23-2005
 
52.090—52.092


2299
 
8-23-2005
 
70.25; 79.07


2300
 
8-23-2005
 
102.01—102.03; 102.99


2301
 
9-13-2005
 
TSO V


2303
 
10-12-2005
 
79.08


2304
 
10-12-2005
 
TSO V


2306
 
11-8-2005
 
TSO IV


2307
 
11-22-2005
 
TSO V


2308
 
11-28-2005
 
35.060


2309
 
12-6-2005
 
159.027


2310
 
12-6-2005
 
TSO V


2311
 
12-6-2005
 
TSO V


2312
 
12-20-2005
 
110.01; 110.03—110.05; 110.99


2314
 
1-25-2006
 
120.001—120.007; 120.020—120.025; 120.040—120.065; 120.080—120.089;
120.100—120.106; 120.120—120.128; 120.140—120.147; 120.160—120.168;
120.999


2315
 
1-25-2006
 
TSO I


2316
 
2-28-2006
 
35.075


2317
 
2-28-2006
 
159.052


2318
 
3-14-2006
 
TSO IV


2319
 
3-14-2006
 
159.018


2320
 
3-14-2006
 
53.11; 53.13—53.18


2321
 
3-28-2006
 
110.04


2322
 
4-25-2006
 
TSO III


2324
 
5-23-2006
 
102.01; 102.02


2325
 
5-23-2006
 
135.02


2326
 
6-13-2006
 
159.046


2327
 
7-11-2006
 
TSO IV


2328
 
8-8-2006
 
TSO IV


2329
 
8-8-2006
 
135.01


2330
 
8-8-2006
 
101.01—101.03


2333
 
9-12-2006
 
TSO V


2334
 
10-10-2006
 
TSO IV


2335
 
10-10-2006
 
151.01; 151.02


2336
 
10-10-2006
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


2337
 
10-24-2006
 
TSO IV


2338
 
10-24-2006
 
79.15; 79.99


2339
 
11-14-2006
 
151.03


2340
 
11-28-2006
 
110.01; 110.03


2341
 
1-9-2007
 
110.03


2342
 
2-13-2007
 
TSO V


2343
 
2-13-2007
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


2344
 
2-13-2007
 
79.08


2348
 
2-27-2007
 
TSO IV


2345
 
3-13-2007
 
35.075


2346
 
3-13-2007
 
12.01


2347
 
4-10-2007
 
TSO II


2349
 
6-12-2007
 
TSO V


2352
 
7-24-2007
 
159.003; 159.004; 159.016—159.018; 159.023; 159.025; 159.027; 159.032;
159.046; 159.048; 159.049; 159.054; 159.065


2353
 
7-24-2007
 
TSO V


2354
 
8-28-2007
 
TSO V


2355
 
8-28-2007
 
TSO V


2357
 
8-28-2007
 
135.01


2358
 
8-28-2007
 
101.02; 101.03


2359
 
11-27-2007
 
35.061


2360
 
2-12-2008
 
159.004; 159.049


2361
 
2-26-2008
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


2362
 
3-11-2008
 
TSO IV


2363
 
3-11-2008
 
TSO IV


2364
 
4-8-2008
 
TSO IV


2365
 
4-8-2008
 
52.090


2366
 
5-27-2008
 
150.02; 150.03; 150.06; 150.07


2367
 
5-27-2008
 
159.999


2368
 
5-27-2008
 
159.046; 159.048; 159.050; 159.051; 159.054


2369
 
5-27-2008
 
TSO V


2370
 
5-27-2008
 
93.03


2372
 
5-27-2008
 
96.09


2373
 
6-10-2008
 
151.03


2374
 
6-10-2008
 
31.045—31.057


2375
 
6-10-2008
 
32.030—32.037


2376
 
6-24-2008
 
100.01—100.04; 100.99


2377
 
6-24-2008
 
32.200—32.203


2378
 
7-8-2008
 
159.004


2379
 
7-8-2008
 
32.015—32.017


2380
 
7-8-2008
 
32.001—32.003


2383
 
7-8-2008
 
34.22


2384
 
8-12-2008
 
TSO IV


2385
 
8-26-2008
 
96.09


2386
 
9-9-2008
 
101.02


2387
 
10-14-2008
 
TSO V


2388
 
10-14-2008
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


2389
 
10-28-2008
 
158.01—158.06; Ch. 158, App. A


2390
 
10-28-2008
 
53.01—53.06; 53.08—53.10; 53.99


2391
 
10-28-2008
 
159.046


2392
 
11-11-2008
 
159.004; 159.021


2394
 
11-25-2008
 
32.117; 32.119—32.122


2395
 
12-9-2008
 
52.090


2396
 
12-18-2008
 
52.048


2397
 
12-18-2008
 
52.091


2398
 
1-13-2009
 
30.25


2399
 
2-24-2009
 
97.027


2401
 
2-24-2009
 
32.015—32.017


2402
 
3-31-2009
 
TSO IV


2403
 
4-14-2009
 
159.046; 159.049


2404
 
4-14-2009
 
159.049


2405
 
8-25-2009
 
31.004


2406
 
9-8-2009
 
31.033


2407
 
9-8-2009
 
101.02


2408
 
10-13-2009
 
TSO IV


2409
 
10-13-2009
 
TSO IV


2410
 
3-9-2010
 
95.02


2411
 
4-27-2010
 
159.046


2412
 
5-25-2010
 
TSO V


2413
 
6-8-2010
 
112.02


2414
 
7-13-2010
 
90.01—90.18; 90.99


2416
 
7-13-2010
 
36.01—36.07


2417
 
7-13-2010
 
81.09


2418
 
7-13-2010
 
30.28


2419
 
7-27-2010
 
79.08


2423
 
8-10-2010
 
35.075


2424
 
9-14-2010
 
112.02; 112.04; 112.05; 112.07; 112.08; 112.17; 112.18


2425
 
9-14-2010
 
159.046


2426
 
9-14-2010
 
32.038


2427
 
9-14-2010
 
31.073


2428
 
9-14-2010
 
80.02; 80.06—80.08


2429
 
10-26-2010
 
103.01—103.09; 103.99


2431
 
11-9-2010
 
159.029


2432
 
11-9-2010
 
110.06


2433
 
11-9-2010
 
114.01—114.03; 114.05; 114.13; 114.14; 114.21; 114.99


2434
 
11-23-2010
 
79.07


2435
 
12-14-2010
 
81.09


2436
 
12-14-2010
 
52.144


2437
 
12-14-2010
 
98.01—98.17; 98.99


2439
 
2-22-2011
 
159.027


2440
 
2-22-2011
 
52.087


2441
 
4-26-2011
 
Ch. 84; Sch. III


2442
 
4-26-2011
 
156.02; 156.09—156.14; 156.26; 156.99


2443
 
4-26-2011
 
52.048


2011-2444
 
4-26-2011
 
31.073


2448
 
5-24-2011
 
TSO IV


2449
 
5-24-2011
 
35.075


2451
 
5-24-2011
 
97.026; 97.031


2452
 
7-12-2011
 
TSO IV


2453
 
7-12-2011
 
TSO IV


2454
 
7-26-2011
 
79.11


2455
 
7-26-2011
 
32.038


2456
 
8-9-2011
 
50.02; 50.06; 50.10; 50.11; 50.25; 50.31


2457
 
8-9-2011
 
52.090


2458
 
8-23-2011
 
11.01


2459
 
8-23-2011
 
159.004; 159.027


2460
 
8-23-2011
 
96.10—96.12


2462
 
9-2-2011
 
11.01


2463
 
9-13-2011
 
Ch. 84, Sch. III


2464
 
9-13-2011
 
96.13


2465
 
9-13-2011
 
35.085


2466
 
10-11-2011
 
52.090


2467
 
10-25-2011
 
TSO V   


2468
 
1-10-2012
 
79.10; 79.99


2469
 
3-13-2012
 
32.301—32.306


2470
 
4-24-2012
 
31.003


2471
 
4-24-2012
 
50.10; 50.31


2472
 
6-12-2012
 
52.090


2473
 
6-12-2012
 
52.035—52.040


2474
 
6-12-2012
 
50.10


2475
 
6-12-2012
 
30.62


2476
 
6-26-2012
 
52.087


2477
 
6-26-2012
 
TSO IV


2478
 
7-10-2012
 
121.01—121.14


2479
 
9-11-2012
 
32.074


2480
 
9-11-2012
 
37.01—37.07


2481
 
9-11-2012
 
93.05


2482
 
9-25-2012
 
TSO IV


2483
 
10-9-2012
 
TSO I


2484
 
10-9-2012
 
TSO I


2485
 
11-27-2012
 
91.001 —91.004; 91.006—91.025; 91.050 —91.061; 91.075 —91.088; 91.100
—91.111; 91.125 —91.128


2486
 
11-27-2012
 
52.090


2487
 
3-12-2013
 
TSO I


2488
 
3-19-2013
 
35.062


2489
 
3-26-2013
 
158.04; 158.05


2490
 
3-26-2013
 
96.05; 96.08; 96.09; 96.14


2492
 
5-28-2013
 
35.058


2493
 
5-28-2013
 
52.090


2494
 
6-11-2013
 
TSO IV


2495
 
6-11-2013
 
52.093A


2496
 
- -2013
 
52.093B


2497
 
7-9-2013
 
72.01


2498
 
8-13-2013
 
31.071


2499
 
8-13-2013
 
31.072


2500
 
9-24-2013
 
76.05


2501
 
9-24-2013
 
TSO IV


2502
 
12-10-2013
 
112.05


2503
 
3-11-2014
 
35.063


2504
 
4-8-2014
 
110.05


2505
 
4-22-2014
 
TSO V


2506
 
5-27-2014
 
31.088; 31.092


2507
 
5-27-2014
 
79.14


2508
 
6-24-2014
 
97.026; 97.036; 97.042; 159.046


2509
 
7-22-2014
 
32.400—32.403


2510
 
8-12-2014
 
79.10


2511
 
9-23-2014
 
30.62


2512
 
9-23-2014
 
32.600—32.603


2513
 
9-23-2014
 
32.500—32.502


2514
 
9-23-2014
 
32.700—32.702


2515
 
10-14-2014
 
32.185


2516
 
12-9-2014
 
154.01—154.05


2517
 
2-24-2015
 
157.01—157.18; 157.99


2518
 
3-10-2015
 
159.027


2519
 
4-28-2015
 
TSO V


2520
 
4-28-2015
 
91.058


2521
 
8-11-2015
 
159.023


2522
 
8-25-2015
 
52.092A


2523
 
9-22-2015
 
TSO IV


2524
 
9-22-2015
 
TSO V


2525
 
9-22-2015
 
TSO V


2526
 
9-22-2015
 
TSO V


2527
 
10-13-2015
 
79.10


2528
 
10-13-2015
 
114.02; 114.03; 114.05; 114.07


2529
 
11-24-2015
 
TSO V


2530
 
11-24-2015
 
32.001—32.003; 32.017


2531
 
12-18-2015
 
TSO V


2532
 
1-26-2016
 
TSO V


2533
 
1-26-2016
 
32.601


2534
 
2-23-2016
 
35.075


2535
 
3-8-2016
 
30.61


2536
 
4-12-2016
 
158.01—158.06


2537
 
5-10-2016
 
TSO IV


2538
 
7-12-2016
 
79.99


2539
 
7-12-2016
 
156.01; 156.03; 156.11; 156.14


2540
 
8-23-2016
 
TSO IV


2541
 
9-13-2016
 
76.05


2542
 
9-27-2016
 
52.002; 52.005; 52.028; 52.029; 52.031; 52.032; 52.034; 52.048; 52.139;
52.140; 52.150


2543
 
9-27-2016
 
53.02; 53.06—53.18


2544
 
10-25-2016
 
159.016; 159.046


2545
 
10-25-2016
 
104.01—104.10


2546
 
11-8-2016
 
TSO IV


2547
 
11-8-2016
 
TSO IV


2548
 
11-8-2016
 
35.054


2549
 
11-8-2016
 
35.057


2550
 
11-22-2016
 
35.064


2551
 
11-22-2016
 
35.065


2552
 
12-13-2016
 
TSO IV


2553
 
1-25-2017
 
97.105—97.114


2554
 
3-14-2017
 
TSO V


2555
 
5-23-2017
 
95.15—95.18


2556
 
10-24-2017
 
53.07; 76.05; 156.11; 158.02; 158.05; 158.06


2557
 
11-14-2017
 
TSO IV


2558
 
11-28-2017
 
52.131; 52.138—52.141; 52.144; 52.150; 52.152


2559
 
11-28-2017
 
97.115


2560
 
12-12-2017
 
10.99; 52.999; 53.99; 82.03; 90.16; 90.18; 90.99; 93.16; 100.99; 103.99;
113.02; 114.99; 115.99; 121.10; 133.02; 134.02; 134.99; 150.06; 155.99;
156.99; 157.99; 159.99


2561
 
1-9-2018
 
114.01—114.25; 114.99


2562
 
1-9-2018
 
159.046


2563
 
1-9-2018
 
32.800—32.802


2564
 
2-5-2018
 
TSO IV


2565
 
2-27-2018
 
90.08; 90.09; 90.13; 94.05; 94.07


2566
 
3-27-2018
 
159.045


2567
 
3-27-2018
 
52.090


2568
 
3-27-2018
 
80.07


2569
 
3-27-2018
 
159.048


2570
 
3-27-2018
 
30.57


2571
 
4-10-2018
 
91.001; 91.005; 91.024; 91.026; 91.027; 91.075; 91.076; 91.083; 91.084;
91.125; 91.127


2572
 
4-24-2018
 
31.003


2573
 
4-24-2018
 
32.900—32.903, 32.1000—32.1003


2574
 
4-24-2018
 
31.003


2575
 
4-24-2018
 
32.1100—32.1103


2577
 
4-24-2018
 
114.13


2578
 
5-8-2018
 
31.004


2579
 
5-8-2018
 
31.003


2580
 
5-8-2018
 
32.1200—32.1203


2581
 
5-8-2018
 
97.042; 159.046


2582
 
5-22-2018
 
97.029; 97.030


2583
 
6-12-2018
 
TSO IV


2585
 
7-10-2018
 
159.004; 159.027


2586
 
7-10-2018
 
115.01—115.10; 115.99


2587
 
7-24-2018
 
52.038—52.041


2588
 
8-14-2018
 
115.03—115.05


2589
 
8-14-2018
 
30.57


2590
 
8-14-2018
 
159.048


2591
 
9-11-2018
 
90.01; 94.03


2592
 
9-25-2018
 
95.17


2593
 
9-25-2018
 
151.03


2594
 
10-9-2018
 
31.057—31.062


2595
 
10-9-2018
 
159.048


2596
 
10-23-2018
 
35.075


2597
 
11-13-2018
 
TSO IV


2598
 
12-11-2018
 
159.095—159.106


2599
 
12-11-2018
 
159.029; 159.045


2600
 
12-11-2018
 
96.05; 96.08; 96.14


2601
 
12-11-2018
 
134.01


2602
 
2-12-2019
 
52.087; 52.090


2603
 
3-12-2019
 
115.01—115.13; 115.99


2604
 
3-12-2019
 
79.08


2605
 
3-12-2019
 
TSO V


 
 
 
 
 




 


