CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 1 -
CHAPTER 1
CODE OF ORDINANCES
1.01 Title 1.08 Amendments
1.02 Definitions 1.09 Catchlines and Notes
1.03 City Powers 1.10 Altering Code
1.04 Indemnity 1.11 Severability
1.05 Personal Injuries 1.12 Warrants
1.06 Rules of Construction 1.13 General Standards for Action
1.07 Extension of Authority 1.14 Standard Penalty
1.01 TITLE. This code of ordinances shall be known and may be cited as the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Charles City, Iowa.
1.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in this Code of Ordinances are
defined in the Code of Iowa, such definitions apply to their use in this Code of Ordinances
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council or
repugnant to the context of the provision. Other words and phrases used herein have the
following meanings, unless specifically defined otherwise in another portion of this Code of
Ordinances or unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or repugnant to the context of the provision:
1. “Alley” means a public right-of-way, other than a street, affording secondary
means of access to abutting property.
2. “City” means the City of Charles City, Iowa.
3. “Clerk” means the city clerk of Charles City, Iowa.
4. “Code” means the specific chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which a
specific subject is covered and bears a descriptive title word (such as the Building
Code and/or a standard code adopted by reference).
5. “Code of Ordinances” means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Charles
City, Iowa.
6. “Council” means the city council of Charles City, Iowa.
7. “County” means Floyd County, Iowa.
8. “May” confers a power.
9. “Measure” means an ordinance, amendment, resolution or motion.
10. “Must” states a requirement.
11. “Occupant” or “tenant,” applied to a building or land, includes any person
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
12. “Ordinances” means the ordinances of the City of Charles City, Iowa, as
embodied in this Code of Ordinances, ordinances not repealed by the ordinance
adopting this Code of Ordinances, and those enacted hereafter.
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 2 -
13. “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, domestic or foreign
corporation, company, association or joint stock association, trust, or other legal
entity, and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar representative thereof, but
does not include a governmental body.
14. “Public way” includes any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway,
sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.
15. “Shall” imposes a duty.
16. “Sidewalk” means that surfaced portion of the street between the edge of the
traveled way, surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
17. “State” means the State of Iowa.
18. “Statutes” or “laws” means the latest edition of the Code of Iowa, as amended.
19. “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public,
as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
Words that are not defined in this Code of Ordinances or by the Code of Iowa have their
ordinary meaning unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of
the Council, or repugnant to the context of the provision.
1.03 CITY POWERS. The City may, except as expressly limited by the Iowa Constitution,
and if not inconsistent with the laws of the Iowa General Assembly, exercise any power and
perform any function it deems appropriate to protect and preserve the rights, privileges and
property of the City and of its residents, and preserve and improve the peace, safety, health,
welfare, comfort and convenience of its residents and each and every provision of this Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed to be in the exercise of the foregoing powers and the performance
of the foregoing functions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.1)
1.04 INDEMNITY. The applicant for any permit or license under this Code of Ordinances,
by making such application, assumes and agrees to pay for all injury to or death of any person
or persons whomsoever, and all loss of or damage to property whatsoever, including all costs
and expenses incident thereto, however arising from or related to, directly, indirectly or
remotely, the issuance of the permit or license, or the doing of anything thereunder, or the
failure of such applicant, or the agents, employees or servants of such applicant, to abide by or
comply with any of the provisions of this Code of Ordinances or the terms and conditions of
such permit or license, and such applicant, by making such application, forever agrees to
indemnify the City and its officers, agents and employees, and agrees to save them harmless
from any and all claims, demands, lawsuits or liability whatsoever for any loss, damage, injury
or death, including all costs and expenses incident thereto, by reason of the foregoing. The
provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a part of any permit or license issued under
this Code of Ordinances or any other ordinance of the City whether expressly recited therein
or not.
1.05 PERSONAL INJURIES. When action is brought against the City for personal
injuries alleged to have been caused by its negligence, the City may notify in writing any
person by whose negligence it claims the injury was caused. The notice shall state the
pendency of the action, the name of the plaintiff, the name and location of the court where the
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 3 -
action is pending, a brief statement of the alleged facts from which the cause arose, that the
City believes that the person notified is liable to it for any judgment rendered against the City,
and asking the person to appear and defend. A judgment obtained in the suit is conclusive in
any action by the City against any person so notified, as to the existence of the defect or other
cause of the injury or damage, as to the liability of the City to the plaintiff in the first named
action, and as to the amount of the damage or injury. The City may maintain an action against
the person notified to recover the amount of the judgment together with all the expenses
incurred by the City in the suit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.14)
1.06 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION. In the construction of this Code of Ordinances, the
rules of statutory construction as set forth in Chapter 4 of the Code of Iowa shall be utilized to
ascertain the intent of the Council with the understanding that the term “statute” as used
therein will be deemed to be synonymous with the term “ordinance” when applied to this
Code of Ordinances.
1.07 EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever an officer or employee is required or
authorized to do an act by a provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision shall be
construed as authorizing performance by a regular assistant, subordinate or a duly authorized
designee of said officer or employee.
1.08 AMENDMENTS. All ordinances which amend, repeal or in any manner affect this
Code of Ordinances shall include proper reference to chapter, section, subsection or paragraph
to maintain an orderly codification of ordinances of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.2)
1.09 CATCHLINES AND NOTES. The catchlines of the several sections of the Code of
Ordinances, titles, headings (chapter, section and subsection), editor’s notes, cross references
and State law references, unless set out in the body of the section itself, contained in the Code
of Ordinances, do not constitute any part of the law, and are intended merely to indicate,
explain, supplement or clarify the contents of a section.
1.10 ALTERING CODE. It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to change or amend
by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Code of Ordinances, or to insert or delete
pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code of Ordinances in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.
1.11 SEVERABILITY. If any section, provision or part of the Code of Ordinances is
adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication will not affect the validity of the Code
of Ordinances as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or
unconstitutional.
1.12 WARRANTS. If consent to enter upon or inspect any building, structure or property
pursuant to a municipal ordinance is withheld by any person having the lawful right to
exclude, the City officer or employee having the duty to enter upon or conduct the inspection
may apply to the Iowa District Court in and for the County, pursuant to Section 808.14 of the
Code of Iowa, for an administrative search warrant. No owner, operator or occupant or any
other person having charge, care or control of any dwelling unit, rooming unit, structure,
building or premises shall fail or neglect, after presentation of a search warrant, to permit entry
therein by the municipal officer or employee.
CHAPTER 1 CODE OF ORDINANCES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 4 -
† EDITOR’S NOTE: For civil penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see Chapter 4.
1.13 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ACTION. Whenever this Code of Ordinances
grants any discretionary power to the Council or any commission, board or officer or
employee of the City and does not specify standards to govern the exercise of the power, the
power shall be exercised in light of the following standard: The discretionary power to grant,
deny or revoke any matter shall be considered in light of the facts and circumstances then
existing and as may be reasonably foreseeable, and due consideration shall be given to the
impact upon the public health, safety and welfare, and the decision shall be that of a
reasonably prudent person under similar circumstances in the exercise of the police power.
1.14 STANDARD PENALTY. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code
of Ordinances for violation of any particular provision, section or chapter, any person failing
to perform a duty required by this Code of Ordinances or otherwise violating any provision of
this Code of Ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted herein by reference shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of at least sixty-five dollars ($65.00) but not to exceed six
hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00). Said violator will not be subject to the penalty of
imprisonment.†
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[2] and 903.1[1a])
[The next page is 9]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 9 -
CHAPTER 2
CHARTER
2.01 Title 2.04 Number and Term of Council
2.02 Form of Government 2.05 Term of Mayor
2.03 Powers and Duties 2.06 Copies on File
2.01 TITLE. This chapter may be cited as the charter of the City of Charles City, Iowa.
2.02 FORM OF GOVERNMENT. The form of government of the City is the Mayor-
Council form of government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
2.03 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Council and Mayor and other City officers have such
powers and shall perform such duties as are authorized or required by State law and by the
ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City.
2.04 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of five Council
Members elected at large for staggered terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.05 TERM OF MAYOR. The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
2.06 COPIES ON FILE. The Clerk shall keep an official copy of the charter on file with
the official records of the Clerk and the Secretary of State, and shall keep copies of the charter
available at the Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.1)
CHAPTER 2 CHARTER
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 10 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 11 -
CHAPTER 3
ELECTION PRECINCTS
3.01 ELECTION PRECINCTS. The City is divided into three election precincts as
follows:
1. First Precinct. The first precinct contains that portion of the City within a
boundary commencing at a point of intersection of the west corporate line of the City
and the center line of the Cedar River, thence southeasterly along the center line of the
Cedar River to the point of intersection of the south corporate line of the City and the
center line of the Cedar River, thence commencing west and south continuing along
the corporate line back to the point of beginning.
2. Second Precinct. The second precinct contains that portion of the City within
a boundary commencing at a point of intersection of the south corporate line of the
City and the center line of the Cedar River, thence commencing east and continuing
along the corporate line to the point of intersection of 5th Avenue (also known as 200th
Avenue and Hwy 18) and the Cedar River Railroad, thence northwesterly along the
Cedar River Railroad to the point of intersection of E Street and the Cedar River
Railroad, thence south along E Street to the point of intersection of E Street and 4th
Avenue, thence west along 4th Avenue to the point of intersection of 4th Avenue and
North Grand Avenue, thence south along North Grand Avenue at the point of
intersection of North Grand Avenue and Clark Street, thence south easterly along
Clark Street to the point of intersection of Clark Street and Leland Avenue, thence
southwesterly along Leland Avenue to the point of intersection of Leland Avenue and
Riverside Drive, thence Northwesterly along Riverside Drive to the point of
intersection of Riverside Drive and Brantingham Street (also known as 200th Avenue
and Hwy 18), then continuing southwesterly along Brantingham Street to the center
line of the Cedar River, then continuing southeasterly along the center line of the
Cedar River to the point of beginning.
3. Third Precinct. The third precinct contains that portion of the City within a
boundary commencing at a point of intersection of the west corporate line of the City
and the center line of the Cedar River, thence north along the corporate line of the
City and continuing along the corporate line to the point of intersection of 5th Avenue
(also known as 200th Avenue and Hwy 18) and the Cedar River Railroad, thence
northwesterly along the Cedar River Railroad to the point of intersection of E Street
and the Cedar River Railroad, thence south along E Street to the point of intersection
of E Street and 4th Avenue, thence west along 4th Avenue to the point of intersection
of 4th Avenue and North Grand Avenue, thence south along North Grand Avenue at
the point of intersection of North Grand Avenue and Clark Street, thence south
easterly along Clark Street to the point of intersection of Clark Street and Leland
Avenue, thence southwesterly along Leland Avenue to the point of intersection of
Leland Avenue and Riverside Drive, thence Northwesterly along Riverside Drive to
the point of intersection of Riverside Drive and Brantingham Street (also known as
200th Avenue and Hwy 18), then continuing southwesterly along Brantingham Street
CHAPTER 3 ELECTION PRECINCTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 12 -
to the center line of the Cedar River, then continuing northwesterly along the center
line of the Cedar River to the point of beginning.
[The next page is 15]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 15 -
† EDITOR’S NOTE: For criminal penalty for violations of this Code of Ordinances, see Section 1.14.
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
4.01 Municipal Infraction 4.04 Civil Citations
4.02 Environmental Violation 4.05 Alternative Relief
4.03 Penalties 4.06 Alternative Penalties
4.01 MUNICIPAL INFRACTION. A violation of this Code of Ordinances or any
ordinance or code herein adopted by reference or the omission or failure to perform any act or
duty required by the same, with the exception of those provisions specifically provided under
State law as a felony, an aggravated misdemeanor, or a serious misdemeanor, or a simple
misdemeanor under Chapters 687 through 747 of the Code of Iowa, is a municipal infraction
punishable by civil penalty as provided herein.†
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[3])
4.02 ENVIRONMENTAL VIOLATION. A municipal infraction which is a violation of
Chapter 455B of the Code of Iowa or of a standard established by the City in consultation with
the Department of Natural Resources, or both, may be classified as an environmental
violation. However, the provisions of this section shall not be applicable until the City has
offered to participate in informal negotiations regarding the violation or to the following
specific violations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1. A violation arising from noncompliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8.
2. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying
or storing of grain, by a person not engaged in the industrial production or
manufacturing of grain products.
3. The discharge of airborne residue from grain, created by the handling, drying
or storing of grain, by a person engaged in such industrial production or
manufacturing if such discharge occurs from September 15 to January 15.
4.03 PENALTIES. A municipal infraction is punishable by the following civil penalties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[1])
1. Standard Civil Penalties.
A. First Offense – Not to exceed $750.00
B. Each Repeat Offense – Not to exceed $1,000.00
Each day that a violation occurs or is permitted to exist constitutes a repeat offense.
2. Special Civil Penalties.
A. A municipal infraction arising from noncompliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement, referred to in 40 C.F.R. §403.8, by an
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 16 -
industrial user is punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each
day a violation exists or continues.
B. A municipal infraction classified as an environmental violation is
punishable by a penalty of not more than $1,000.00 for each occurrence.
However, an environmental violation is not subject to such penalty if all of
the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The violation results solely from conducting an initial startup,
cleaning, repairing, performing scheduled maintenance, testing, or
conducting a shutdown of either equipment causing the violation or
the equipment designed to reduce or eliminate the violation.
(2) The City is notified of the violation within twenty-four (24)
hours from the time that the violation begins.
(3) The violation does not continue in existence for more than
eight (8) hours.
4.04 CIVIL CITATIONS. Any officer authorized by the City to enforce this Code of
Ordinances may issue a civil citation to a person who commits a municipal infraction. A copy
of the citation may be served by personal service as provided in Rule of Civil Procedure
1.305, by certified mail addressed to the defendant at defendant’s last known mailing address,
return receipt requested, or by publication in the manner as provided in Rule of Civil
Procedure 1.310 and subject to the conditions of Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311. A copy of the
citation shall be retained by the issuing officer, and the original citation shall be sent to the
Clerk of the District Court. The citation shall serve as notification that a civil offense has been
committed and shall contain the following information:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[4])
1. The name and address of the defendant.
2. The name or description of the infraction attested to by the officer issuing the
citation.
3. The location and time of the infraction.
4. The amount of civil penalty to be assessed or the alternative relief sought, or
both.
5. The manner, location, and time in which the penalty may be paid.
6. The time and place of court appearance.
7. The penalty for failure to appear in court.
8. The legal description of the affected real property, if applicable.
If the citation affects real property and charges a violation relating to the condition of the
property, including a building code violation, a local housing regulation violation, a housing
code violation, or a public health or safety violation, after filing the citation with the Clerk of
the District Court, the City shall also file the citation in the office of the County Treasurer.
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 17 -
4.05 ALTERNATIVE RELIEF. Seeking a civil penalty as authorized in this chapter does
not preclude the City from seeking alternative relief from the court in the same action. Such
alternative relief may include, but is not limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[8])
4.06 ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES. This chapter does not preclude a peace officer from
issuing a criminal citation for a violation of this Code of Ordinances or regulation if criminal
penalties are also provided for the violation. Nor does it preclude or limit the authority of the
City to enforce the provisions of this Code of Ordinances by criminal sanctions or other lawful
means.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.22[11])
CHAPTER 4 MUNICIPAL INFRACTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 18 -
[The next page is 21]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 21 -
CHAPTER 5
OPERATING PROCEDURES
5.01 Oaths 5.07 Conflict of Interest
5.02 Bonds 5.08 Resignations
5.03 Duties: General 5.09 Removal of Appointed Officers and Employees
5.04 Books and Records 5.10 Vacancies
5.05 Transfer to Successor 5.11 Gifts
5.06 Meetings
5.01 OATHS. The oath of office shall be required and administered in accordance with the
following:
1. Qualify for Office. Each elected or appointed officer shall qualify for office
by taking the prescribed oath and by giving, when required, a bond. The oath shall be
taken, and bond provided, after being certified as elected but not later than noon of the
first day which is not a Sunday or a legal holiday in January of the first year of the
term for which the officer was elected.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.1)
2. Prescribed Oath. The prescribed oath is: “I, (name), do solemnly swear that I
will support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Iowa, and that I will faithfully and impartially, to the best of my ability, discharge all
duties of the office of (name of office) in Charles City as now or hereafter required by
law.”
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63.10)
3. Officers Empowered to Administer Oaths. The following are empowered to
administer oaths and to take affirmations in any matter pertaining to the business of
their respective offices:
A. Mayor
B. City Clerk
C. Members of all boards, commissions or bodies created by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 63A.2)
5.02 BONDS. Surety bonds are provided in accordance with the following:
1. Required. The Council shall provide by resolution for a surety bond or
blanket position bond running to the City and covering the Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer
and such other officers and employees as may be necessary and advisable.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.13)
2. Bonds Approved. Bonds shall be approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.19)
3. Bonds Filed. All bonds, after approval and proper record, shall be filed with
the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.23[6])
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 22 -
4. Record. The Clerk shall keep a book, to be known as the “Record of Official
Bonds” in which shall be recorded the official bonds of all City officers, elective or
appointive.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 64.24[3])
5.03 DUTIES: GENERAL. Each municipal officer shall exercise the powers and perform
the duties prescribed by law and this Code of Ordinances, or as otherwise directed by the
Council unless contrary to State law or City charter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.04 BOOKS AND RECORDS. All books and records required to be kept by law or
ordinance shall be open to examination by the public upon request, unless some other
provisions of law expressly limit such right or require such records to be kept confidential.
Access to public records which are combined with data processing software shall be in
accordance with policies and procedures established by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 22.2 & 22.3A)
5.05 TRANSFER TO SUCCESSOR. Each officer shall transfer to his or her successor in
office all books, papers, records, documents and property in the officer’s custody and
appertaining to that office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
5.06 MEETINGS. All meetings of the Council, any board or commission, or any multimembered
body formally and directly created by any of the foregoing bodies shall be held in
accordance with the following:
1. Notice of Meetings. Reasonable notice, as defined by State law, of the time,
date and place of each meeting, and its tentative agenda shall be given.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.4)
2. Meetings Open. All meetings shall be held in open session unless closed
sessions are held as expressly permitted by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
3. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings showing the date, time and
place, the members present, and the action taken at each meeting. The minutes shall
show the results of each vote taken and information sufficient to indicate the vote of
each member present. The vote of each member present shall be made public at the
open session. The minutes shall be public records open to public inspection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.3)
4. Closed Session. A closed session may be held only by affirmative vote of
either two-thirds of the body or all of the members present at the meeting and in
accordance with Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.5)
5. Cameras and Recorders. The public may use cameras or recording devices at
any open session.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.7)
6. Electronic Meetings. A meeting may be conducted by electronic means only
in circumstances where such a meeting in person is impossible or impractical and then
only in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 21.8)
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 23 -
5.07 CONFLICT OF INTEREST. A City officer or employee shall not have an interest,
direct or indirect, in any contract or job of work or material or the profits thereof or services to
be furnished or performed for the City, unless expressly permitted by law. A contract entered
into in violation of this section is void. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5)
1. Compensation of Officers. The payment of lawful compensation of a City
officer or employee holding more than one City office or position, the holding of
which is not incompatible with another public office or is not prohibited by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3a])
2. Investment of Funds. The designation of a bank or trust company as a
depository, paying agent, or for investment of funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3b])
3. City Treasurer. An employee of a bank or trust company, who serves as
Treasurer of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3c])
4. Stock Interests. Contracts in which a City officer or employee has an interest
solely by reason of employment, or a stock interest of the kind described in subsection
8 of this section, or both, if the contracts are made by competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened, or if the remuneration of employment will not be directly
affected as a result of the contract and the duties of employment do not directly
involve the procurement or preparation of any part of the contract. The competitive
bid qualification of this subsection does not apply to a contract for professional
services not customarily awarded by competitive bid.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3e])
5. Newspaper. The designation of an official newspaper.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3f])
6. Existing Contracts. A contract in which a City officer or employee has an
interest if the contract was made before the time the officer or employee was elected
or appointed, but the contract may not be renewed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3g])
7. Volunteers. Contracts with volunteer firefighters or civil defense volunteers.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3h])
8. Corporations. A contract with a corporation in which a City officer or
employee has an interest by reason of stock holdings when less than five percent (5%)
of the outstanding stock of the corporation is owned or controlled directly or indirectly
by the officer or employee or the spouse or immediate family of such officer or
employee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3i])
9. Contracts. Contracts made by the City upon competitive bid in writing,
publicly invited and opened.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3d])
10. Cumulative Purchases. Contracts not otherwise permitted by this section, for
the purchase of goods or services that benefit a City officer or employee, if the
CHAPTER 5 OPERATING PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 24 -
purchases benefiting that officer or employee do not exceed a cumulative total
purchase price of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in a fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3j])
11. Franchise Agreements. Franchise agreements between the City and a utility
and contracts entered into by the City for the provision of essential City utility
services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3l])
12. Third Party Contracts. A contract that is a bond, note or other obligation of
the City and the contract is not acquired directly from the City but is acquired in a
transaction with a third party who may or may not be the original underwriter,
purchaser, or obligee of the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.5[3m])
5.08 RESIGNATIONS. An elected officer who wishes to resign may do so by submitting a
resignation in writing to the Clerk so that it shall be properly recorded and considered. A
person who resigns from an elective office is not eligible for appointment to the same office
during the time for which the person was elected, if during that time the compensation of the
office has been increased.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[9])
5.09 REMOVAL OF APPOINTED OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. Except as
otherwise provided by State or City law, all persons appointed to City office or employment
may be removed by the officer or body making the appointment, but every such removal shall
be by written order. The order shall give the reasons, be filed in the office of the Clerk, and a
copy shall be sent by certified mail to the person removed, who, upon request filed with the
Clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing the copy, shall be granted a public
hearing before the Council on all issues connected with the removal. The hearing shall be
held within thirty (30) days after the date the request is filed, unless the person removed
requests a later date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.15)
5.10 VACANCIES. A vacancy in an elective City office during a term of office shall be
filled in accordance with Section 372.13[2] of the Code of Iowa.
5.11 GIFTS. Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 68B of the Code of Iowa, a public
official, public employee or candidate, or that person’s immediate family member, shall not,
directly or indirectly, accept or receive any gift or series of gifts from a “restricted donor” as
defined in Chapter 68B and a restricted donor shall not, directly or indirectly, individually or
jointly with one or more other restricted donors, offer or make a gift or a series of gifts to a
public official, public employee or candidate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 68B.22)
[The next page is 29]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 29 -
CHAPTER 6
CITY ELECTIONS
6.01 Nominating Method to be Used 6.04 Preparation of Petition and Affidavit
6.02 Nominations by Petition 6.05 Filing, Presumption, Withdrawals, Objections
6.03 Adding Name by Petition 6.06 Persons Elected
6.01 NOMINATING METHOD TO BE USED. All candidates for elective municipal
offices shall be nominated under the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.3)
6.02 NOMINATIONS BY PETITION. Nominations for elective municipal offices of the
City may be made by nomination paper or papers signed by not less than twenty-five (25)
eligible electors, residents of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.1)
6.03 ADDING NAME BY PETITION. The name of a candidate placed upon the ballot by
any other method than by petition shall not be added by petition for the same office.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.2)
6.04 PREPARATION OF PETITION AND AFFIDAVIT. Nomination papers shall
include a petition and an affidavit of candidacy. The petition and affidavit shall be
substantially in the form prescribed by the State Commissioner of Elections, shall include
information required by the Code of Iowa, and shall be signed in accordance with the Code of
Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.3, 45.5 & 45.6)
6.05 FILING, PRESUMPTION, WITHDRAWALS, OBJECTIONS. The time and
place of filing nomination petitions, the presumption of validity thereof, the right of a
candidate so nominated to withdraw and the effect of such withdrawal, and the right to object
to the legal sufficiency of such petitions, or to the eligibility of the candidate, shall be
governed by the appropriate provisions of Chapter 44 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 45.4)
6.06 PERSONS ELECTED. The candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for
each office on the ballot are elected, to the extent necessary to fill the positions open.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.8[3])
CHAPTER 6 CITY ELECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 30 -
[The next page is 35]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 35 -
CHAPTER 7
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
7.01 Purpose 7.05 Operating Budget Preparation
7.02 Finance Officer 7.06 Budget Amendments
7.03 Cash Control 7.07 Accounting
7.04 Fund Control 7.08 Financial Reports
7.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and provide for rules
and regulations governing the management of the financial affairs of the City.
7.02 FINANCE OFFICER. The Clerk is the finance and accounting officer of the City and
is responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
7.03 CASH CONTROL. To assure the proper accounting and safe custody of moneys the
following shall apply:
1. Deposit of Funds. All moneys or fees collected for any purpose by any City
officer shall be deposited through the office of the finance officer. If any said fees are
due to an officer, they shall be paid to the officer by check drawn by the finance
officer and approved by the Council only upon such officer’s making adequate reports
relating thereto as required by law, ordinance or Council directive.
2. Deposits and Investments. All moneys belonging to the City shall be
promptly deposited in depositories selected by the Council in amounts not exceeding
the authorized depository limitation established by the Council or invested in
accordance with the City’s written investment policy and State law, including joint
investments as authorized by Section 384.21 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.21, 12B.10, 12C.1)
3. Petty Cash Fund. The finance officer shall be custodian of a petty cash fund
for the payment of small claims for minor purchases, collect-on-delivery
transportation charges and small fees customarily paid at the time of rendering a
service, for which payments the finance officer shall obtain some form of receipt or
bill acknowledged as paid by the vendor or agent. At such time as the petty cash fund
is approaching depletion, the finance officer shall draw a check for replenishment in
the amount of the accumulated expenditures and said check and supporting detail shall
be submitted to the Council as a claim in the usual manner for claims and charged to
the proper funds and accounts. It shall not be used for salary payments or other
personal services or personal expenses.
4. Change Fund. The finance officer is authorized to draw a warrant/check on
the Utility Fund for establishing a change fund for the purpose of making change
without commingling other funds to meet the requirements of the office. Said change
fund shall be in the custody of the finance officer, who shall maintain the integrity of
the fund.
7.04 FUND CONTROL. There shall be established and maintained separate and distinct
funds in accordance with the following:
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 36 -
1. Revenues. All moneys received by the City shall be credited to the proper
fund as required by law, ordinance or resolution.
2. Expenditures. No disbursement shall be made from a fund unless such
disbursement is authorized by law, ordinance or resolution, was properly budgeted,
and supported by a claim approved by the Council.
3. Emergency Fund. No transfer may be made from any fund to the Emergency
Fund.
(IAC, 545-2.5 [384,388], Sec. 2.5[2])
4. Debt Service Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by State law,
moneys may be transferred from any other City fund to the Debt Service Fund to meet
payments of principal and interest. Such transfers must be authorized by the original
budget or a budget amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[3])
5. Capital Improvements Reserve Fund. Except where specifically prohibited by
State law, moneys may be transferred from any City fund to the Capital Improvements
Reserve Fund. Such transfers must be authorized by the original budget or a budget
amendment.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388] Sec. 2.5[4])
6. Utility and Enterprise Funds. A surplus in a Utility or Enterprise Fund may
be transferred to any other City fund, except the Emergency Fund and Road Use Tax
Funds, by resolution of the Council. A surplus may exist only after all required
transfers have been made to any restricted accounts in accordance with the terms and
provisions of any revenue bonds or loan agreements relating to the Utility or
Enterprise Fund. A surplus is defined as the cash balance in the operating account or
the unrestricted retained earnings calculated in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles in excess of:
A. The amount of the expense of disbursements for operating and
maintaining the utility or enterprise for the preceding three (3) months, and
B. The amount necessary to make all required transfers to restricted
accounts for the succeeding three (3) months.
(IAC, 545-2.5[384,388], Sec. 2.5[5])
7. Balancing of Funds. Fund accounts shall be reconciled at the close of each
month and a report thereof submitted to the Council.
7.05 OPERATING BUDGET PREPARATION. The annual operating budget of the City
shall be prepared in accordance with the following:
1. Proposal Prepared. The finance officer is responsible for preparation of the
annual budget detail, for review by the Mayor and Council and adoption by the
Council in accordance with directives of the Mayor and Council.
2. Boards and Commissions. All boards, commissions and other administrative
agencies of the City that are authorized to prepare and administer budgets must submit
their budget proposals to the finance officer for inclusion in the proposed City budget
at such time and in such form as required by the Council.
3. Submission to Council. The finance officer shall submit the completed
budget proposal to the Council no later than February 15 of each year.
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 37 -
4. Council Review. The Council shall review the proposed budget and may
make any adjustments in the budget which it deems appropriate before accepting such
proposal for publication, hearing and final adoption.
5. Notice of Hearing. Upon adopting a proposed budget the Council shall set a
date for public hearing thereon to be held before March 15 and cause notice of such
hearing and a summary of the proposed budget to be published not less than ten (10)
nor more than twenty (20) days before the date established for the hearing. Proof of
such publication must be filed with the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[3])
6. Copies of Budget on File. Not less than twenty (20) days before the date that
the budget must be certified to the County Auditor and not less than ten (10) days
before the public hearing, the Clerk shall make available a sufficient number of copies
of the detailed budget to meet the requests of taxpayers and organizations, and have
them available for distribution at the offices of the Mayor and Clerk and at the City
library.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[2])
7. Adoption and Certification. After the hearing, the Council shall adopt, by
resolution, a budget for at least the next fiscal year and the Clerk shall certify the
necessary tax levy for the next fiscal year to the County Auditor and the County Board
of Supervisors. The tax levy certified may be less than, but not more than, the amount
estimated in the proposed budget. Two copies each of the detailed budget as adopted
and of the tax certificate must be transmitted to the County Auditor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.16[5])
7.06 BUDGET AMENDMENTS. A City budget finally adopted for the following fiscal
year becomes effective July 1 and constitutes the City appropriation for each program and
purpose specified therein until amended as provided by this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.18)
1. Program Increase. Any increase in the amount appropriated to a program
must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original
budget.
(IAC, 545-2.2 [384, 388])
2. Program Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one program to another
must be prepared, adopted and subject to protest in the same manner as the original
budget.
(IAC, 545-2.3 [384, 388])
3. Activity Transfer. Any transfer of appropriation from one activity to another
activity within a program must be approved by resolution of the Council.
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388])
4. Administrative Transfers. The finance officer shall have the authority to
adjust, by transfer or otherwise, the appropriations allocated within a specific activity
without prior Council approval.
(IAC, 545-2.4 [384, 388])
7.07 ACCOUNTING. The accounting records of the City shall consist of not less than the
following:
CHAPTER 7 FISCAL MANAGEMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 38 -
1. Books of Original Entry. There shall be established and maintained books of
original entry to provide a chronological record of cash received and disbursed.
2. General Ledger. There shall be established and maintained a general ledger
controlling all cash transactions, budgetary accounts and for recording unappropriated
surpluses.
3. Checks. Checks shall be prenumbered and signed by the Clerk following
Council approval, except as provided by subsection 5 hereof.
4. Budget Accounts. There shall be established such individual accounts to record
receipts by source and expenditures by program and activity as will provide adequate
information and control for budgeting purposes as planned and approved by the
Council. Each individual account shall be maintained within its proper fund and so kept
that receipts can be immediately and directly compared with revenue estimates and
expenditures can be related to the authorizing appropriation. No expenditure shall be
posted except to the appropriation for the function and purpose for which the expense
was incurred.
5. Immediate Payment Authorized. The Council may by resolution authorize the
Clerk to issue checks for immediate payment of amounts due, which if not paid
promptly would result in loss of discount, penalty for late payment or additional
interest cost. Any such payments made shall be reported to the Council for review
and approval with and in the same manner as other claims at the next meeting
following such payment. The resolution authorizing immediate payment shall specify
the type of payment so authorized and may include but is not limited to payment of
utility bills, contractual obligations, payroll and bond principal and interest.
6. Utilities. The finance officer shall perform and be responsible for accounting
functions of the municipally owned utilities.
7.08 FINANCIAL REPORTS. The finance officer shall prepare and file the following
financial reports:
1. Monthly Reports. There shall be submitted to the Council each month a
report showing the activity and status of each fund, program, sub-program and activity
for the preceding month.
2. Annual Report. Not later than December 1 of each year there shall be
published an annual report containing a summary for the preceding fiscal year of all
collections and receipts, all accounts due the City, and all expenditures, the current
public debt of the City, and the legal debt limit of the City for the current fiscal year.
A copy of the annual report must be filed with the Auditor of State not later than
December 1 of each year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.22)
[The next page is 45]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 45 -
CHAPTER 8
URBAN RENEWAL
8.01 Purpose 8.05 East Park Urban Renewal Area
8.02 Riverside Tax Increment Area 8.06 Park Avenue Economic Development District
8.03 Southwest ByPass T.I.F. District 8.07 2017 South Grand Urban Renewal Area Addition
8.04 South Grand Urban Renewal Area
8.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the division of taxes levied
on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Areas of the City each year by and for the
benefit of the State, City, County, school districts or other taxing districts after the effective
date of the ordinances codified in this chapter in order to create a special fund to pay the
principal of and interest on loans, advances or indebtedness, including bonds proposed to be
issued by the City, to finance projects in such areas.
8.02 RIVERSIDE TAX INCREMENT AREA. The provisions of this section apply to the
Riverside Tax Increment Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area having
been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the Council by resolutions adopted in
December, 1968, and on July 18, 1977:
Commencing at the point of intersection of centerline of Clark Street and
Grand Avenue; thence north along said centerline of Grand Avenue to the
centerline of Thirteenth Avenue; thence east along said centerline of Thirteenth
Avenue to the extended east line of Lots 21 through 30 in Block 132 to Lane’s
Addition and Lots 19 through 24 of Block 131 of Lane’s Addition; thence north
along said extended lot line to the centerline of Sixteenth Avenue; thence west
along said centerline of Sixteenth Avenue to the centerline of Grand Avenue;
thence north along said centerline of Grand Avenue to the extended south line
of Lots 1 through 19 of Block 1 of Laun’s Addition “A”; thence west along said
extended south lot line to the east line of the Illinois Central Railroad right-ofway;
thence west along said extended south lot line to the east line of the
Illinois Central Railroad right-of-way; thence southerly along said railroad
right-of-way to the centerline of Iowa Street; thence southwest along said
centerline of Iowa Street to the centerline of the Chicago, Milwaukee, St. Paul
and Pacific Railroad right-of-way; thence west along said railroad right-ofway
line to the centerline of Richings Street; thence southeast along said
centerline of Richings Street to the centerline of Johnson Street; thence
southwest along said centerline of Johnson Street to the centerline of Spriggs
Street; thence southeast along said centerline of Spriggs Street to the
centerline of Jackson Street; thence southwest along said centerline of Jackson
Street to the centerline of Blunt Street; thence northwest along said centerline
of Blunt Street to the centerline of Johnson Street; thence southwest along said
centerline of Johnson Street to the centerline of the Cedar River to the
centerline of Jackson Street extended; thence southwest along said centerline
of Jackson Street to the centerline of Court Street; thence southeast along said
centerline of Court Street to the centerline of Main Street; thence southwest
along said centerline of Main Street to the centerline of Gilbert Street thence
southeast along said centerline of Gilbert Street to the centerline of Cedar
CHAPTER 8 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 46 -
Street; thence south along said centerline of Cedar Street to the centerline of
Third Street; thence east along said centerline of Third Street to the centerline
of Hildreth Street; thence north along said centerline of Hildreth Street to the
centerline of Second Street; thence east along said centerline of Second Street
to the centerline of South Grand Avenue; thence southeasterly along said
centerline of South Grand Avenue to the extended southeast line of Lot 21 of
Boulton’s Park Addition; thence northeasterly along said extended lot line to
the centerline of Riverside Street; thence northwesterly along said centerline of
Riverside Street to the extended southeast line of Lot 5 of Block 158 of Lane’s
Addition; thence northeasterly along said extended line to the point of
beginning.
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Riverside Tax Increment Area each year by and
for the benefit of the State, the City, the County and any school district or other taxing district
in which the such Urban Renewal Area is located, from and after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this section, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the Riverside Tax Increment Area, as shown
on the assessment roll as of January 1, 1989, shall be allocated to and when collected
be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating
taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the
Riverside Tax Increment Area on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
section, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after said
effective date, the assessment roll as of January 1, 1989, shall be used in determining
the assessed valuation of the taxable property in said Riverside Tax Increment Area on
the effective date.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be allocated
to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay the principal of and
interest on loans, advances or indebtedness, whether funded, refunded, assumed or
otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of Section 403.9[1] of the Code of
Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects in the
Riverside Tax Increment Area, except that taxes for the payment of bonds and interest
of each taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing
district without limitation by the provisions of this section. Unless and until the total
assessed valuation of the taxable property in the Riverside Tax Increment Area exceeds
the total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown on the assessment
roll referred to in subsection 1 of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon
the taxable property in the Riverside Tax Increment Area shall be paid into the funds for
the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner
as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any,
and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the Riverside Tax Increment Area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection 2 of this section and the special
fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the City for
the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the
authority of Section 403.9[1] of the Code of Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the
CHAPTER 8 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 47 -
City to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the Riverside Tax
Increment Area.
4. As used in this section, the word “taxes” includes, but is not limited to, all
levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
8.03 SOUTHWEST BYPASS T.I.F. DISTRICT. The provisions of this section apply to
the Southwest ByPass T.I.F. District, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area
having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the Council by resolution
adopted on December 7, 1992, and on November 1, 1993:
Beginning at a point on the easterly right-of-way line of the Charles City
Railways located 486 feet north of the centerline of Highway Iowa 14, said
point also on the south property line of Wildwood Park; thence south along the
easterly right-of-way line of the railroad to the southeasterly corner of Lot 1,
Green Acres Addition to Charles City; thence south along the westerly
boundary line of Hillcrest Addition to the north right-of-way line of 11th
Street; thence south 33 feet to the NE corner of the W½ NW¼ Section 13,
T95N, R16W; thence south along the east line of the W½ NW¼ of said Section
13 to the SE corner of the W½ NW¼ of Section 13; thence west along the south
line of the NW¼ of Section 13 to the SE corner of the NE¼ of Section 14,
T95N, R16W; thence west along the south line of the NE¼ of said Section 14 to
the east right-of-way line of Ridgeway Avenue; thence north along the east
right-of-way line of Ridgeway Avenue to the southeasterly right-of-way line of
the abandoned Charles City Western Railway; thence southwesterly along said
southeasterly right-of-way line to south right-of-way line of 215th Street;
thence west along the south right-of-way line of 215th Street to the west rightof-
way line of Quail Avenue; thence north along the west right-of-way line of
Quail Avenue to the centerline of Highway Iowa 14; thence east along the
centerline of Iowa 14 33 feet to the west section line of Section 11, T95N,
R16W; thence north along the west section line of Section 11 to the NW corner
of the SW¼ of the NW¼ of Section 11; thence east along the south line of the
NW¼ of Section 11 to the NW corner of Wildwood Park; thence south along
the west line of Wildwood Park 861.2 feet to the SW corner of Wildwood Park;
thence east along the south line of Wildwood Park to the point of beginning.
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Southwest ByPass T.I.F. District each year by
and for the benefit of the State, the City, the County and any school district or other taxing
district in which the such Urban Renewal Area is located, from and after the effective date of
Ordinance No. 871, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the Southwest ByPass T.I.F. District, as
shown on the assessment roll as of January 1, 1991, shall be allocated to and when
collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for said
taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of
allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory
in the Southwest ByPass T.I.F. District on the effective date of the ordinance codified
in this section, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after
said effective date, the assessment roll as of January 1, 1991, shall be used in
CHAPTER 8 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 48 -
determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in said Southwest ByPass
T.I.F. District on the effective date.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay the
principal of and interest on loans, advances or indebtedness, whether funded,
refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of Section
403.9[1] of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or
in part, projects in the Southwest ByPass T.I.F. District, except that taxes for the
payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all
taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this
section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the
Southwest ByPass T.I.F. District exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in such area as shown on the assessment roll referred to in subsection 1 of
this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the
Southwest ByPass T.I.F. District shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other property
taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest
thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
property in the Southwest ByPass T.I.F. District shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection 2 of this section and the special
fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the City for
the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the
authority of Section 403.9[1] of the Code of Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the
City to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the Southwest ByPass T.I.F.
District.
4. As used in this section, the word “taxes” includes, but is not limited to, all
levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
8.04 SOUTH GRAND URBAN RENEWAL AREA. The provisions of this section apply
to the South Grand Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area
having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the Council by resolution
adopted on December 22, 1994:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the northerly right-of-way line of the
Charles City Railways and the west right-of-way line of South Main Street,
said point being 697.56 feet north of the south line of Section 12, T95N, R16W;
thence south along the west right-of-way line of South Main Street to the north
right-of-way line of 11th Street; thence west along the north right-of-way line
of 11th Street, 1287 feet; thence south 33 feet to the northwest corner of the E½
of the NW¼ of Section 13, T95N, R16W; thence continuing south along the
west line of said E½ NW¼ of Section 13, to the centerline of 215th Street,
Floyd County, Iowa; thence east along the centerline of 215th Street to the
west right-of-way line of South Main Street; thence south along said west
right-of-way line of South Main Street to the centerline of 220th Street, Floyd
County, Iowa; thence east along the centerline of 220th Street, said line being
the south line of Section 13, T95N, R16W to the SW corner of Section 18,
T95N, R15W; thence east along the south line of said Section 18 to the SE
corner of the W½ of said Section 18; thence north along the east line of the
W½ of 18-95-15 to the north line of Section 18; thence continuing north along
CHAPTER 8 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 49 -
the east line of W½ of Section 7, T95N, R15W to a point of intersection on the
north right-of-way line of the Charles City Railways; thence westerly along the
north right-of-way line of Charles City Railways to the point of beginning.
[The South Grand District includes properties in all of the E½ NW¼ of Section
13, T95N, R16W, all of the E½ of Section 13, T95N, R16W; all of the W½ of
Section 18, T95N, R15W; part of the W½ of Section 7, T95N, R15W and part of
the E½ of Section 12, T95N, R16W.]
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the South Grand Urban Renewal Area each year by
and for the benefit of the State, the City, the County and any school district or other taxing
district in which the such Urban Renewal Area is located, from and after the effective date of
Ordinance No. 897, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the South Grand Urban Renewal Area, as
shown on the assessment roll as of January 1, 1993, shall be allocated to and when
collected be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for said
taxing district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of
allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory
in the South Grand Urban Renewal Area on the effective date of Ordinance No. 897,
but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after said effective
date, the assessment roll as of January 1, 1993, shall be used in determining the
assessed valuation of the taxable property in said South Grand Urban Renewal Area
on the effective date.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay the
principal of and interest on loans, advances or indebtedness, whether funded,
refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of Section
403.9[1] of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or
in part, projects in the South Grand Urban Renewal Area, except that taxes for the
payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all
taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this
section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the
South Grand Urban Renewal Area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in such area as shown on the assessment roll referred to in subsection 1 of
this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the
South Grand Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective
taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other
property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and
interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the
taxable property in the South Grand Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds
for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection 2 of this section and the special
fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the City for
the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the
authority of Section 403.9[1] of the Code of Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the
City to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the South Grand Urban
Renewal Area.
CHAPTER 8 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 50 -
4. As used in this section, the word “taxes” includes, but is not limited to, all
levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
8.05 EAST PARK URBAN RENEWAL AREA. The provisions of this section apply to
the East Park Urban Renewal Area, the boundaries of which are set out below, such area
having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved by the Council by resolution
adopted on December 16, 1996:
That part of the north 1480.0 feet of the Northwest Quarter (NW¼) of Section
Eight (8), Township Ninety-five (95) North, Range Fifteen (15) West of the 5th
P.M., Floyd County, Iowa, as measured at right angles to the north line of said
Northwest Quarter (NW¼), lying northeasterly of the Illinois Central Railroad,
containing 76.1 acres more or less, subject to an easement to the State of Iowa
for highway purposes. [The foregoing property is platted as East Park, An
Addition to Floyd County, Iowa, and recorded in Book 103 of Land Deeds at
Pages 446-456 in the office of the Floyd County Recorder.]
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the East Park Urban Renewal Area each year by
and for the benefit of the State, the City, the County and any school district or other taxing
district in which the such Urban Renewal Area is located, from and after the effective date of
Ordinance No. 931, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the East Park Urban Renewal Area, as shown
on the assessment roll as of January 1, 1996, shall be allocated to and when collected
be paid into the fund for the respective taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing
district into which all other property taxes are paid. For the purpose of allocating
taxes levied by or for any taxing district which did not include the territory in the East
Park Urban Renewal Area on the effective date of Ordinance No. 931, but to which
the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after said effective date, the
assessment roll as of January 1, 1996, shall be used in determining the assessed
valuation of the taxable property in said East Park Urban Renewal Area on the
effective date.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay the
principal of and interest on loans, advances or indebtedness, whether funded,
refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of Section
403.9[1] of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in whole or
in part, projects in the East Park Urban Renewal Area, except that taxes for the
payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all
taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this
section. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the
East Park Urban Renewal Area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable
property in such area as shown on the assessment roll referred to in subsection 1 of
this section, all of the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the East
Park Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing
districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same manner as all other property
taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest
thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable
CHAPTER 8 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 51 -
property in the East Park Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for the
respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection 2 of this section and the special
fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the City for
the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the
authority of Section 403.9[1] of the Code of Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the
City to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the East Park Urban
Renewal Area.
4. As used in this section, the word “taxes” includes, but is not limited to, all
levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
8.06 PARK AVENUE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. The provisions of
this section apply to the Park Avenue Economic Development District, the boundaries of
which are set out below, such are having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan approved
by the Council by resolutions adopted on April 21, 2003:
That tract of land located in portions of Section Seven (7) and Section Eight
(8), Township Ninety-five North (95N), Range Fifteen (15) West of the 5th
P.M., Floyd County, Iowa, described as follows: Commencing at a point on
the east line of the Southeast Quarter of Section Seven, Township Ninety-five
North, Range Fifteen, West of the Fifth P.M., which point is 758.6 feet North of
the southeast corner of said Section Seven, thence North 56º 18' 40" West
along the centerline of Clark Street, Charles City, Iowa, a distance of 743 feet
to the point of beginning; thence continuing North 56º 18' 40" West along the
centerline of Clark Street a distance of 863.1 feet to a point; thence North 00º
02' 50" East a distance of 987.7 feet to a point; thence North 89º 22' 30" East a
distance of 1001.6 feet to a point; thence North 00º 00' 40" East a distance of
661.9 feet to a point; thence North 89º 29' 30" East a distance of 333.2 feet to a
point; thence North 00º 03' 30" West a distance of 661.5 feet to the northeast
corner of the Southeast Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of said Section
Seven; thence North 89º 07' East a distance of 375.0 feet to a point; thence
South 00º 02' 40" East a distance of 1824.12 feet to a point; thence South 90º
00' West a distance of 300.0 feet to a point; thence South 29º 59' West a
distance of 150.08 feet to a point on the east line of the Southeast Quarter of
said Section Seven, said point being 2026.16 feet North of the Southeast corner
of said Section Seven; thence South 35º 51' 20" West a distance of 1055.44 feet
to the point of beginning, excepting therefrom the following described parcels:
Parcel No. 1: Commencing at the Northeast Corner of the Southeast
Quarter of the Northeast Quarter of Section 7, Township 95 North,
Range 15; thence south along the east line of said Section 661.5 feet;
thence West 333.2 feet; thence south parallel to the east line of said
Section a distance of 661.9 feet; thence east a distance of 402.2 feet,
the same being a point 69 feet East of the East Quarter corner of said
Section; thence north parallel with the east line of said Section a
distance of 1323.4 feet to the north line of the Southwest Quarter of the
Northwest Quarter of Section Eight, Township 95 North, Range 15
West of the 5th P.M.; thence west along said line a distance of 69 feet
to the point of beginning;
CHAPTER 8 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 52 -
Parcel No. 2: From a point on the East line of the Southeast Quarter
of Section Seven, Township 95 North, Range 15, which point is 758.60
feet north of the southeast corner of said Section 7, thence North 56º
18' 40" West along the centerline of East Clark Street in Charles City,
Iowa, a distance of 1307.10 feet; thence North 33º 41' 20" East 45 feet
to the place of beginning; thence North 56º 18' 40" West 329.00 feet
along the northeast line of Clark Street; thence North 00º 02' 50" East
187.7 feet; thence North 58º 33' East 282 feet; thence North 33º 41'
20" East 200 feet; thence North 56º 18' 40" East 317 feet; thence
South 33º 41' 20" West 616 feet to the point of beginning;
Parcel No. 3: Commencing at the southeasterly corner of Lot 2, Block
12, Highland Terrace Addition to Charles City, Iowa, thence
northeasterly along the easterly line of said Lot 2 and Lot 5, Block 12,
Highland Terrace Addition to Charles City, Iowa, a distance of 616
feet to the northeasterly corner of said Lot 5; thence southeasterly
parallel with the North line of Clark Street a distance of 60 feet; thence
southwesterly parallel with the easterly line of said Lots 2 and 5 a
distance of 616 feet to the north line of Clark Street; thence
northwesterly along the north line of Clark Street a distance of 60 feet
to the point of beginning; also, the southwesterly 60 feet of said Lot 5;
also, from a point on the east line of the Southeast Quarter of Section
7, Township 95 North, Range 15, West of the 5th P.M., which point is
758.6 feet north of the southeast corner of said Section 7; thence North
56º18'40" West along the centerline of East Clark Street in Charles
City, Iowa, a distance of 1307.10 feet, thence North 33º41'20" East 45
feet; thence North 56º18'40" West 329.0 feet along the Northeast line
of Clark Street; thence North 00º02'50" East 187.7 feet to the point of
beginning; thence North 00º02'50" East 620 feet; thence East 90º a
distance of 300 feet; thence south parallel with the west line of the
Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of Section 7, Township 95
North, Range 15, to a point where said line intersects a line parallel to
and 60 feet north of the southwesterly boundary line of said Lot 5;
thence northwesterly along said parallel line to the northwesterly line
of said Lot 5; thence southwesterly along said line to the corner of Lot
4, Block 12, Highland Terrace Addition to Charles City, Iowa; thence
southwesterly 282 feet along the northwesterly line of said Lot 4 to the
point of beginning, all being located in the Northeast Quarter of the
Southeast Quarter of Section 7, Township 95 North, Range 15 West of
the 5th P.M., Floyd County, Iowa;
Parcel No. 4: Part of the SE¼ of Section 7, T 95 N, R 15 W of the 5th
P.M. and Lot 5, Block 12, Highland Terrace Addition to Charles City,
Floyd County, Iowa, described as follows: Commencing at the most
easterly corner of Lot 5, Block 12, Highland Terrace Addition to
Charles City, Iowa; thence N 56º19'41" W along the northeasterly line
of said Lot 5, Block 12, 30.00 feet to the point of beginning; thence N
33º40'19" E 60.00 feet; thence N 56º19'41" W 448.58 feet to a point on
the East line of Clark View Drive; thence S 0º03'00" W 182.83 feet to a
point on the Northwesterly line of said Lot 5; thence continuing along
Clark View Drive S 0º03'00" W 57.70 feet; thence continuing along the
Northeasterly line of Clark View Drive S 56º19'41" E 285.41 feet to a
CHAPTER 8 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 53 -
point on the Northwesterly line of Terrace Drive; thence N 33º40'19" E
140.00 feet to a point on said Northeasterly line of said Lot 5; thence
S 56º19'41" E 30.00 feet to the point of beginning, containing 1.66
acres. NOTE: the north line of Lot 5, Block 12, Highland Terrace
Addition is assumed to bear N 56º19'41" W;
Parcel No. 5: Begin at a point on the North line of the Southeast
Quarter of Section 7, T95N, R15W of the 5th P.M. in Charles City,
Floyd County, Iowa, which bears S 89º -22' W 836.05 feet from the
Northeast Corner of the Southeast Quarter, thence continue S 89º22' W
500.0 feet; thence S 0º08'37" W 125.88 feet; thence S 89º59'28" E
300.18 feet; thence S 0º03'12" W along the East line of Clarkview
Drive 195.27 feet; thence S 56º19'29" E 240.18 feet; thence N 0º03'12"
E 459.9 feet to the point of beginning, containing 2.68 acres.
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area each year by and for the
benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the County and any school district or other taxing
district in which the Urban Renewal Area is located, from and after the effective date of
Ordinance No. 999, shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area, as shown on the
assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in
which the City certifies to the County Auditor the amount of loans, advances,
indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in subsection 2
below, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective
taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other property taxes
are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which
did not include the territory in the Urban Renewal Area on the effective date of this
ordinance, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the
effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of
January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which
amends the plan for the Urban Renewal Area to include the annexed area, shall be
used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay the
principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether
funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of
Section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in
whole or in part, projects in the Urban Renewal Area, except that taxes for the
payment of bonds and interest of each taxing district shall be collected against all
taxable property within the taxing district without limitation by the provisions of this
ordinance. Unless and until the total assessed valuation of the taxable property in the
Urban Renewal Area exceeds the total assessed value of the taxable property in such
area as shown by the assessment roll referred to in subsection 1 of this section, all of
the taxes levied and collected upon the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area
shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said
taxing districts in the same manner as all other property taxes. When such loans,
advances, indebtedness, and bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all
money thereafter received from taxes upon the taxable property in the Urban Renewal
CHAPTER 8 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 54 -
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 1105 adopted by the City Council on July 17, 2017.
Area shall be paid into the funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner
as taxes on all other property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection 2 of this section and the special
fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the City for
the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the
authority of Section 403.9[1] of the Code of Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the
City to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the Urban Renewal Area.
4. As used in this section, the word “taxes” includes, but is not limited to, all
levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
8.07 2017 SOUTH GRAND URBAN RENEWAL AREA ADDITION. The provisions
of this section apply to the 2017 South Grand Urban Renewal Area Addition, the boundaries
of which are set out below, such are having been identified in the Urban Renewal Plan
approved by the Council by resolution adopted on June 19, 2017:
Certain real property situated in the City of Charles City, Floyd
County, State of Iowa more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the point of intersection of the easterly right-of-way of
Brantingham Street and the southwest bank of the Cedar River; thence
southerly along the easterly right-of-way line of Brantingham Street to the
southwest corner of Lot 4 Block P Freeman Addition; thence west 452 ft.
along the north right-of-way line of Gilbert Street to the southeasterly corner
of Lot 5 Block G Freeman Addition; thence south of the northeast corner of
the Public Square Freeman Addition; thence south 360 ft. along the west
right-of-way line of Hildreth Street to the northeast corner of Lot 6 Block F
Freeman Addition; thence east 772 ft. along the south right-of-way line of
Third Street to the northeast corner Lot 1 Block N Freeman Addition; thence
south 2,141 ft. along the west right-of-way line of Allison Street to the
southeast corner of Lot 8 Block 123 Lane’s Addition; thence west along the
north right-of-way line of Ninth Street to a point of intersection of the
extension of the west right-of-way line of Hildreth Street; thence south along
the west right-of-way line of Hildreth Street to the intersection of the north
right-of-way line of the Charles City Charley Western Recreation Trail
(formerly Charles City Western Railway Company); thence east along the
north right-of-way line of the Charley Western Recreation Trail to the
intersection of the westerly bank of the Cedar River; thence north and
northwesterly along the west and southwesterly bank of the Cedar River to the
Point of Beginning.
The taxes levied on the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area each year by and for the
benefit of the State of Iowa, the City, the County and any school district or other taxing
district in which the Urban Renewal Area is located, from and after the effective date of
Ordinance No. 1105, † shall be divided as follows:
1. That portion of the taxes which would be produced by the rate at which the
tax is levied each year by or for each of the taxing districts upon the total sum of the
assessed value of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area, as shown on the
CHAPTER 8 URBAN RENEWAL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 55 -
assessment roll as of January 1 of the calendar year preceding the first calendar year in
which the City certifies to the County Auditor the amount of loans, advances,
indebtedness, or bonds payable from the special fund referred to in subsection 2
below, shall be allocated to and when collected be paid into the fund for the respective
taxing district as taxes by or for said taxing district into which all other property taxes
are paid. For the purpose of allocating taxes levied by or for any taxing district which
did not include the territory in the Urban Renewal Area on the effective date of this
ordinance, but to which the territory has been annexed or otherwise included after the
effective date, the assessment roll applicable to property in the annexed territory as of
January 1 of the calendar year preceding the effective date of the ordinance which
amends the plan for the Urban Renewal Area to include the annexed area, shall be
used in determining the assessed valuation of the taxable property in the annexed area.
2. That portion of the taxes each year in excess of such amounts shall be
allocated to and when collected be paid into a special fund of the City to pay the
principal of and interest on loans, moneys advanced to or indebtedness, whether
funded, refunded, assumed or otherwise, including bonds issued under the authority of
Section 403.9(1), of the Code of Iowa, incurred by the City to finance or refinance, in
whole or in part, projects in the Urban Renewal Area, and to provide assistance for
low and moderate-income family housing as provided in Section 403.22, except that
taxes for the regular and voter-approved physical plant and equipment levy of a school
district imposed pursuant to Section 298.2 of the Code of Iowa, taxes for the
instructional support program levy of a school district imposed pursuant to Section
257.19 of the Code of Iowa and taxes for the payment of bonds and interest of each
taxing district shall be collected against all taxable property within the taxing district
without limitation by the provisions of this ordinance. Unless and until the total
assessed valuation of the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area exceeds the
total assessed value of the taxable property in such area as shown by the assessment
roll referred to in subsection 1 of this section, all of the taxes levied and collected
upon the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the funds for
the respective taxing districts as taxes by or for said taxing districts in the same
manner as all other property taxes. When such loans, advances, indebtedness, and
bonds, if any, and interest thereon, have been paid, all money thereafter received from
taxes upon the taxable property in the Urban Renewal Area shall be paid into the
funds for the respective taxing districts in the same manner as taxes on all other
property.
3. The portion of taxes mentioned in subsection 2 of this section and the special
fund into which that portion shall be paid may be irrevocably pledged by the City for
the payment of the principal and interest on loans, advances, bonds issued under the
authority of Section 403.9[1] of the Code of Iowa, or indebtedness incurred by the
City to finance or refinance in whole or in part projects in the Urban Renewal Area.
4. As used in this section, the word “taxes” includes, but is not limited to, all
levies on an ad valorem basis upon land or real property.
(Ord. 1105 – Aug. 17 Supp.)
[The next page is 71]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 71 -
CHAPTER 9
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
9.01 Purpose 9.06 Applications
9.02 Definitions 9.07 Approval
9.03 Period of Partial Exemption 9.08 Exemption Repealed
9.04 Amounts Eligible for Exemption 9.09 Dual Exemptions Prohibited
9.05 Limitations
9.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a partial exemption from
property taxation of the actual value added to industrial real estate by the new construction of
industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses and distribution centers.
9.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Actual value added” means the actual value added as of the first year for
which the exemption is received.
2. “Distribution center” means a building or structure used primarily for the
storage of goods which are intended for subsequent shipment to retail outlets.
Distribution center does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw
agricultural products, used primarily by a manufacturer to store goods to be used in
the manufacturing process, used primarily for the storage of petroleum products, or
used for the retail sale of goods.
3. “New construction” means new buildings and structures and includes new
buildings and structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings and
structures. New construction does not include reconstruction of an existing building
or structure which does not constitute complete replacement of an existing building or
structure or refitting of an existing building or structure unless the reconstruction of an
existing building or structure is required due to economic obsolescence and the
reconstruction is necessary to implement recognized industry standards for the
manufacturing and processing of specific products and the reconstruction is required
for the owner of the building or structure to continue competitively to manufacture or
process those products, which determination shall receive prior approval from the City
Council upon the recommendation of the Iowa Department of Economic
Development.
4. “Research-service facilities” means a building or group of buildings devoted
primarily to research and development activities, including, but not limited to, the
design and production or manufacture of prototype products for experimental use, and
corporate research services which do not have a primary purpose of providing on-site
services to the public.
5. “Warehouse” means a building or structure used as a public warehouse for the
storage of goods pursuant to Chapter 554, Article 7, of the Code of Iowa, except that it
does not mean a building or structure used primarily to store raw agricultural products
or from which goods are sold at retail.
9.03 PERIOD OF PARTIAL EXEMPTION. The actual value added to industrial real
estate by the new construction of industrial real estate, research-service facilities, warehouses
CHAPTER 9 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 72 -
and distribution centers is eligible to receive a partial exemption from taxation for a period of
five (5) years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
9.04 AMOUNTS ELIGIBLE FOR EXEMPTION. The amount of actual value added
which is eligible to be exempt from taxation shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
1. For the first year, seventy-five percent (75%)
2. For the second year, sixty percent (60%)
3. For the third year, forty-five percent (45%)
4. For the fourth year, thirty percent (30%)
5. For the fifth year, fifteen percent (15%)
9.05 LIMITATIONS. The granting of the exemption under this chapter for new
construction constituting complete replacement of an existing building or structure shall not
result in the assessed value of the industrial real estate being reduced below the assessed value
of the industrial real estate before the start of the new construction added.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.3)
9.06 APPLICATIONS. An application shall be filed for each project resulting in actual
value added for which an exemption is claimed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
1. The application for exemption shall be filed by the owner of the property with
the local assessor by February 1 of the assessment year in which the value added is
first assessed for taxation.
2. Applications for exemption shall be made on forms prescribed by the Director
of Revenue and shall contain information pertaining to the nature of the improvement,
its cost, and other information deemed necessary by the Director of Revenue.
9.07 APPROVAL. A person may submit a proposal to the City Council to receive prior
approval for eligibility for a tax exemption on new construction. If the City Council resolves
to consider such proposal, it shall publish notice and hold a public hearing thereon.
Thereafter, at least thirty (30) days after such hearing the City Council, by ordinance, may
give its prior approval of a tax exemption for new construction if the new construction is in
conformance with City zoning. Such prior approval shall not entitle the owner to exemption
from taxation until the new construction has been completed and found to be qualified real
estate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.4)
9.08 EXEMPTION REPEALED. When in the opinion of the City Council continuation of
the exemption granted by this chapter ceases to be of benefit to the City, the City Council may
repeal this chapter, but all existing exemptions shall continue until their expiration.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.5)
9.09 DUAL EXEMPTIONS PROHIBITED. A property tax exemption under this chapter
shall not be granted if the property for which the exemption is claimed has received any other
property tax exemption authorized by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 427B.6)
CHAPTER 9 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 73 -
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 936, not codified herein and specifically saved from repeal, was adopted by the
Council on July 7, 1997, by which the City granted its approval to exemption from taxation of
the actual value added to real estate legally described as:
The south 75 feet of the north 235 feet of the east 300 feet of the west 333 feet
of Lot 71 of the Irregular Survey of the Southwest Quarter of Section 7,
Township 95 N, Range 15W of the 5th P.M. in the City and also the west 33 feet
of the south 75 feet of the north 235 feet of the aforementioned Lot 71.
Such ordinance remains in full force and effect.
CHAPTER 9 INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 74 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 75 -
CHAPTER 10
TAX REBATE AND GRANT PROGRAM
10.01 Purpose 10.04 City Held Harmless
10.02 Definitions 10.05 Grants Disallowed
10.03 Rebates and Grants to Eligible Purchasers
10.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the economic development of
the City. The Council declares that the lack of construction of new houses within the City
hinders the economic development of the City and that a real estate tax rebate and grant for
new construction will promote the economic development of the City.
10.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Eligible property” means any dwelling within the City limits which is
designed or used exclusively for residential purposes by the purchaser, but not
including a tent, cabin, trailer, mobile home or multi-family structure. Also excluded
are all dwellings located within an urban renewal area within which a division of
revenue is made, as provided in Section 403.19 of the Code of Iowa, for the purpose
of providing or aiding in the provision of public improvements related to housing and
residential development.
2. “Eligible purchaser” means:
A. Newly constructed residence – any person purchasing a newly
constructed residence in the City during the 24-month period of time
beginning May 1, 2002, through April 30, 2004, provided the residence must
be used as a residence by the owner.
B. Other residences – any person purchasing a new residence in the City
which has not been previously occupied during the 24-month period of time
beginning May 1, 2002, through April 30, 2004, provided the residence must
be used as a residence by the owner.
3. “Purchase” means the construction of a new residence or the purchase of a
new residence which has not been previously occupied.
4. “Rebate and grant application” means applications made by eligible
purchasers on forms provided by the Clerk.
10.03 REBATES AND GRANTS TO ELIGIBLE PURCHASERS. Rebates and grants
will be made to eligible purchasers of eligible property in the following manner:
1. The City will credit to eligible purchasers of either newly constructed
residences or purchasers of any new residence which has not been previously
occupied an amount of money equal to the utility bill collected by the City during the
first 24 months beginning with the occupancy by the eligible purchaser of the
property, but said grant shall be in no event greater than $360.00.
2. The City will pay a real estate tax rebate to the eligible purchasers of newly
constructed residence only an amount of money equal to seventy-five percent (75%)
of the portion of the real estate taxes for the City levy which would become delinquent
CHAPTER 10 TAX REBATE AND GRANT PROGRAM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 76 -
if not paid by the eligible purchaser during the first twelve (12) months following
purchase, and fifty percent (50%) of the real estate taxes for the City levy which
would become delinquent if not paid by the eligible purchaser during the second
twelve (12) months following purchase, and twenty-five percent (25%) of the real
estate taxes for the City levy which would become delinquent if not paid by the
eligible purchaser during the third twelve (12) months following purchase. Before
receiving payments under this subsection, the eligible purchaser must provide the
Clerk with a receipt from the County Treasurer showing payment of real estate taxes
delinquent if not paid during each of the respective time periods set forth above.
3. Grants referred to above shall be paid at the time or times as directed by the
Council.
10.04 CITY HELD HARMLESS. Recipients of the grants provided herein must, as part of
the application for said grant, agree to hold the City harmless and refund to the City any grants
made under this chapter later determined to be illegal.
10.05 GRANTS DISALLOWED. No grants shall be allowed when the purchase is from a
related party. Related parties are defined as presently defined in the Internal Revenue Code
section or sections which disallow a deduction for losses from sales or exchanges between
related parties.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 77 -
CHAPTER 11
REDEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE FUND
11.01 Purpose 11.04 Committee Review
11.02 Definitions 11.05 Grant Entitlement and Default
11.03 Applications
11.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to promote the economic development
within the Riverside Tax Increment Financing District by providing financial incentives to
preserve commercial buildings constructed prior to 1950, and financial incentives to
encourage occupancy of vacant commercial buildings or, in the alternative, to avoid the
occurrences of a vacancy in such buildings.
11.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Option 1 Eligible Property” means any commercial building located within
the TIF district which was constructed prior to 1950. “Option 2 Eligible Property”
means any vacant or potentially vacant commercial building located within the TIF
district.
2. “Preservation” means such renovation of the existing structure of a building
as is necessary to make such building structurally sound and shall not include work
that is essentially decorative and not necessary to the preservation of said building.
3. “RIF” means Redevelopment Incentive Fund.
4. “TIF” means Tax Increment Financing.
11.03 APPLICATIONS. A RIF application may be submitted by the owner in the case of
Option 1, and the owner or prospective tenant in the case of Option 2, subject to the following
conditions:
1. Under Option 1:
A. The financial assistance must be used for preservation of the eligible
property.
B. The owner is required to contribute a minimum of ten percent (10%)
of the funds necessary to complete the preservation project, and the source of
these funds cannot be a loan.
C. The owner must have a commitment for long-term financing if
necessary for a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the cost of the project.
D. Subject to approval of the Council, the City will then provide a grant
up to and not to exceed forty percent (40%) of the project costs, and which
grant will in no event exceed $25,000.00. Thirty-five percent (35%) of the
grant shall be provided upon proof of financing by the owner, and the
remaining sixty-five percent (65%) of the grant shall be provided upon
completion of the project.
CHAPTER 11 REDEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE FUND
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 78 -
2. Under Option 2:
A. The financial assistance may be used for preservation of the eligible
property but is not restricted to this use.
B. The property must either be vacant at the time of application, or the
fact that without the use of RIF funding, the property will become vacant
must be established.
C. The owner or prospective tenant must provide detailed plans for the
intended use of the grant and must demonstrate that the assistance provided
under this program will result in immediate occupancy by a commercial
business other than the present tenant or the tenant that had possession
immediately preceding the vacancy.
D. Subject to approval by the Council, a grant will be made within the
following guidelines:
Affected Area Incentive Maximum
Up to 1,000 square feet $3,000.00
1,001 to 4,000 square feet $5,000.00
4,001 square feet and up $1.25/square foot
3. A specific area cannot qualify for more than one RIF grant. The Council shall
have the right to reject any application submitted under this chapter.
11.04 COMMITTEE REVIEW. The Mayor, upon approval of the Council, shall appoint a
seven-member RIF review committee to review applications and make recommendations to
the Council. The committee shall consist of: one Council Member, one officer of the Charles
City Area Development Corporation, City Administrator or designee, one member of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, and three citizens of Charles City. The committee shall
adopt general guidelines for review of applications and shall adopt a procedure for conduct of
all committee meetings. All recommendations of the RIF committee shall be forwarded to the
Council for final approval.
11.05 GRANT ENTITLEMENT AND DEFAULT. The City’s Redevelopment Incentive
Fund grant to an applicant under either Option 1 or Option 2 will be in the form of a
forgivable loan. The grant shall be repaid in an amount and manner hereafter described if any
of the following events occur during the 36-month period immediately following completion
of the approved project:
1. The benefited property is sold or otherwise conveyed by the owner to another
individual or entity; or
2. The business located in the benefited property ceases operation; or
3. The City becomes aware that the applicant made false or misleading
statements in the application which were material in making the grant; or
4. The applicant becomes insolvent.
The City shall give written notice to the applicant upon determination that one of the
foregoing events has occurred, in which case repayment shall be made in twelve (12) equal
monthly installments of principal only beginning on the first of the month next following the
date of the notice and continuing on the first day of each month thereafter until repaid in full.
CHAPTER 11 REDEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE FUND
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 79 -
Except for repayment caused by reasons set forth in subsection 3 above, the amount to be
repaid shall be calculated as follows:
Amount to be Repaid =
??
? ??
? ? xNouMmf obnetrhs
togtraalnt
TGotraalnt
36
“Number of Months” is equal to the number of full months from the date of project completion
to the date of repayment notice.
For repayment triggered by reasons set forth in subsection 3 above, the full amount of the
grant shall be repaid. If no notice of repayment, as above described, is given to the applicant
within the 36-month period after project completion, then the grant shall be deemed forgiven.
Pending forgiveness of the entire grant, or pending full repayment of the grant, the grant shall
be secured by a mortgage upon the benefited premises given by the owner at the time of grant
approval and subject to foreclosure upon default in making a required payment. A mortgage
shall not be required if applicant has only a leasehold interest in the benefited property.
CHAPTER 11 REDEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE FUND
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 80 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 81 -
CHAPTER 12
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION
12.01 Purpose 12.04 When Effective
12.02 Definitions 12.05 Application
12.03 Eligibility
12.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for a property tax exemption
for shell buildings constructed by community development organizations or for-profit entities
for speculative purposes in accordance with Section 427.1[41] of the Code of Iowa.
12.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Community development organization” means a City
organization or a multi-community group formed for one or more
of the following purposes:
A. To promote, stimulate, develop, and advance the business prosperity
and economic welfare of the community, area, or region and its citizens.
B. To encourage and assist the location of new business and industry.
C. To rehabilitate and assist existing business and industry.
D. To stimulate and assist in the expansion of business activity.
For purposes of this definition, a community development organization must have at
least fifteen (15) members with representation from the government at the level or
levels corresponding to the community development organization’s area of operation;
a private sector lending institution; a community organization in the area; business in
the area; and private citizens in the community.
2. “New construction” means new buildings or structures and includes new
buildings or structures which are constructed as additions to existing buildings or
structures. “New construction” also includes reconstruction or renovation of an
existing building or structure which constitutes complete replacement of an existing
building or structure or refitting of an existing building or structure, if the
reconstruction or renovation of the existing building or structure is required due to
economic obsolescence, if the reconstruction or renovation is necessary to implement
recognized industry standards for the manufacturing or processing of products, and
the reconstruction or renovation is required in order to competitively manufacture or
process products or for community development organizations or for-profit entities to
market a building or structure as a speculative shell building, which determination
must receive prior approval from the Council.
3. “Speculative shell building” means a building or structure owned and
constructed or reconstructed by a community development organization or a for-profit
entity without a tenant or buyer for the purpose of attracting an employer or user
CHAPTER 12 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 82 -
which will complete the building to the employer’s or user’s specification for
manufacturing, processing, or warehousing the employer’s or user’s product line.
12.03 ELIGIBILITY. The new construction of shell buildings by the community
development organization or for-profit entity for speculative purposes is eligible for property
tax exemption. The exemption shall be for one of the following:
1. The value added by new construction of a shell building or addition to an
existing building or structure.
2. The value of an existing building being reconstructed or renovated, and the
value of the land on which the building is located, if the reconstruction or renovation
constitutes complete replacement or refitting of the existing building or structure.
12.04 WHEN EFFECTIVE.
1. If the exemption is for a project described in subsection 1 of Section 12.03,
the exemption shall be effective for the assessment year in which the building is first
assessed for property taxation or the assessment year in which the addition to an
existing building first adds value. If the exemption is for a project described in
subsection 2 of Section 12.03, the exemption shall be effective for the assessment year
following the assessment year in which the project commences. An exemption
allowed under this section shall be allowed for all subsequent years until the property
is leased or sold or until the exemption is terminated by ordinance of the City Council.
2. Eligibility for an exemption as a speculative shell building shall be
determined as of January 1 of the assessment year. However, an exemption shall not
be granted for a speculative shell building of a for-profit entity if the building is used
by the for-profit entity or a subsidiary or majority owners thereof for other than as a
speculative shell building. If the shell building or any portion of the shell building is
leased or sold, the portion of the shell building that is leased or sold and a
proportionate share of the land on which it is located, if applicable, shall not be
entitled to an exemption under this section for subsequent years. Upon the sale of the
shell building, the shell building shall be considered new construction for purposes of
Section 427B.1 of the Code of Iowa if used for purposes set forth in Section 427B.1.
12.05 APPLICATION.
1. If the speculative shell building project is a project described in subsection 1
of Section 12.03, an application shall be filed pursuant to Section 427B.4 of the Code
of Iowa.
2. If the speculative shell building project is a project described in subsection 2
of Section 12.03, an application shall be filed pursuant to Section 427.1[27] of the
Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 12 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 83 -
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 898, adopted by the Council on January 16, 1995, granted an exemption
from taxation for a speculative shell building to be constructed upon property owned
jointly by the Charles City Area Development Corporation and for-profit entities.
Ordinance No. 959, adopted by the Council on May 17, 1999, granted an exemption
from taxation for the speculative shell building to be constructed upon real property
jointly owned by the Charles City Area Development Corporation and Floyd County
Progressive Growth, LLC. The ordinances are not codified herein but are specifically
saved from repeal.
CHAPTER 12 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 84 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 85 -
CHAPTER 13
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
REVOLVING LOAN PROGRAM
13.01 Purpose 13.04 Loan Application Procedure and Approval
13.02 Eligible Projects 13.05 Loan Review Committee
13.03 Loan Terms 13.06 Disbursement of Loan Proceeds
13.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter to promote economic development within
the Riverside Urban Renewal Area by creating a Business Development Revolving Loan
Program for the rehabilitation, preservation and expansion of existing commercial buildings
within the district, and for the construction of new commercial buildings within the district.
13.02 ELIGIBLE PROJECTS. To qualify for a loan under this chapter, the following
criteria must be met:
1. The project must involve the rehabilitation, preservation or expansion of an
existing commercial building, or the construction of a new commercial building which
will enhance the economic development of the urban renewal district through
increased employment opportunities or otherwise.
2. The requested loan proceeds must be devoted to the building improvements,
and may not be utilized for other business purposes, such as the purchase of personal
property.
3. The project must have other financing equivalent to 70% or more of total
project cost and of which not less than 10% of total project cost must be monetary
investment by the borrower. The loan granted under this chapter, together with any
other form of assistance from the City, whether in form of grant or loan, shall not
exceed 30% of total project cost, nor shall the loan granted under this chapter exceed
the amount of $75,000.00. These limits shall apply only to projects utilizing loans
made under the provisions of this chapter.
13.03 LOAN TERMS. The terms of repayment of the loan made under this chapter,
including the frequency and amount of periodic payments, shall be subject to negotiation with
the borrower but with the following requirements:
1. Not less than one loan payment shall be scheduled for each year of the loan
term.
2. The term of the loan shall not exceed five (5) years.
3. The interest rate during the entire loan term shall accrue at the rate of two (2)
points below New York prime rate on the date that the loan is approved by the
Council, except that the rate shall not be less than the average interest rate realized by
the City on its investments as calculated on the date that the loan is approved by the
Council.
4. The loan shall be secured by a first mortgage on the benefited property,
except that a mortgage may be second in priority to the mortgage of the primary
CHAPTER 13 BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT
REVOLVING LOAN PROGRAM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 86 -
lender to the extent that such lender’s mortgage secures funds used for project
construction.
5. If the borrower is other than an individual, then all owners of the borrowing
entity must personally guarantee, jointly and severally, loan repayment and shall
execute a guarantee on a form provided by the City.
6. The borrower, and if other than an individual, the owners of the entity
receiving the loan must sign a loan agreement with the City describing the nature of
the project and reciting all terms and conditions under which the loan is made.
13.04 LOAN APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL. Any person or entity
seeking a loan under this chapter shall submit an application to the Clerk on a form provided
by the City. The application shall be submitted by the Clerk to the loan review committee
established under this chapter for review and recommendation to the Council. Once filed with
the Clerk in completed form, the application shall be reviewed by the loan review committee
and its recommendation made to the Council within thirty (30) days of the application’s filing
date, unless additional information is requested by the committee from the applicant, in which
case the deadline for final recommendation shall be extended to 30 days from the receipt by
the Clerk of the additional information. The loan review committee’s recommendation shall
be filed with the Clerk and presented by the Clerk to the Council for initial consideration
within twenty (20) days of the Clerk’s receipt of the recommendation. The Council shall have
the right to approve or reject any application with or without cause.
13.05 LOAN REVIEW COMMITTEE. The loan review committee shall consist of seven
(7) members appointed by the Mayor for staggered terms of two (2) years. The loan review
committee shall elect a chairperson and shall meet upon call of the Chairperson or the Mayor
or any two committee members. The committee shall have a quorum of four (4) members to
conduct business and shall make its decisions by a majority vote. The loan review committee
shall establish such other bylaws for its effective operation as it deems necessary. The loan
committee shall develop criteria for objection evaluation of each loan application presented
under this chapter. These criteria shall be designed to provide a cost-benefit analysis of each
project, whereby the public benefit to be gained by the project is measured against the cost to
the City. The committee shall also consider the merit of each project relative to the merit of
other pending projects for which loan applications have been submitted.
13.06 DISBURSEMENT OF LOAN PROCEEDS. Fifty percent (50%) of the loan
proceeds shall be disbursed to the borrower upon occurrence of the following:
1. Approval of the loan by the Council; and
2. Execution by the borrower (and guarantors) of the required loan agreement,
promissory note, mortgage and guarantee agreement; and
3. Receipt by the Clerk of proof, in the form of a loan commitment letter, of the
additional financing required by the provisions of this chapter; and
4. Initiation of construction.
The remaining fifty percent (50%) of the loan shall be disbursed upon final completion of the
project as certified by the City Engineer.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 87 -
CHAPTER 14
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
14.01 Imposition of Tax 14.03 Effective Date of Tax
14.02 Use of Funds
14.01 IMPOSITION OF TAX. A tax of seven percent (7%) is imposed upon the sales
price from the renting of sleeping quarters in a hotel, motel, inn, public lodging house,
rooming house, manufactured or mobile home which is tangible personal property, or tourist
court, or in any place where sleeping accommodations are furnished to transient guests for
rent, with or without meals, except for sleeping rooms provided for guests of a religious
institution if the property is exempt under Section 427.1[8] of the Code of Iowa, and the
purpose of renting is to provide a place for a religious retreat or function and not a place for
transient guests generally. This tax only applies within the corporate boundaries of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 423A.1)
14.02 USE OF FUNDS. Revenues derived from this tax shall be used as follows:
1. Sixty percent (60%) thereof shall be expended for the promotion and
encouragement of tourist and convention business in the City.
2. Forty percent (40%) shall be expended for Park and Recreation capital
projects within the City. Capital projects are defined as projects involving the
acquisition of construction of fixed assets which are of a long-term character and
intended for long-term use such as land, buildings, machinery, furniture and other
equipment.
14.03 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX. The hotel and motel tax as set forth in this chapter
shall be imposed on all sales prices beginning July 1, 2001.
CHAPTER 14 HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 88 -
[The next page is 109]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 109 -
CHAPTER 17
MAYOR
17.01 Term of Office 17.04 Compensation
17.02 Powers and Duties 17.05 Voting
17.03 Appointments
17.01 TERM OF OFFICE. The Mayor is elected for a term of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 376.2)
17.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Mayor are as follows:
1. Chief Executive Officer. Act as the chief executive officer of the City and
presiding officer of the Council, supervise all departments of the City, except for
supervisory duties delegated to the City Administrator, give direction to department
heads concerning the functions of the departments, and have the power to examine all
functions of the municipal departments, their records and to call for special reports
from department heads at any time.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
2. Proclamation of Emergency. Have authority to take command of the police
and govern the City by proclamation, upon making a determination that a time of
emergency or public danger exists. Within the City limits, the Mayor has all the
powers conferred upon the Sheriff to suppress disorders.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[2])
3. Special Meetings. Call special meetings of the Council when the Mayor
deems such meetings necessary to the interests of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[1])
4. Mayor’s Veto. Sign, veto or take no action on an ordinance, amendment or
resolution passed by the Council. The Mayor may veto an ordinance, amendment or
resolution within fourteen days after passage. The Mayor shall explain the reasons for
the veto in a written message to the Council at the time of the veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.5 & 380.6[2])
5. Reports to Council. Make such oral or written reports to the Council as
required. These reports shall concern municipal affairs generally, the municipal
departments, and recommendations suitable for Council action.
6. Contracts. Whenever authorized by the Council, sign contracts on behalf of
the City.
7. Absentee Officer. Make appropriate provision that duties of any absentee
officer be carried on during such absence.
CHAPTER 17 MAYOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 110 -
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Compensation is effective beginning January 1, 2018.
17.03 APPOINTMENTS. The Mayor shall appoint the Mayor Pro Tem and shall appoint,
subject to approval of the Council, the following officials:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
1. Library Board of Trustees
2. Park and Recreation Board
3. Civil Service Commission
4. Board of Adjustment
5. Charles City Housing and Redevelopment Authority Board of Commissioners
6. Board of Appeals
7. Electrical Trade Advisory Board
8. Plumbing and Mechanical Advisory Board
9. Building Trades Advisory Board
10. Broadband Telecommunications Commission
11. Historic Preservation Commission
12. Utility Advisory Board
13. Business Development Revolving Loan Review Committee
14. Redevelopment Incentive Fund Committee
15. Pavement Management Advisory Board
16. Two North Cedar Aviation Authority Board members
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the Mayor shall have the authority to remove
members from these Boards and Commissions and to appoint new members to fill vacancies
created by removal, resignation, death or extended disability.
17.04 COMPENSATION. The salary of the Mayor is four thousand eight hundred dollars
($4,800.00) per year, payable on a biweekly basis. † (Ord. 1100 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
17.05 VOTING. The Mayor is not a member of the Council and shall not vote as a member
of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 111 -
CHAPTER 18
MAYOR PRO TEM
18.01 Vice President of Council 18.03 Voting Rights
18.02 Powers and Duties 18.04 Compensation
18.01 VICE PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL. The Mayor shall appoint a member of the
Council as Mayor Pro Tem, who shall serve as vice president of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
18.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. Except for the limitations otherwise provided herein, the
Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor in cases of absence or inability of the
Mayor to perform such duties. In the exercise of the duties of the office the Mayor Pro Tem
shall not have power to appoint, employ, or discharge from employment officers or employees
that the Mayor has the power to appoint, employ, or discharge without the approval of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
18.03 VOTING RIGHTS. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have the right to vote as a member of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.14[3])
18.04 COMPENSATION. If the Mayor Pro Tem performs the duties of the Mayor during
the Mayor’s absence or disability for a continuous period of fifteen (15) days or more, the
Mayor Pro Tem may be paid for that period the compensation as determined by the Council,
based upon the Mayor Pro Tem’s performance of the Mayor’s duties and upon the
compensation of the Mayor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 18 MAYOR PRO TEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 112 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 113 -
CHAPTER 19
CITY COUNCIL
19.01 Number and Term of Council 19.04 Council Meetings
19.02 Powers and Duties 19.05 Appointments
19.03 Exercise of Power 19.06 Compensation
19.01 NUMBER AND TERM OF COUNCIL. The Council consists of five Council
members elected at large for staggered terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.4 & 376.2)
19.02 POWERS AND DUTIES. The powers and duties of the Council include, but are not
limited to the following:
1. General. All powers of the City are vested in the Council except as otherwise
provided by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
2. Wards. By ordinance, the Council may divide the City into wards based upon
population, change the boundaries of wards, eliminate wards or create new wards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[7])
3. Fiscal Authority. The Council shall apportion and appropriate all funds, and
audit and allow all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment thereof. It
shall make all assessments for the cost of street improvements, sidewalks, sewers and
other work, improvement or repairs which may be specially assessed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1], 384.16 & 384.38 [1])
4. Public Improvements. The Council shall make all orders for the construction
of any improvements, bridges or buildings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.2[1])
5. Contracts. The Council shall make or authorize the making of all contracts.
No contract shall bind or be obligatory upon the City unless approved by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 26.10)
6. Employees. The Council shall authorize, by resolution, the number, duties,
term of office and compensation of employees or officers not otherwise provided for
by State law or the Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
7. Setting Compensation for Elected Officers. By ordinance, the Council shall
prescribe the compensation of the Mayor, Council members, and other elected City
officers, but a change in the compensation of the Mayor does not become effective
during the term in which the change is adopted, and the Council shall not adopt such
an ordinance changing the compensation of any elected officer during the months of
November and December in the year of a regular City election. A change in the
CHAPTER 19 CITY COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 114 -
compensation of Council members becomes effective for all Council members at the
beginning of the term of the Council members elected at the election next following
the change in compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
19.03 EXERCISE OF POWER. The Council shall exercise a power only by the passage
of a motion, a resolution, an amendment or an ordinance in the following manner:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.3[1])
1. Action by Council. Passage of an ordinance, amendment, or resolution
requires a majority vote of all of the members of the Council. Passage of a motion
requires a majority vote of a quorum of the Council. A resolution must be passed to
spend public funds in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) on a
public improvement project, or to accept public improvements and facilities upon
their completion. Each Council member’s vote on a measure must be recorded. A
measure that fails to receive sufficient votes for passage shall be considered defeated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.4)
2. Overriding Mayor’s Veto. Within thirty (30) days after the Mayor’s veto, the
Council may pass the measure again by a vote of not less than two-thirds of all of the
members of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
3. Measures Become Effective. Measures passed by the Council become
effective in one of the following ways:
A. An ordinance or amendment signed by the Mayor becomes effective
when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is published, unless a
subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1a])
B. A resolution signed by the Mayor becomes effective immediately
upon signing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1b])
C. A motion becomes effective immediately upon passage of the motion
by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[1c])
D. If the Mayor vetoes an ordinance, amendment or resolution and the
Council repasses the measure after the Mayor’s veto, a resolution becomes
effective immediately upon repassage, and an ordinance or amendment
becomes a law when the ordinance or a summary of the ordinance is
published, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the ordinance
or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[2])
E. If the Mayor takes no action on an ordinance, amendment or
resolution, a resolution becomes effective fourteen (14) days after the date of
passage, and an ordinance or amendment becomes law when the ordinance or
a summary of the ordinance is published, but not sooner than 14 days after the
date of passage, unless a subsequent effective date is provided within the
ordinance or amendment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.6[3])
CHAPTER 19 CITY COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 115 -
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Compensation is effective beginning January 1, 2018.
“All of the members of the Council” refers to all of the seats of the Council including a vacant
seat and a seat where the member is absent, but does not include a seat where the Council
member declines to vote by reason of a conflict of interest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.1[a])
19.04 COUNCIL MEETINGS. Procedures for giving notice of meetings of the Council
and other provisions regarding the conduct of Council meetings are contained in Section 5.06
of this Code of Ordinances. Additional particulars relating to Council meetings are the
following:
1. Regular Meetings. The time and place of the regular meetings of the Council
shall be fixed by resolution of the Council.
2. Special Meetings. Special meetings shall be held upon call of the Mayor or
upon the written request of a majority of the members of the Council submitted to the
Clerk. Notice of a special meeting shall specify the date, time, place and subject of
the meeting and such notice shall be given personally or left at the usual place of
residence of each member of the Council. A record of the service of notice shall be
maintained by the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
3. Quorum. A majority of all Council members is a quorum.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[1])
4. Rules of Procedure. The Council shall determine its own rules and maintain
records of its proceedings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[5])
5. Compelling Attendance. Any three members of the Council can compel the
attendance of the absent members at any regular, adjourned or duly called meeting, by
serving a written notice upon the absent members to attend at once.
19.05 APPOINTMENTS. The Council shall appoint the following officials and prescribe
their powers, duties, compensation and term of office:
1. City Clerk
2. City Attorney
3. City Administrator
4. Planning and Zoning Commission
19.06 COMPENSATION. The salary of each Council Member is forty dollars ($40.00) for
each regular and special meeting of the Council attended.† (Ord. 1101 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[8])
CHAPTER 19 CITY COUNCIL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 116 -
[The next page is 121]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 121 -
CHAPTER 20
CITY CLERK
20.01 Appointment and Compensation 20.08 Records
20.02 Powers and Duties: General 20.09 Attendance at Meetings
20.03 Publication of Minutes 20.10 Licenses and Permits
20.04 Recording Measures 20.11 Notification of Appointments
20.05 Other Publications 20.12 Elections
20.06 Authentication 20.13 City Seal
20.07 Certification 20.14 City Funds
20.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by majority
vote a City Clerk to serve at the discretion of the Council. The Clerk shall receive such
compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3])
20.02 POWERS AND DUTIES: GENERAL. The Clerk, or in the Clerk’s absence or
inability to act, the Deputy Clerk has the powers and duties as provided in this chapter, this
Code of Ordinances, and the law.
20.03 PUBLICATION OF MINUTES. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Clerk
shall attend all regular and special Council meetings and within fifteen (15) days following a
regular or special meeting shall cause the minutes of the proceedings thereof to be published.
Such publication shall include a list of all claims allowed and a summary of all receipts and
shall show the gross amount of the claim. The Clerk may be excused from attendance at a
Council meeting or portion thereof by the Council, and in such event the Council shall
designate another person to keep minutes and otherwise perform the duties of the Clerk in the
Clerk’s absence. The minutes shall be surrendered to the Clerk at the conclusion of the
meeting for safekeeping and publication, as required by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[6])
20.04 RECORDING MEASURES. The Clerk shall promptly record each measure
considered by the Council and record a statement with the measure, where applicable,
indicating whether the Mayor signed, vetoed or took no action on the measure, and whether
the measure was repassed after the Mayor’s veto.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[1 & 2])
20.05 OTHER PUBLICATIONS. The Clerk shall cause to be published all ordinances,
enactments, proceedings and official notices requiring publication as follows:
1. Time. If notice of an election, hearing, or other official action is required by
this Code of Ordinances or law, the notice must be published at least once, not less
than four (4) nor more than twenty (20) days before the date of the election, hearing or
other action, unless otherwise provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[1])
2. Manner of Publication. A publication required by this Code of Ordinances or
CHAPTER 20 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 122 -
law must be in a newspaper published at least once weekly and having general
circulation in the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 362.3[2])
20.06 AUTHENTICATION. The Clerk shall authenticate all measures except motions
with the Clerk’s signature, certifying the time and manner of publication when required.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[4])
20.07 CERTIFICATION. The Clerk shall certify all measures establishing any zoning
district, building lines, or fire limits and a plat showing the district, lines, or limits to the
recorder of the County containing the affected parts of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.11)
20.08 RECORDS. The Clerk shall maintain the specified City records in the following
manner:
1. Ordinances and Codes. Maintain copies of all effective City ordinances and
codes for public use.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 380.7[5])
2. Custody. Have custody and be responsible for the safekeeping of all writings
or documents in which the City is a party in interest unless otherwise specifically
directed by law or ordinance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
3. Maintenance. Maintain all City records and documents, or accurate
reproductions, for at least five (5) years except that ordinances, resolutions, Council
proceedings, records and documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to the
issuance, cancellation, transfer, redemption or replacement of public bonds or
obligations shall be kept for at least eleven (11) years following the final maturity of
the bonds or obligations. Ordinances, resolutions, Council proceedings, records and
documents, or accurate reproductions, relating to real property transactions shall be
maintained permanently.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[3 & 5])
4. Provide Copy. Furnish upon request to any municipal officer a copy of any
record, paper or public document under the Clerk’s control when it may be necessary
to such officer in the discharge of such officer’s duty; furnish a copy to any citizen
when requested upon payment of the fee set by Council resolution; under the direction
of the Mayor or other authorized officer, affix the seal of the City to those public
documents or instruments which by ordinance and Code of Ordinances are required to
be attested by the affixing of the seal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4 & 5] and 380.7[5])
5. Filing of Communications. Keep and file all communications and petitions
directed to the Council or to the City generally. The Clerk shall endorse thereon the
action of the Council taken upon matters considered in such communications and
petitions.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 20 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 123 -
20.09 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS. The Clerk shall attend all regular and special
Council meetings and, at the direction of the Council, the Clerk shall attend meetings of
committees, boards, and commissions. The Clerk shall record and preserve a correct record of
the proceedings of such meetings.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.10 LICENSES AND PERMITS. The Clerk shall issue or revoke licenses and permits
when authorized by this Code of Ordinances, and keep a record of licenses and permits issued
which shall show date of issuance, license or permit number, official receipt number, name of
person to whom issued, term of license or permit and purpose for which issued.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.11 NOTIFICATION OF APPOINTMENTS. The Clerk shall inform all persons
appointed by the Mayor or Council to offices in the City government of their positions and the
time at which they shall assume the duties of their offices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
20.12 ELECTIONS. The Clerk shall perform the duties relating to elections in accordance
with Chapter 376 of the Code of Iowa.
20.13 CITY SEAL. The City seal is in the custody of the Clerk and shall be attached by the
Clerk to all transcripts, orders and certificates which it may be necessary or proper to
authenticate. The City seal is circular in form, in the center of which are the words
“CHARLES CITY, IOWA” and around the margin of which are the words “CITY SEAL.”
20.14 CITY FUNDS. The Clerk shall perform the following duties relating to City funds.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Custody of Funds. Be responsible for the safe custody of all funds of the City
in the manner provided by law, and Council direction.
2. Record Receipts. Keep an accurate record of all money or securities received
on behalf of the City and specify the date, from whom, and for what purpose received.
3. Record Disbursements. Keep an accurate account of all disbursements,
money or property, specifying date, to whom, and from what fund paid.
4. Special Assessments. Keep a separate account of all money received from
special assessments.
5. Reconciliation. Reconcile depository statements with the Clerk’s books and
certify monthly to the council the balance of cash and investments of each fund and
amounts received and disbursed.
6. Debt Service. Keep a register of all bonds outstanding and record all
payments of interest and principal.
CHAPTER 20 CITY CLERK
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 124 -
[The next page is 131]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 131 -
CHAPTER 21
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
21.01 Appointment and Term 21.03 Duties
21.02 Compensation 21.04 Appointments
21.01 APPOINTMENT AND TERM. The Council shall appoint by majority vote a City
Administrator to serve at the discretion of the Council.
21.02 COMPENSATION. The City Administrator shall receive such compensation as the
Council shall from time to time determine by resolution.
21.03 DUTIES. The duties of the City Administrator are as follows:
1. Supervise enforcement and execution of this Code of Ordinances, City
policies and Council directives and have general supervision and direction of the
administration of the City government.
2. Attend all meetings of the Council unless excused by the Council or Mayor.
3. Be directly responsible to the Council for the administration of municipal
affairs as directed by the Council. All City departmental administration requiring the
attention of the Council shall be brought before the Council by the Administrator.
Council involvement in administration initiated by the Council must be coordinated
through the Administrator.
4. Employ persons for positions which have been approved by the Council and
discharge employees except for the positions of City Clerk, City Attorney, City
Librarian, and employees of the City library. The Administrator shall advise the
Council on the performance of the City Attorney and City Clerk and make
recommendations with regard to their performance and employment. Hiring and
discharge of employees shall always be accomplished in compliance with applicable
employee contract provisions, and in accordance with applicable State and Federal
law. The Administrator may delegate the power to hire and discharge employees to
subordinate department heads to the extent the Administrator deems appropriate.
5. Obtain, upon order of the Council, such specialized and professional services
deemed necessary by the Council and not already available to the City.
6. Supervise the construction, improvement, repair, maintenance and
management of all City property, capital improvements and undertakings of the City.
7. Make such investigations into the affairs and conduct of any department,
agency, officer or employee under the supervision of the City Administrator as are
necessary or desirable or as directed by the Council.
8. Supervise the recording, issuing and revocation of licenses and permits and to
sign the same when authorized by this Code of Ordinances.
9. Keep the Council fully advised of the financial and other conditions of the
City and of its future needs.
10. Make to the Council periodic itemized financial reports in writing.
CHAPTER 21 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 132 -
11. Assemble the department heads’ proposed annual departmental budgets,
which proposals shall include projected revenues, proposed expenditures and salary
requests and thereafter submit said proposed budget on prescribed forms to the
Council.
12. Conduct the business affairs of the City and cause accurate records to be kept.
13. Designate one or more City employees to discharge the duties of the office of
City Administrator when the Administrator is absent, such designation being subject
to Council approval.
14. Order in writing the removal, at public expense, any nuisance for which no
person can be found responsible and liable.
15. Cooperate with area economic development agencies and other governmental
bodies in promoting economic development within the Charles City area; provide
direction to the Council regarding measures which can be undertaken by the City to
promote economic development; and supervise implementation of such economic
development measures as are approved by the Council.
16. Assist the Council in establishing long-range goals for the City in order to
provide a framework for decision making on a daily basis and to provide guidance and
direction to successive City Councils.
17. Promote good relations with the citizens of the City and its civic
organizations; to ensure that citizens’ complaints, inquiries and needs are given
prompt attention and timely response in a manner which communicates genuine
interest in the concerns of each citizen.
18. Represent the City in all negotiations properly entered into in accordance with
law or ordinance.
19. Perform such other duties as the Council may direct.
20. Open and announce bids at the time and place described in the published
notice advertising for bids, and submit such bids to staff for review and
recommendation to the City Council at its next meeting. If the City Administrator is
absent or otherwise unavailable at the time for opening bids, he or she may direct
either the City Engineer or the City Clerk to open and announce bids at the time and
place described in the published notice advertising for bids, and in such case these
bids shall also be reviewed by staff as directed by the City Administrator and
submitted to the City Council with staff recommendation at its meeting.
21.04 APPOINTMENTS. The City Administrator shall appoint the following officials:
1. Police Chief
2. Fire Chief
3. Public Safety Director (Building Official)
4. Water Superintendent, Wastewater Superintendent and Street Superintendent
5. Zoning Administrator
6. Director of Foster Grandparent Program
7. Director of Housing and Redevelopment Authority
8. Director of Parks and Recreation
CHAPTER 21 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 133 -
9. Building Official
10. All other department heads except only the City Librarian and those for whom
the Council by ordinance reserves the right of appointment.
CHAPTER 21 CITY ADMINISTRATOR
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 134 -
[The next page is 139]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 139 -
CHAPTER 22
CITY ATTORNEY
22.01 Appointment and Compensation 22.05 Review and Comment
22.02 Attorney for City 22.06 Provide Legal Opinion
22.03 Power of Attorney 22.07 Attendance at Council Meetings
22.04 Ordinance Preparation 22.08 Prepare Documents
22.01 APPOINTMENT AND COMPENSATION. The Council shall appoint by majority
vote a City Attorney to serve at the discretion of the Council. The City Attorney shall receive
such compensation as established by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
22.02 ATTORNEY FOR CITY. The City Attorney shall act as attorney for the City in all
matters affecting the City’s interest and appear on behalf of the City before any court, tribunal,
commission or board. The City Attorney shall prosecute or defend all actions and proceedings
when so requested by the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
22.03 POWER OF ATTORNEY. The City Attorney shall sign the name of the City to all
appeal bonds and to all other bonds or papers of any kind that may be essential to the
prosecution of any cause in court, and when so signed the City shall be bound upon the same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
22.04 ORDINANCE PREPARATION. The City Attorney shall prepare those ordinances
which the Council may desire and direct to be prepared and report to the Council upon all such
ordinances before their final passage by the Council and publication.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
22.05 REVIEW AND COMMENT. The City Attorney shall, upon request, make a report
to the Council giving an opinion on all contracts, documents, resolutions, or ordinances
submitted to or coming under the City Attorney’s notice.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
22.06 PROVIDE LEGAL OPINION. The City Attorney shall give advice or a written
legal opinion on City contracts and all questions of law relating to City matters submitted by
the Council, the Mayor, the City Administrator, or the City Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
22.07 ATTENDANCE AT COUNCIL MEETINGS. The City Attorney shall attend
meetings of the Council at the request of the Mayor or Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
22.08 PREPARE DOCUMENTS. The City Attorney shall, upon request, formulate drafts
for contracts, forms and other writings which may be required for the use of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 22 CITY ATTORNEY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 140 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 141 -
CHAPTER 23
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
23.01 Public Library 23.07 Nonresident Use
23.02 Library Trustees 23.08 Expenditures
23.03 Qualifications of Trustees 23.09 Annual Report
23.04 Organization of the Board 23.10 Injury to Books or Property
23.05 Powers and Duties 23.11 Theft
23.06 Contracting with Other Libraries 23.12 Notice Posted
23.01 PUBLIC LIBRARY. The public library for the City is known as the Charles City
Public Library. It is referred to in this chapter as the Library.
23.02 LIBRARY TRUSTEES. The Board of Trustees of the Library, hereinafter referred
to as the Board, consists of eight resident members and one nonresident member. All resident
members are to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The nonresident
member is to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the County Board of
Supervisors.
23.03 QUALIFICATIONS OF TRUSTEES. All resident members of the Board shall be
bona fide citizens and residents of the City. The nonresident member of the Board shall be a
bona fide citizen and resident of the unincorporated County. Members shall be over the age of
eighteen (18) years.
23.04 ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD. The organization of the Board shall be as
follows:
1. Term of Office. All appointments to the Board shall be for three years, except
to fill vacancies. Each term shall commence on July 1. Appointments shall be made
on July 1 each year to stagger the terms.
2. Vacancies. The position of any resident Trustee shall be vacated if such
member moves permanently from the City. The position of a nonresident Trustee
shall be vacated if such member moves permanently from the County or into the City.
The position of any Trustee shall be deemed vacated if such member is absent from
six (6) consecutive regular meetings of the Board, except in the case of sickness or
temporary absence from the City or County. Vacancies in the Board shall be filled in
the same manner as an original appointment except that the new Trustee shall fill out
the unexpired term for which the appointment is made.
3. Compensation. Trustees shall receive no compensation for their services.
23.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Board shall have and exercise the following powers
and duties:
1. Officers. To meet and elect from its members a President, a Secretary, and
such other officers as it deems necessary.
2. Physical Plant. To have charge, control and supervision of the Library, its
appurtenances, fixtures and rooms containing the same.
3. Charge of Affairs. To direct and control all affairs of the Library.
CHAPTER 23 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 142 -
4. Hiring of Personnel. To employ a librarian, and authorize the librarian to
employ such assistants and employees as may be necessary for the proper
management of the Library, and fix their compensation; provided, however, that prior
to such employment, the compensation of the librarian, assistants and employees shall
have been fixed and approved by a majority of the members of the Board voting in
favor thereof.
5. Removal of Personnel. To remove the librarian, by a two-thirds vote of the
Board, and provide procedures for the removal of the assistants or employees for
misdemeanor, incompetence or inattention to duty, subject however, to the provisions
of Chapter 35C of the Code of Iowa.
6. Purchases. To select, or authorize the librarian to select, and make purchases
of books, pamphlets, magazines, periodicals, papers, maps, journals, other Library
materials, furniture, fixtures, stationery and supplies for the Library within budgetary
limits set by the Board.
7. Use by Nonresidents. To authorize the use of the Library by nonresidents and
to fix charges therefor unless a contract for free service exists.
8. Rules and Regulations. To make and adopt, amend, modify or repeal rules
and regulations, not inconsistent with this Code of Ordinances and the law, for the
care, use, government and management of the Library and the business of the Board,
fixing and enforcing penalties for violations.
9. Expenditures. To have exclusive control of the expenditure of all funds
allocated for Library purposes by the Council, and of all moneys available by gift or
otherwise for the erection of Library buildings, and of all other moneys belonging to
the Library including fines and rentals collected under the rules of the Board.
10. Gifts. To accept gifts of real property, personal property, or mixed property,
and devises and bequests, including trust funds; to take the title to said property in the
name of the Library; to execute deeds and bills of sale for the conveyance of said
property; and to expend the funds received by them from such gifts, for the
improvement of the Library.
11. Enforce the Performance of Conditions on Gifts. To enforce the performance
of conditions on gifts, donations, devises and bequests accepted by the City by action
against the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 661)
12. Record of Proceedings. To keep a record of its proceedings.
13. County Historical Association. To have authority to make agreements with
the local County historical association where such exists, and to set apart the
necessary room and to care for such articles as may come into the possession of the
association. The Trustees are further authorized to purchase necessary receptacles and
materials for the preservation and protection of such articles as are in their judgment
of a historical and educational nature and pay for the same out of funds allocated for
Library purposes.
23.06 CONTRACTING WITH OTHER LIBRARIES. The Board has power to contract
with other libraries in accordance with the following:
1. Contracting. The Board may contract with any other boards of trustees of free
public libraries, with any other city, school corporation, private or semiprivate
CHAPTER 23 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 143 -
organization, institution of higher learning, township, or County, or with the trustees
of any County library district for the use of the Library by their respective residents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.5 & Ch. 28E)
2. Termination. Such a contract may be terminated at any time by mutual
consent of the contracting parties. It also may be terminated by a majority vote of the
electors represented by either of the contracting parties. Such a termination
proposition shall be submitted to the electors by the governing body of a contracting
party on a written petition of not less than five percent (5%) in number of the electors
who voted for governor in the territory of the contracting party at the last general
election. The petition must be presented to the governing body not less than forty (40)
days before the election. The proposition may be submitted at any election provided
by law that is held in the territory of the party seeking to terminate the contract.
23.07 NONRESIDENT USE. The Board may authorize the use of the Library by persons
not residents of the City or County in any one or more of the following ways:
1. Lending. By lending the books or other materials of the Library to
nonresidents on the same terms and conditions as to residents of the City, or County,
or upon payment of a special nonresident Library fee.
2. Depository. By establishing depositories of Library books or other materials
to be loaned to nonresidents.
3. Bookmobiles. By establishing bookmobiles or a traveling library so that
books or other Library materials may be loaned to nonresidents.
4. Branch Library. By establishing branch libraries for lending books or other
Library materials to nonresidents.
23.08 EXPENDITURES. All money appropriated by the Council for the operation and
maintenance of the Library shall be set aside in an account for the Library. Expenditures shall
be paid for only on orders of the Board, signed by any two Board members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.20 & 392.5)
23.09 ANNUAL REPORT. The Board shall make a report to the Council immediately
after the close of the fiscal year. This report shall contain statements as to the condition of the
Library, the number of books added, the number circulated, the amount of fines collected, and
the amount of money expended in the maintenance of the Library during the year, together
with such further information as may be required by the Council.
23.10 INJURY TO BOOKS OR PROPERTY. It is unlawful for a person willfully,
maliciously or wantonly to tear, deface, mutilate, injure or destroy, in whole or in part, any
newspaper, periodical, book, map, pamphlet, chart, picture or other property belonging to the
Library or reading room.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
CHAPTER 23 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 144 -
23.11 THEFT. No person shall take possession or control of property of the Library with
the intent to deprive the Library thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
23.12 NOTICE POSTED. There shall be posted in clear public view within the Library
notices informing the public of the following:
1. Failure To Return. Failure to return Library materials for two months or more
after the date the person agreed to return the Library materials, or failure to return
Library equipment for one month or more after the date the person agreed to return the
Library equipment, is evidence of intent to deprive the owner, provided a reasonable
attempt, including the mailing by restricted certified mail of notice that such material
or equipment is overdue and criminal actions will be taken, has been made to reclaim
the materials or equipment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.5)
2. Detention and Search. Persons concealing Library materials may be detained
and searched pursuant to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 808.12)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 145 -
CHAPTER 24
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
24.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 24.04 Compensation
24.02 Term of Office 24.05 Powers and Duties
24.03 Vacancies
24.01 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. The City Planning and Zoning
Commission, hereinafter referred to as the Commission, consists of seven (7) members
appointed by the Council. The Commission members shall be residents of the City and shall
not hold any elective office in the City government.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6 & 392.1)
24.02 TERM OF OFFICE. The term of office of the members of the Commission shall be
three years. The terms of not more than one-third of the members will expire in any one year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
24.03 VACANCIES. If any vacancy exists on the Commission caused by resignation, or
otherwise, a successor for the residue of the term shall be appointed in the same manner as the
original appointee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
24.04 COMPENSATION. All members of the Commission shall serve without
compensation, except their actual expenses, which shall be subject to the approval of the
Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
24.05 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall have and exercise the following
powers and duties:
1. Selection of Officers. The Commission shall choose annually at its first
regular meeting one of its members to act as Chairperson and another as Vice
Chairperson, who shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson during the
Chairperson’s absence or disability. The Clerk shall act as Secretary for the
Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
2. Adopt Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt such rules and
regulations governing its organization and procedure as it may deem necessary.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
3. Zoning. The Commission shall have and exercise all the powers and duties
and privileges in establishing the City zoning regulations and other related matters and
may from time to time recommend to the Council amendments, supplements, changes
or modifications, all as provided by Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 414.6)
4. Recommendations of Improvements. No statuary, memorial or work of art in
a public place, and no public building, bridge, viaduct, street fixtures, public structure
or appurtenances, shall be located or erected, or site therefor obtained, nor shall any
CHAPTER 24 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 146 -
permit be issued by any department of the City for the erection or location thereof
until and unless the design and proposed location of any such improvement shall have
been submitted to the Commission and its recommendations thereon obtained, except
such requirements and recommendations shall not act as a stay upon action for any
such improvement when the Commission after thirty (30) days’ written notice
requesting such recommendations, shall have failed to file same.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
5. Review and Comment on Plats. All plans, plats, or re-plats of subdivision or
re-subdivisions of land embraced in the City or adjacent thereto, laid out in lots or
plats with the streets, alleys, or other portions of the same intended to be dedicated to
the public in the City, shall first be submitted to the Commission and its
recommendations obtained before approval by the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
6. Review and Comment of Street and Park Improvements. No plan for any
street, park, parkway, boulevard, traffic-way, river front, or other public improvement
affecting the City plan shall be finally approved by the City or the character or
location thereof determined, unless such proposal shall first have been submitted to
the Commission and the Commission shall have had thirty (30) days within which to
file its recommendations thereon.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
7. Fiscal Responsibilities. The Commission shall have full, complete and
exclusive authority to expend for and on behalf of the City all sums of money
appropriated to it, and to use and expend all gifts, donations or payments whatsoever
which are received by the City for City planning and zoning purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
8. Limitation on Entering Contracts. The Commission shall have no power to
contract debts beyond the amount of its original or amended appropriation as
approved by the Council for the present year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
9. Annual Report. The Commission shall each year make a report to the Mayor
and Council of its proceedings, with a full statement of its receipts, disbursements and
the progress of its work during the preceding fiscal year.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
[The next page is 151]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 151 -
CHAPTER 25
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
25.01 Board Created 25.04 Rules
25.02 Organization 25.05 Special Penalties
25.03 Duties
25.01 BOARD CREATED. A Parks and Recreation Board is hereby created to advise the
Council on the needed facilities and funds to provide open space such as parks, playgrounds
and community facilities for other forms of recreation. It shall also plan, operate and
supervise certain recreation facilities and parks as designated by the Council.
25.02 ORGANIZATION. The Board shall consist of seven (7) members, appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of the Council, for overlapping terms of three years. The Board shall
choose from its membership a Chairperson. Members shall serve without compensation, but
may receive reimbursement for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
25.03 DUTIES. In addition to its duty to make a plan for recreation and for the facilities for
recreation, and to update and revise these plans from time to time, the Board has oversight of
the properties and personnel devoted to parks and recreation, subject to the limitation of
expenditures for salaries and supplies, contracts and capital outlays set forth in the annual
budget provided by the Council for parks and recreation operations. The Board shall be
responsible for preparing and executing the annual budget to be presented to the Council for
its approval.
25.04 RULES. The Board has the power to make rules and regulations for the use of parks
or other recreational facilities or for the conduct of recreation programs. It shall also
promulgate and establish certain policies for the care and use of parks and recreational
facilities and properties.
25.05 SPECIAL PENALTIES. Violation of a Board rule which has been approved and
either posted or publicized may be cause for denial of use of a facility or participation in a
program, but such denial may be appealed to the Board.
CHAPTER 25 PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 152 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 153 -
CHAPTER 26
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
26.01 Purpose 26.06 Chairperson
26.02 Appointment and Term 26.07 Clerk
26.03 Qualifications 26.08 Records
26.04 Human Rights Commission 26.09 Rooms and Supplies
26.05 Compensation 26.10 Powers and Duties
26.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the appointment, powers
and duties of a Civil Service Commission in accordance with the requirements of State law.
26.02 APPOINTMENT AND TERM. A Civil Service Commission consisting of three
members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council for staggered
terms of four years.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.1)
26.03 QUALIFICATIONS. Commissioners must be citizens of Iowa, eligible electors and
residents of the City preceding their appointment. No person while on said Commission shall
hold or be a candidate for any office of public trust.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
26.04 HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
26.03, when a human rights commission has been established, the director thereof shall ex
officio be a member, without vote, of the Civil Service Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
26.05 COMPENSATION. Civil Service Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.2)
26.06 CHAIRPERSON. The Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its
members.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
26.07 CLERK. The City Clerk shall be clerk of the Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
26.08 RECORDS. The Civil Service Commission shall keep a record of all its meetings
and also a complete individual service record of each civil service employee which record
shall be permanent and kept up to date.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.4)
26.09 ROOMS AND SUPPLIES. The Council shall provide suitable rooms in which the
Commission may hold its meetings and supply the Commission with all necessary equipment
and a qualified shorthand reporter or an electronic voice recording device to enable it to
properly perform its duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 400.5)
CHAPTER 26 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 154 -
26.10 POWERS AND DUTIES. The Commission shall administer the civil service
procedure as contained in Chapter 400, Code of Iowa, and amendments thereto and shall have,
exercise and perform all powers and duties as provided thereby.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 155 -
CHAPTER 27
HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
27.01 Purpose 27.04 Meeting and Organization
27.02 Powers Defined and Commission Established 27.05 Executive Director
27.03 Commissioners
27.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the administration of all
municipal housing programs and projects pursuant to Chapter 403A of the Code of Iowa, as
amended.
27.02 POWERS DEFINED AND COMMISSION ESTABLISHED. The City Council of
the City of Charles City, Iowa shall exercise all powers conferred by Chapter 403A of the
Code of Iowa, as amended, but shall exercise such powers through the Charles City Housing
and Redevelopment Authority Board of Commissioners and its Executive Director
(collectively referred to herein as the Charles City Housing and Redevelopment Authority).
The Charles City Housing and Redevelopment Authority shall not constitute an independent
municipal housing agency as defined by Section 403A.2(1) of the Iowa Code, but rather it
shall be a department of the City of Charles City, subject to the jurisdiction of the City
Council of Charles City and supervision of the City Administrator. The Board of
Commissioners may exercise all powers of the City Council concerning housing projects and
programs and the Executive Director is authorized to sign all contracts and documents
approved by the Board of Commissioners, subject to the following limitations:
1. All employees engaged in the administration of the housing projects and
programs shall be hired and fired by the City Administrator of Charles City; and
2. All procurement by the Housing Authority shall be made pursuant to the
Housing Authority Procurement Policy approved by the City Council of the City of
Charles City.
The Executive Director shall attend City Council meeting as directed by the City
Administrator to report on Authority activities to the City Council.
27.03 COMMISSIONERS. The Commission shall consist of five members to be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to Council approval, for overlapping terms of two years.
Member of the Commission shall serve without compensation but shall be entitled to the
necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the discharge of their duties.
Members of the Commission may be removed from office by the Mayor, subject to Council
approval. Each Commissioner shall hold office until a successor has been appointed and
qualified.
27.04 MEETING AND ORGANIZATION. The Commission shall meet at regular
intervals, said meetings to be public. It shall adopt its own bylaws and shall keep an accurate
record of all its proceedings. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. The Commission may, through its bylaws, provide for appointment of a
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the Commissioners.
CHAPTER 27 HOUSING AND REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 156 -
27.05 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR. An Executive Director may be appointed by the City
Administrator of Charles City, subject to approval by the City Council, to supervise the dayto-
day operation of the municipal housing program. The Executive Director shall be under the
direct supervision of the City Administrator but shall be subject to the direction of the Board
of Commissioners created under this chapter.
(Ch. 27 – Ord. 1099 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 157 -
CHAPTER 28
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
28.01 Purpose and Intent 28.04 Powers of the Commission
28.02 Definitions 28.05 Student Representatives on Historic Preservation
28.03 Charles City Historic Preservation Commission Commission
28.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT. The purpose of this chapter is to:
1. Promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public
through the recognition, enhancement and perpetuation of sites and districts of
historical and cultural significance;
2. Safeguard the City’s historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage by preserving
sites and districts of historic and cultural significance;
3. Stabilize and improve property values;
4. Foster pride in the legacy of beauty and achievements of the past;
5. Protect and enhance the City’s attractions to tourists and visitors and the
support and stimulus to business thereby provided;
6. Strengthen the economy of the City;
7. Promote the use of sites and districts of historic and cultural significance as
places for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the City.
28.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Commission” means the Charles City Historic Preservation Commission, as
established by this chapter.
2. “Historic district” means an area which contains a significant portion of
buildings, structures or other improvements which, considered as a whole, possess
integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association,
and which area as a whole:
A. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of
construction, or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic
values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or
B. Is associated with events that have made significant contributions to
the broad patterns of our local, state or national history; or
C. Possesses a coherent and distinctive visual character or integrity
based upon similarity of scale, design, color, setting, workmanship, materials
or combinations thereof which is deemed to add significantly to the value and
attractiveness of properties within such area; or
D. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
E. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
CHAPTER 28 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 158 -
3. “Historic site” means a structure or building which:
A. Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history; or
B. Is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
C. Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method of
construction or represents the work of a master, or possesses high artistic
values, or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or
D. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
28.03 CHARLES CITY HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
1. The Commission shall consist of not to exceed eight (8) members who shall
be residents of Charles City. Terms shall be three (3) years from January 1 following
the year of appointment or until a successor is appointed.
2. Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council. Members shall demonstrate a positive interest in historic
preservation, possessing interest or expertise in architecture, architectural history,
historic preservation, city planning, building rehabilitation, conservation in general or
real estate.
3. The Commission members are appointed for staggered terms of three (3)
years. Members may serve for more than one term. Each member shall serve until
the appointment of a successor.
4. Vacancies occurring in the Commission, other than expiration of term of
office, shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term of the member replaced.
5. Members shall serve without compensation.
6. A simple majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.
7. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson who shall preside over all
Commission meetings and elect a Secretary who shall be responsible for maintaining
written records of the Commission’s proceedings.
8. The Commission shall meet at least three (3) times a year.
28.04 POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
1. The Commission may conduct studies for the identification and designation of
historic districts and sites meeting the definitions established by this chapter. The
Commission may proceed at its own initiative or upon a petition from any person,
group or association. The Commission shall maintain records of all studies and
inventories for public use.
2. The Commission may make a recommendation to the State Bureau of Historic
Preservation for the listing of an historic district or site in the National Register of
Historic Places and may conduct a public hearing thereon.
CHAPTER 28 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 159 -
3. The Commission may investigate and recommend to the Council the adoption
of ordinances designating historic sites and historic districts if they qualify as defined
herein.
4. The Commission may appoint five members to a local design review
committee, which committee shall have the power to review applications for the Main
Street Linked Investments for Tomorrow program. Projects receiving preliminary
design review approval from this committee will be submitted to the State Main Street
LIFT Design Review Board.
5. In addition to those duties and powers specified above, the Commission may,
with Council approval:
A. Accept unconditional gifts and donations of real and personal
property, including money, for the purpose of historic preservation;
B. Acquire, by purchase, bequest or donation, fee and lesser interests in
historic properties, including properties adjacent to or associated with historic
properties;
C. Preserve, restore, maintain and operate historic properties under the
ownership or control of the Commission;
D. Lease, sell and otherwise transfer or dispose of historic properties
subject to rights of public access and other covenants and in a manner that
will preserve the property;
E. Contract with State or Federal government or other organizations;
F. Cooperate with Federal, State and local governments in the pursuance
of the objectives of historic preservation;
G. Provide information for the purpose of historic preservation to the
Council; and
H. Promote and conduct an educational and interpretive program on
historic properties within its jurisdiction.
28.05 STUDENT REPRESENTATIVES ON HISTORIC PRESERVATION
COMMISSION.
1. The Historic Preservation Commission may nominate up to four (4) high
school students to participate as non-voting members of the Commission. These
persons shall be known as student representatives. Following nomination by the
Commission, nominated student representatives shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council.
2. Student representatives must be residents of the Charles City Community
School District. Student representatives should demonstrate a positive interest in
historic preservation, possessing interest or expertise in architecture, architectural
history, historic preservation, city planning, building rehabilitation, conservation in
general or real estate.
3. Vacancies shall be published on the Charles City website, the Charles City
Community School District website, and through outreach to local schools when City
resources allow for such publication and outreach. The Commission is authorized to
prepare an application form that is relevant to the powers and responsibilities of the
Commission and to interview students who have submitted applications. All
CHAPTER 28 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 160 -
applicants shall be forwarded to the Commission for consideration. After the
applications have been considered, nominations shall be voted on by the Commission
in an open public meeting.
4. Each student representative shall serve a one-year term that commences on
September 1 of each year. Student representative attendance at Commission meetings
during the summer shall be optional and any absences during the summer shall be
excused by the Commission. A student representative may apply for re-appointment
to the same position for successive terms, provided that the Commission shall evaluate
all applicants for the student representative position and any re-appointment shall be
voted on in an open public meeting. A student representative may be removed for
cause prior to the end of the term on a majority vote of the full Commission.
Vacancies occurring, other than expiration of term of office, shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term of the student representative replaced.
5. This section shall not repeal, replace, amend, or modify Section 28.03 of this
chapter. Accordingly, student representative shall not be considered Commission
members for purposes of Section 28.03 of this chapter.
(Section 28.05 – Ord. 1131 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 161 -
CHAPTER 29
NORTH CEDAR AVIATION AUTHORITY
29.01 Creation of Authority 29.02 The North Cedar Aviation Authority Board
29.01 CREATION OF AUTHORITY. The City of Charles City, Iowa, shall participate in
the creation of, and thereafter become a member of, the North Cedar Aviation Authority (the
Authority), which when created, shall be comprised initially of two members, namely: Floyd
County, Iowa, and the City of Charles City, Iowa. The Mayor, on behalf of the City of
Charles City, Iowa, is authorized to execute an agreement (the Authority Agreement) creating
the North Cedar Aviation Authority pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 330A Code of Iowa,
as amended.
29.02 THE NORTH CEDAR AVIATION AUTHORITY BOARD. The Authority shall
have a board of three (3) representatives who shall be the governing body of the Authority
exercising all of the rights, duties, and powers conferred by Chapter 330A Code of Iowa, as
amended, upon the Authority. Two representatives of the Board shall be residents of the City
of Charles City and one representative shall be a resident of the unincorporated area of Floyd
County. The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint two residents of the
City of Charles City to serve on the Board of the Authority at such time as this chapter takes
effect. Additional representatives shall be added to the Board as provided in the Authority
Agreement as additional municipalities become members of the Authority in the manner
prescribed by Chapter 330A Code of Iowa, as amended.
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 1030, adopted by the Council on November 6, 2006, amended
the Agreement Establishing North Cedar Aviation Authority, which
Amendment authorized the transfer of all aviation facilities, as that term is
defined under §330A.2[2] of the Code of Iowa, owned by the City of Charles
City to the North Cedar Aviation Authority on the terms and conditions set
forth in the Amendment. Ordinance No. 1030 is hereby saved from repeal.
CHAPTER 30 VOCATIONAL ADVISORY BOARDS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 162 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CHAPTER 30 VOCATIONAL ADVISORY BOARDS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 163 -
CHAPTER 30
VOCATIONAL ADVISORY BOARDS
30.01 Purpose 30.03 Term of Office and Meetings
30.02 Composition of the Boards 30.04 Duties
30.01 PURPOSE. This chapter authorizes the appointment of an Electrical Trade Advisory
Board, a Plumbing and Mechanical Advisory Board, and a Building Trades Advisory Board
for the purpose of providing advice and counsel to City Officials in the performance of their
responsibilities that involve the particular fields of expertise represented by each of these
Boards.
30.02 COMPOSITION OF THE BOARDS.
1. The Electrical Trade Advisory Board shall consist of three members
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. At least one member shall
be a licensed electrical contractor and the remaining members shall be licensed
electricians.
2. The Plumbing and Mechanical Advisory Board shall consist of three
members, appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council, all of whom
shall be licensed plumbers.
3. The Building Trades Advisory Board shall be composed of three members,
appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council, and shall consist of
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to
building construction.
30.03 TERM OF OFFICE AND MEETINGS. The members of each Board shall serve
staggered terms of three years. Each Board may schedule regular meetings and shall also
meet upon the call of the Building Official, a Code Enforcement Officer, or the City Engineer.
30.04 DUTIES. Each of the Vocational Boards shall provide advice and counsel to City
Officials on questions presented for their consideration in their particular field of expertise.
This advice and counsel is not binding upon the City Official or upon the City. Rather, such
advice and counsel shall be for the sole purpose of assisting the City Officials in making
informed decisions in the performance of their respective responsibilities. Advisory Board
members are not employees of the jurisdiction.
CHAPTER 30 VOCATIONAL ADVISORY BOARDS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 164 -
[The next page is 185]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 185 -
CHAPTER 33
POLICE DEPARTMENT
33.01 Department Established 33.07 Police Chief: Duties
33.02 Organization 33.08 Departmental Rules
33.03 Peace Officer Qualifications 33.09 Summoning Aid
33.04 Required Training 33.10 Taking Weapons
33.05 Compensation 33.11 Uniform Allowance
33.06 Police Chief Appointed
33.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED. The police department of the City is established
to provide for the preservation of peace and enforcement of law and ordinances within the
corporate limits of the City.
33.02 ORGANIZATION. The Department shall be a separate division of the Public Safety
Department and shall consist of the Police Chief and such other law enforcement officers and
personnel, whether full or part time, as may be authorized by the Council. The Chief and all
personnel in the Police Department shall be under the direct supervision of the Public Safety
Director.
33.03 PEACE OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS. In no case shall any person be selected or
appointed as a law enforcement officer unless such person meets the minimum qualification
standards established by the Iowa Law Enforcement Academy.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11)
33.04 REQUIRED TRAINING. All peace officers shall have received the minimum
training required by law at an approved law enforcement training school within one year of
employment. Peace officers shall also meet the minimum in-service training as required by
law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 80B.11[2])
(IAC, 501-3 and 501-8)
33.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department are designated by rank and receive
such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
33.06 POLICE CHIEF APPOINTED. The City Administrator shall appoint the Police
Chief. The Police Chief shall, at all times, be subject to the orders and supervision of the
Public Safety Director.
33.07 POLICE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Police Chief has the following powers and duties
subject to the approval of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. General. Perform all duties required of the Police Chief by law or ordinance.
2. Enforce Laws. Enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations and bring all
persons committing any offense before the proper court.
3. Writs. Execute and return all writs and other processes directed to the Police
Chief.
CHAPTER 33 POLICE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 186 -
4. Accident Reports. Report all motor vehicle accidents investigated to the State
Department of Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.266)
5. Prisoners. Be responsible for the custody of prisoners, including conveyance
to detention facilities as may be required.
6. Assist Officials. When requested, provide aid to other City officers, boards
and commissions in the execution of their official duties.
7. Investigations. Provide for such investigation as may be necessary for the
prosecution of any person alleged to have violated any law or ordinance.
8. Record of Arrests. Keep a record of all arrests made in the City by showing
whether said arrests were made under provisions of State law or City ordinance, the
offense charged, who made the arrest and the disposition of the charge.
9. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report as
well as such other reports as may be requested by the Mayor or Council.
10. Command. Be in command of all officers appointed for police work and be
responsible for the care, maintenance and use of all vehicles, equipment and materials
of the department.
33.08 DEPARTMENTAL RULES. The Police Chief shall establish such rules, not in
conflict with the Code of Ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Council, as may be
necessary for the operation of the department.
33.09 SUMMONING AID. Any peace officer making a legal arrest may orally summon as
many persons as the officer reasonably finds necessary to aid the officer in making the arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.17)
33.10 TAKING WEAPONS. Any person who makes an arrest may take from the person
arrested all items which are capable of causing bodily harm which the arrested person may
have within such person’s control to be disposed of according to law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 804.18)
33.11 UNIFORM ALLOWANCE. All police officers shall be provided a uniform
allowance as determined by resolution of the Council, which shall be granted in the form of
the purchase of clothing meeting the standard of color, style and quality specified by the City.
Any officer who leaves the department’s service shall turn over all items identifiable as
official uniforms, including insignia, before receiving final compensation.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 187 -
CHAPTER 34
PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT
34.01 Public Safety Department Established 34.04 Compensation
34.02 Organization 34.05 Training
34.03 Public Safety Director 34.06 Delegation of Duties
34.01 PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED. A Public Safety Department
is hereby established which shall consist of the police and fire departments under the
supervision of the Public Safety Director. The Public Safety Department shall also have
responsibility for enforcement of all building and property maintenance provisions as set forth
in Chapters 145 through 158 of the Charles City Code of Ordinances and for enforcement of
the nuisance laws as set forth in Chapters 50 and 51 of the Charles City Code of Ordinances.
The Building Official and all Code Enforcement (inspection) Officers of the City shall be
under the supervision of the Public Safety Director.
34.02 ORGANIZATION. The Police and Fire Departments shall operate as separate
subdivisions of the Public Safety Department. Each department shall have a chief who is
appointed by the City Administrator upon the recommendation of the Public Safety Director.
34.03 PUBLIC SAFETY DIRECTOR. The Public Safety Department shall be under the
supervision of a Public Safety Director appointed by the City Administrator. The Public
Safety Director shall have the duties and responsibilities as established by the Council and as
set forth in the job description adopted by the Council. The Public Safety Director may also
serve as Police Chief or Fire Chief at the discretion of the Council, and as Building Official at
the discretion of and upon appointment by the City Administrator.
34.04 COMPENSATION. The Public Safety Director shall receive compensation as
established by the Council and set forth in a written contract approved by the Council by
resolution.
34.05 TRAINING. The Public Safety Director shall have knowledge of both law
enforcement and fire protection and shall be versed in both disciplines to the extent that the
Director is capable of managing both departments and have a good working knowledge of
both departments’ functions.
34.06 DELEGATION OF DUTIES. The Public Safety Director may delegate duties to the
chiefs of either the Police and Fire Departments as he/she determines necessary to carry out
the respective responsibilities of each department.
CHAPTER 34 PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 188 -
[The next page is 195]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 195 -
CHAPTER 35
FIRE DEPARTMENT
35.01 Establishment and Purpose 35.09 Department Rules
35.02 Organization 35.10 Accidental Injury Insurance
35.03 Appointments 35.11 Liability Insurance
35.04 Training 35.12 Calls Outside Fire District
35.05 Compensation 35.13 Mutual Aid
35.06 Fire Chief Appointed 35.14 Authority to Cite Violations
35.07 Fire Chief: Duties 35.15 Uniform Allowance
35.08 Obedience to Fire Chief
35.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE. A fire department is hereby established to
prevent and extinguish fires and to protect lives and property against fires, to promote fire
prevention and fire safety, and to answer all emergency calls for which there is no other
established agency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.16)
35.02 ORGANIZATION. The Fire Department shall be a separate division of the Public
Safety Department and shall consist of the Fire Chief and such other officers and personnel,
whether full or part-time, as may be authorized by the Council. The Chief and all personnel in
the Fire Department shall be under the direct supervision of the Public Safety Director.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.03 APPOINTMENTS. Regularly employed full-time members of the Fire Department
shall be appointed by the Fire Chief, subject to approval of the City Administrator in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission and the civil
service laws of the State. Volunteer members of the Fire Department shall be appointed by
the Fire Chief subject to the approval of the City Administrator.
35.04 TRAINING. All members of the department shall meet the minimum training
standards established by the State Fire Marshal and attend and actively participate in regular
or special training drills or programs as directed by the Fire Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100B.2[4])
35.05 COMPENSATION. Members of the department shall be designated by rank and
receive such compensation as shall be determined by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
35.06 FIRE CHIEF APPOINTED. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City
Administrator and shall hold office until resigning or being removed from office as provided
by the civil service laws of the State and the rules and regulations of the Civil Service
Commission. The Fire Chief shall at all times be subject to the orders and supervision of the
Public Safety Director.
35.07 FIRE CHIEF: DUTIES. The Fire Chief shall perform all duties required of the Fire
Chief by law or ordinance, including but not limited to the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 196 -
1. Enforce Laws. Enforce ordinances and laws regulating fire prevention and
the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires, and enforce the
following provisions of the Charles City Municipal Code of Ordinances: Chapters 50,
51, 105, 145, 157, 158 and 159. The authority of the Fire Chief to enforce these
ordinances and laws does not preclude enforcement of these same laws and
ordinances by the Police Chief under §33.07 of the Charles City Municipal Code of
Ordinances.
2. Technical Assistance. Upon request, give advice concerning private fire
alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, fire escapes and exits and development
of fire emergency plans.
3. Authority at Fires. When in charge of a fire scene, direct an operation as
necessary to extinguish or control a fire, perform a rescue operation, investigate the
existence of a suspected or reported fire, gas leak, or other hazardous condition, or
take any other action deemed necessary in the reasonable performance of the
department’s duties.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
4. Control of Scenes. Prohibit an individual, vehicle or vessel from approaching
a fire scene and remove from the scene any object, vehicle, vessel or individual that
may impede or interfere with the operation of the Fire Department.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.2)
5. Authority to Barricade. When in charge of a fire scene, place or erect ropes,
guards, barricades or other obstructions across a street, alley, right-of-way, or private
property near the location of the fire or emergency so as to prevent accidents or
interference with the firefighting efforts of the Fire Department, to control the scene
until any required investigation is complete, or to preserve evidence related to the fire
or other emergency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.3)
6. Command. Be charged with the duty of maintaining the efficiency, discipline
and control of the Fire Department. The members of the Fire Department shall, at all
times, be subject to the direction of the Fire Chief.
7. Property. Exercise and have full control over the disposition of all fire
apparatus, tools, equipment and other property used by or belonging to the Fire
Department.
8. Notification. Whenever death, serious bodily injury, or property damage in
excess of $200,000 has occurred as a result of a fire, or if arson is suspected, notify
the State Fire Marshal’s Division immediately. For all other fires causing an
estimated damage of $50.00 or more or emergency responses by the Fire Department,
file a report with the Fire Marshal’s Division within ten (10) days following the end of
the month. The report shall indicate all fire incidents occurring and state the name of
the owners and occupants of the property at the time of the fire, the value of the
property, the estimated total loss to the property, origin of the fire as determined by
investigation, and other facts, statistics, and circumstances concerning the fire
incidents.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.2 & 100.3)
9. Right of Entry. Have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter any building
or premises within the Fire Chief’s jurisdiction for the purpose of making such
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 197 -
investigation or inspection which under law or ordinance may be necessary to be
made and is reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.12)
10. Recommendation. Make such recommendations to owners, occupants,
caretakers or managers of buildings necessary to eliminate fire hazards.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.13)
11. Assist State Fire Marshal. At the request of the State Fire Marshal, and as
provided by law, aid said marshal in the performance of duties by investigating,
preventing and reporting data pertaining to fires.
12. Records. Cause to be kept records of the fire department personnel,
firefighting equipment, depreciation of all equipment and apparatus, the number of
responses to alarms, their cause and location, and an analysis of losses by value, type
and location of buildings.
13. Reports. Compile and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual report of
the status and activities of the department as well as such other reports as may be
requested by the Mayor or Council.
35.08 OBEDIENCE TO FIRE CHIEF. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any lawful order or direction of the Fire Chief.
35.09 DEPARTMENT RULES. The Fire Chief shall establish such rules, not in conflict
with this Code of Ordinances and rules of the Civil Service Commission, and subject to the
approval of the Council, as may be necessary for the operation of the department, including
rules governing the following:
1. Rules of Conduct. The conduct and activity of members of the department
during regular and off-duty hours.
2. Communication. The procedures, use and care of the radio and other
communication systems.
3. Training. The nature, time and attendance requirements for in-service
training of members of the department.
4. Emergencies. Temporary rules for the protection and functioning of the
department as may be necessary in the event of an emergency until such rules may be
considered by the Council.
5. Other. Such other rules as may be deemed necessary and advisable in
assuring efficient and proper performance of the duties of the department.
6. Penalties. The penalties which may be imposed for violation of established
departmental rules by members.
7. Notice. The Fire Chief shall give written notice to any member charged with
a violation of departmental rules specifying the rules violated, the nature of the
violation and the penalty to be imposed.
8. Appeal. A member of the department charged with a violation of rules may
request a hearing before the Council by filing notice of appeal with the Clerk within
ten (10) days of receipt of notice of violation. The Council, at its next meeting, shall
review the facts and affirm, modify or revoke the action of the Fire Chief.
CHAPTER 35 FIRE DEPARTMENT
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 198 -
35.10 ACCIDENTAL INJURY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure the
City against liability for worker’s compensation and against statutory liability for the costs of
hospitalization, nursing, and medical attention for volunteer firefighters injured in the
performance of their duties as firefighters whether within or outside the corporate limits of the
City. All volunteer firefighters shall be covered by the contract.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 85.2, 85.61 and Sec. 410.18)
35.11 LIABILITY INSURANCE. The Council shall contract to insure against liability of
the City or members of the department for injuries, death or property damage arising out of
and resulting from the performance of departmental duties within or outside the corporate
limits of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 670.2 & 517A.1)
35.12 CALLS OUTSIDE FIRE DISTRICT. The department shall answer calls to fires
and other emergencies outside the Fire District if the Fire Chief determines that such
emergency exists and that such action will not endanger persons and property within the Fire
District.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
35.13 MUTUAL AID. Subject to approval by resolution of the Council, the department
may enter into mutual aid agreements with other legally constituted fire departments. Copies
of any such agreements shall be filed with the Clerk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4[2 & 3])
35.14 AUTHORITY TO CITE VIOLATIONS. Fire officials acting under the authority
of Chapter 100 of the Code of Iowa may issue citations in accordance to Chapter 805 of the
Code of Iowa, for violations of State and/or local fire safety regulations.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 100.41)
35.15 UNIFORM ALLOWANCE. All Fire Department members shall be provided a
uniform allowance as determined by resolution of the Council, which shall be granted in the
form of the purchase of clothing meeting the standard of color, style and quality specified by
the City. Any member who leaves the department’s service shall turn over all items
identifiable as official uniforms, including insignia, before receiving final compensation.
[The next page is 207]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 207 -
CHAPTER 36
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
36.01 Purpose 36.05 Notifications
36.02 Definitions 36.06 Police Authority
36.03 Cleanup Required 36.07 Liability
36.04 Liability for Cleanup Costs
36.01 PURPOSE. In order to reduce the danger to the public health, safety and welfare
from the leaks and spills of hazardous substances, these regulations are promulgated to
establish responsibility for the treatment, removal and cleanup of hazardous substance spills
within the City limits.
36.02 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Cleanup” means actions necessary to contain, collect, control, identify,
analyze, clean up, treat, disperse, remove or dispose of a hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[1])
2. “Hazardous condition” means any situation involving the actual, imminent or
probable spillage, leakage, or release of a hazardous substance onto the land, into a
water of the State or into the atmosphere which creates an immediate or potential
danger to the public health or safety or to the environment.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[4])
3. “Hazardous substance” means any substance or mixture of substances that
presents a danger to the public health or safety and includes, but is not limited to, a
substance that is toxic, corrosive, or flammable, or that is an irritant or that generates
pressure through decomposition, heat, or other means. “Hazardous substance” may
include any hazardous waste identified or listed by the administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as
amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, or any toxic
pollutant listed under Section 307 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as
amended to January 1, 1977, or any hazardous substance designated under Section
311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended to January 1, 1977, or any
hazardous material designated by the Secretary of Transportation under the Hazardous
Materials Transportation Act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[5])
4. “Responsible person” means a person who at any time produces, handles,
stores, uses, transports, refines, or disposes of a hazardous substance, the release of
which creates a hazardous condition, including bailees, carriers, and any other person
in control of a hazardous substance when a hazardous condition occurs, whether the
person owns the hazardous substance or is operating under a lease, contract, or other
agreement with the legal owner of the hazardous substance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.381[7])
36.03 CLEANUP REQUIRED. Whenever a hazardous condition is created by the deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of a hazardous substance, so that the hazardous
substance or a constituent of the hazardous substance may enter the environment or be emitted
CHAPTER 36 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 208 -
into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground waters, the responsible person
shall cause the condition to be remedied by a cleanup, as defined in the preceding section, as
rapidly as feasible to an acceptable, safe condition. The costs of cleanup shall be borne by the
responsible person. If the responsible person does not cause the cleanup to begin in a
reasonable time in relation to the hazard and circumstances of the incident, the City may, by
an authorized officer, give reasonable notice, based on the character of the hazardous
condition, said notice setting a deadline for accomplishing the cleanup and stating that the City
will proceed to procure cleanup services and bill the responsible person for all costs associated
with the cleanup if the cleanup is not accomplished within the deadline. In the event that it is
determined that immediate cleanup is necessary as a result of the present danger to the public
health, safety and welfare, then no notice shall be required and the City may proceed to
procure the cleanup and bill the responsible person for all costs associated with the cleanup. If
the bill for those services is not paid within thirty (30) days, the City Attorney shall proceed to
obtain payment by all legal means. If the cost of the cleanup is beyond the capacity of the
City to finance it, the authorized officer shall report to the Council and immediately seek any
State or federal funds available for said cleanup.
36.04 LIABILITY FOR CLEANUP COSTS. The responsible person shall be strictly
liable to the City for all of the following:
1. The reasonable cleanup costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City as
a result of the failure of the responsible person to clean up a hazardous substance
involved in a hazardous condition.
2. The reasonable costs incurred by the City or the agents of the City to evacuate
people from the area threatened by a hazardous condition caused by the person.
3. The reasonable damages to the City for the injury to, destruction of, or loss of
City property, including parks and roads, resulting from a hazardous condition caused
by that person, including the costs of assessing the injury, destruction or loss.
4. The excessive and extraordinary cost incurred by the City or the agents of the
City in responding at and to the scene of a hazardous condition caused by that person.
36.05 NOTIFICATIONS.
1. A person manufacturing, storing, handling, transporting, or disposing of a
hazardous substance shall notify the State Department of Natural Resources and the
Police Department of the occurrence of a hazardous condition as soon as possible but
not later than six (6) hours after the onset of the hazardous condition or discovery of
the hazardous condition. The Police Chief shall immediately notify the Department of
Natural Resources.
2. Any other person who discovers a hazardous condition shall notify the Police
Department, which shall then notify the Department of Natural Resources.
36.06 POLICE AUTHORITY. If the circumstances reasonably so require, the law
enforcement officer or an authorized representative may:
1. Evacuate persons from their homes to areas away from the site of a hazardous
condition, and
2. Establish perimeters or other boundaries at or near the site of a hazardous
condition and limit access to cleanup personnel.
CHAPTER 36 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 209 -
No person shall disobey an order of any law enforcement officer issued under this section.
36.07 LIABILITY. The City shall not be liable to any person for claims of damages,
injuries, or losses resulting from any hazardous condition, unless the City is the responsible
person as defined in Section 36.02(4).
CHAPTER 36 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE SPILLS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 210 -
[The next page is 231]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 231 -
CHAPTER 40
PUBLIC PEACE
40.01 Assault 40.04 Unlawful Assembly
40.02 Harassment 40.05 Failure to Disperse
40.03 Disorderly Conduct
40.01 ASSAULT. No person shall, without justification, commit any of the following:
1. Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to cause pain or injury to another or
that is intended to result in physical contact that will be insulting or offensive to
another, coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[1])
2. Threat of Pain or Injury. Any act that is intended to place another in fear of
immediate physical contact which will be painful, injurious, insulting, or offensive,
coupled with the apparent ability to execute the act.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1[2])
An act described in subsections 1 and 2 shall not be an assault under the following
circumstances: (i) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts, and such other person, are
voluntary participants in a sport, social or other activity, not in itself criminal, and such act is a
reasonably foreseeable incident of such sport or activity, and does not create an unreasonable
risk of serious injury or breach of the peace; (ii) if the person doing any of the enumerated acts
is employed by a school district or accredited nonpublic school, or is an area education agency
staff member who provides services to a school or school district, and intervenes in a fight or
physical struggle or other disruptive situation that takes place in the presence of the employee
or staff member performing employment duties in a school building, on school grounds, or at
an official school function, regardless of the location, whether the fight or physical struggle or
other disruptive situation is between students or other individuals, if the degree and the force
of the intervention is reasonably necessary to restore order and to protect the safety of those
assembled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.1)
40.02 HARASSMENT. No person shall commit harassment.
1. A person commits harassment when, with intent to intimidate, annoy or alarm
another person, the person does any of the following:
A. Communicates with another by telephone, telegraph, writing or via
electronic communication without legitimate purpose and in a manner likely
to cause the other person annoyance or harm.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
B. Places any simulated explosive or simulated incendiary device in or
near any building, vehicle, airplane, railroad engine or railroad car, or boat
occupied by the other person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
C. Orders merchandise or services in the name of another, or to be
delivered to another, without such other person’s knowledge or consent.
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 232 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
D. Reports or causes to be reported false information to a law
enforcement authority implicating another in some criminal activity, knowing
that the information is false, or reports the alleged occurrence of a criminal
act, knowing the same did not occur.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.7)
2. A person commits harassment when the person, purposefully and without
legitimate purpose, has personal contact with another person, with the intent to
threaten, intimidate or alarm that other person. As used in this section, unless the
context otherwise requires, “personal contact” means an encounter in which two or
more people are in visual or physical proximity to each other. “Personal contact” does
not require a physical touching or oral communication, although it may include these
types of contacts.
40.03 DISORDERLY CONDUCT. No person shall do any of the following:
1. Fighting. Engage in fighting or violent behavior in any public place or in or
near any lawful assembly of persons, provided that participants in athletic contests
may engage in such conduct which is reasonably related to that sport.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[1])
2. Noise. Make loud and raucous noise in the vicinity of any residence or public
building which causes unreasonable distress to the occupants thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[2])
3. Abusive Language. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture
which the person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent
reaction by another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[3])
4. Disrupt Lawful Assembly. Without lawful authority or color of authority,
disturb any lawful assembly or meeting of persons by conduct intended to disrupt the
meeting or assembly.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[4])
5. False Report of Catastrophe. By words or action, initiate or circulate a report
or warning of fire, epidemic, or other catastrophe, knowing such report to be false or
such warning to be baseless.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[5])
6. Disrespect of Flag. Knowingly and publicly use the flag of the United States
in such a manner as to show disrespect for the flag as a symbol of the United States,
with the intent or reasonable expectation that such use will provoke or encourage
another to commit trespass or assault. As used in this subsection:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[6])
A. “Deface” means to intentionally mar the external appearance.
B. “Defile” means to intentionally make physically unclean.
C. “Flag” means a piece of woven cloth or other material designed to be
flown from a pole or mast.
D. “Mutilate” means to intentionally cut up or alter so as to make
imperfect.
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 233 -
E. “Show disrespect” means to deface, defile, mutilate, or trample.
F. “Trample” means to intentionally tread upon or intentionally cause a
machine, vehicle, or animal to tread upon.
7. Obstruct Use of Street. Without authority or justification, obstruct any street,
sidewalk, highway, or other public way, with the intent to prevent or hinder its lawful
use by others.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.4[7])
8. Funeral or Memorial Service. Within 500 feet of the building or other
location where a funeral or memorial service is being conducted, or within 500 feet of
a funeral procession or burial:
A. Make loud and raucous noise that causes unreasonable distress to the
persons attending the funeral or memorial service or participating in the
funeral procession.
B. Direct abusive epithets or make any threatening gesture that the
person knows or reasonably should know is likely to provoke a violent
reaction by another.
C. Disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial service, funeral procession,
or burial by conduct intended to disturb or disrupt the funeral, memorial
service, funeral procession, or burial.
This subsection applies to conduct within 60 minutes preceding, during, and within 60
minutes after a funeral, memorial service, funeral procession, or burial.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.5)
40.04 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY. It is unlawful for three or more persons to assemble
together, with them or any of them acting in a violent manner, and with intent that they or any
of them will commit a public offense. No person shall willingly join in or remain part of an
unlawful assembly, knowing or having reasonable grounds to believe it is such.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.2)
40.05 FAILURE TO DISPERSE. A peace officer may order the participants in a riot or
unlawful assembly or persons in the immediate vicinity of a riot or unlawful assembly to
disperse. No person within hearing distance of such command shall refuse to obey.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 723.3)
CHAPTER 40 PUBLIC PEACE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 234 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 235 -
CHAPTER 41
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
41.01 Distributing Dangerous Substances 41.08 Abandoned or Unattended Refrigerators
41.02 False Reports to or Communications with Public 41.09 Antenna and Radio Wires
Safety Entities 41.10 Barbed Wire and Electric Fences
41.03 Providing False Identification Information 41.11 Discharging Weapons
41.04 Refusing to Assist Officer 41.12 Throwing and Shooting
41.05 Harassment of Public Officers and Employees 41.13 Urinating and Defecating
41.06 Interference with Official Acts 41.14 Fireworks
41.07 Removal of an Officer’s Communication or Control 41.15 Drug Paraphernalia
Device
41.01 DISTRIBUTING DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES. No person shall distribute
samples of any drugs or medicine, or any corrosive, caustic, poisonous or other injurious
substance unless the person delivers such into the hands of a competent person, or otherwise
takes reasonable precautions that the substance will not be taken by children or animals from
the place where the substance is deposited.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.1)
41.02 FALSE REPORTS TO OR COMMUNICATIONS WITH PUBLIC SAFETY
ENTITIES. No person shall do any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.6)
1. Report or cause to be reported false information to a fire department, a law
enforcement authority or other public safety entity, knowing that the information is
false, or report the alleged occurrence of a criminal act knowing the act did not occur.
2. Telephone an emergency 911 communications center, knowing that he or she
is not reporting an emergency or otherwise needing emergency information or
assistance.
3. Knowingly provide false information to a law enforcement officer who enters
the information on a citation.
41.03 PROVIDING FALSE IDENTIFICATION INFORMATION. No person shall
knowingly provide false identification information to anyone known by the person to be a
peace officer, emergency medical care provider, or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in
the performance of any act that is within the scope of the lawful duty or authority of that
officer, emergency medical care provider, or firefighter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1A)
41.04 REFUSING TO ASSIST OFFICER. Any person who is requested or ordered by
any magistrate or peace officer to render the magistrate or officer assistance in making or
attempting to make an arrest, or to prevent the commission of any criminal act, shall render
assistance as required. No person shall unreasonably and without lawful cause, refuse or
neglect to render assistance when so requested.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.2)
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 236 -
41.05 HARASSMENT OF PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES. No person shall
willfully prevent or attempt to prevent any public officer or employee from performing the
officer’s or employee’s duty.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 718.4)
41.06 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL ACTS. No person shall knowingly resist or
obstruct anyone known by the person to be a peace officer, emergency medical care provider
or firefighter, whether paid or volunteer, in the performance of any act that is within the scope
of the lawful duty or authority of that officer, emergency medical care provider, or firefighter,
or shall knowingly resist or obstruct the service or execution by any authorized person of any
civil or criminal process or order of any court. The terms “resist” and “obstruct” as used in
this section do not include verbal harassment unless the verbal harassment is accompanied by
a present ability and apparent intention to execute a verbal threat physically.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 719.1)
41.07 REMOVAL OF AN OFFICER’S COMMUNICATION OR CONTROL
DEVICE. No person shall knowingly or intentionally remove or attempt to remove a
communication device or any device used for control from the possession of a peace officer or
correctional officer, when the officer is in the performance of any act which is within the
scope of the lawful duty or authority of that officer and the person knew or should have known
the individual to be an officer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 708.12)
41.08 ABANDONED OR UNATTENDED REFRIGERATORS. No person shall
abandon or otherwise leave unattended any refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, with
doors that may become locked, outside of buildings and accessible to children, nor shall any
person allow any such refrigerator, ice box, or similar container, to remain outside of buildings
on premises in the person’s possession or control, abandoned or unattended and so accessible
to children.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 727.3)
41.09 ANTENNA AND RADIO WIRES. It is unlawful for a person to allow antenna
wires, antenna supports, radio wires, or television wires to exist over any street, alley,
highway, sidewalk, public way, public ground, or public building without written consent of
the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.10 BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES. It is unlawful for a person to use
barbed wire or electric fences to enclose land within the City limits without the written
consent of the Council unless such land consists of ten (10) acres or more and is used as
agricultural land.
41.11 DISCHARGING WEAPONS.
1. It is unlawful for a person to discharge rifles, shotguns, revolvers, pistols,
guns, or other firearms of any kind within the City limits except by written consent of
the Council.
2. No person shall intentionally discharge a firearm in a reckless manner.
41.12 THROWING AND SHOOTING. It is unlawful for a person to throw stones, bricks,
or missiles of any kind or to shoot arrows, paintballs, rubber guns, slingshots, air rifles, BB
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 237 -
guns, or other dangerous instruments or toys on or into any street, alley, highway, sidewalk,
public way, public ground, or public building, without written consent of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
41.13 URINATING AND DEFECATING. It is unlawful for any person to urinate or
defecate onto any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way, or onto any public or private
building, including but not limited to the wall, floor, hallway, steps, stairway, doorway, or
window thereof, or onto any public or private land.
41.14 FIREWORKS. The sale, use and exploding of fireworks within the City are subject
to the following:
1. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the definitions for “consumer
fireworks,” “display fireworks,” and “novelties” shall be as enumerated in Iowa Code
section 727.2, subsection 1, which definitions are incorporated herein by reference.
2. Consumer fireworks.
A. Use and Explosion. The use and explosion of consumer fireworks is
prohibited within the corporate limits of the City of Charles City.
B. Sale, Transfer, and Purchase.
(1) Sale. The sale of consumer fireworks shall at all times be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Iowa Code and the
administrative rules adopted by the Iowa State Fire Marshal relating
to the sale, transfer, and purchase of consumer fireworks.
Accordingly, it shall be unlawful to sell consumer fireworks without
meeting the requirements specified in the Iowa Code and by the State
Fire Marshal, or to sell consumer fireworks outside of the following
dates:
i. Approved consumer fireworks sales meeting the
requirements of this Chapter shall be allowed from an
approved permanent structure or building between June 1 and
July 8 and from December 10 until January 3.
ii. Approved consumer fireworks sales meeting the
requirements of this Chapter shall be allowed from an
approved temporary structure between June 13 and July 8.
(2) Requirements. Prior to engaging in the sale of consumer
fireworks, a person, firm, partnership, or entity who sells consumer
fireworks shall provide the Fire Chief of the City of Charles City with
proof of a valid and current license issued by the state fire marshal.
(3) Peddlers, Solicitors, and Transient Merchants. A person, firm,
partnership, or entity who sells consumer fireworks and meets the
definition of a Peddler, Solicitor, or Transient Merchant, as those
terms are defined in Chapter 122 of the Charles City Code of
Ordinances, shall be subject to the provisions provided in said
Chapter 122 of the Charles City Code of Ordinances.
(4) Notice of Prohibition of Use and Explosion. Any person, firm,
partnership, or entity who sells Consumer fireworks under this
Chapter shall display in a prominent location on the premises a notice
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 238 -
that the use and explosion of consumer fireworks is prohibited within
the corporate limits of the City of Charles City, Iowa.
(Subsection 2(B) – Ord. 1110 – Nov. 17 Supp.)
3. Display Fireworks. It is unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose for
sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any display fireworks; provided the City may,
upon application in writing, grant a permit for the display of display fireworks by a
City agency, fair associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups of
individuals approved by City authorities when such fireworks display will be handled
by a competent operator. No permit shall be granted hereunder unless the operator or
sponsoring organization has filed with the City evidence of insurance in the following
amounts:
A. Bodily Injury and Property Damage: $2,000,000
B. Total Liability Coverage: $2,000,000
4. Violations. A person who violates this Chapter commits a simple
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars. A court
shall not order imprisonment for violation of this Chapter. Violations of this Chapter
shall be reported to the state fire marshal.
5. Applicability.
A. This Chapter does not prohibit the sale by a resident, dealer,
manufacturer, or jobber of such fireworks as are not prohibited by this
Chapter, or the sale of any kind of fireworks if they are to be shipped out of
the state, or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or the theater, or for
signal purposes in athletic sports or by railroads or trucks, for signal purposes,
or by a recognized military organization.
B. This Chapter does not apply to any substance or composition
prepared and sold for medicinal or fumigation purposes.
C. Unless specifically provided otherwise, the Chapter does not apply to
novelties.
(Sec. 41.14 – Ord. 1104 – Jul. 17 Supp.)
41.15 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 124.414)
1. As used in this section “drug paraphernalia” means all equipment, products or
materials of any kind used or attempted to be used in combination with a controlled
substance, except those items used in combination with the lawful use of a controlled
substance, to knowingly or intentionally and primarily do any of the following:
A. Manufacture a controlled substance.
B. Inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a
controlled substance.
C. Test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a controlled substance.
D. Enhance the effect of a controlled substance.
Drug paraphernalia does not include hypodermic needles or syringes if manufactured,
delivered, sold, or possessed for a lawful purpose.
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 239 -
2. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally manufacture,
deliver, sell, or possess drug paraphernalia.
CHAPTER 41 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 240 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 241 -
CHAPTER 42
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
42.01 Trespassing 42.05 Fraud
42.02 Criminal Mischief 42.06 Theft
42.03 Defacing Proclamations or Notices 42.07 Other Public Property Offenses
42.04 Unauthorized Entry
42.01 TRESPASSING. Prohibited. It is unlawful for a person to knowingly trespass upon
the property of another.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.8)
1. Definitions. For purposes of this section:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[1])
A. “Property” includes any land, dwelling, building, conveyance,
vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure, whether publicly or
privately owned.
B. “Public utility” is a public utility as defined in Section 476.1 of the
Code of Iowa or an electric transmission line as provided in Chapter 478 of
the Code of Iowa.
C. “Public utility property” means any land, dwelling, building,
conveyance, vehicle, or other temporary or permanent structure owned,
leased, or operated by a public utility and that is completely enclosed by a
physical barrier of any kind.
D. “Railway corporation” means a corporation, company, or person
owning, leasing, or operating any railroad in whole or in part within this State.
E. “Railway property” means all tangible real and personal property
owned, leased, or operated by a railway corporation, with the exception of any
administrative building or offices of the railway corporation.
F. “Trespass” means one or more of the following acts:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2a])
(1) Entering upon or in property without the express permission
of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession with the intent to
commit a public offense or to use, remove therefrom, alter, damage,
harass, or place thereon or therein anything animate or inanimate.
(2) Entering or remaining upon or in property without
justification after being notified or requested to abstain from entering
or to remove or vacate therefrom by the owner, lessee, or person in
lawful possession, or the agent or employee of the owner, lessee, or
person in lawful possession, or by any peace officer, magistrate, or
public employee whose duty it is to supervise the use or maintenance
of the property.
(3) Entering upon or in property for the purpose or with the effect
of unduly interfering with the lawful use of the property by others.
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 242 -
(4) Being upon or in property and wrongfully using, removing
therefrom, altering, damaging, harassing, or placing thereon or therein
anything animate or inanimate, without the implied or actual
permission of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession.
(5) Entering or remaining upon or in railway property without
lawful authority or without the consent of the railway corporation
which owns, leases, or operates the railway property. This paragraph
does not apply to passage over a railroad right-of-way, other than a
track, railroad roadbed, viaduct, bridge, trestle, or railroad yard, by an
unarmed person if the person has not been notified or requested to
abstain from entering onto the right-of-way or to vacate the right-ofway
and the passage over the right-of-way does not interfere with the
operation of the railroad.
(6) Entering or remaining upon or in public utility property
without lawful authority or without the consent of the public utility
that owns, leases, or operates the public utility property. This
paragraph does not apply to passage over public utility right-of-way
by a person if the person has not been notified or requested by posted
signage or other means to abstain from entering onto the right-of-way
or to vacate the right-of-way.
2. Specific Exceptions. “Trespass” does not mean either of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.7[2b])
A. Entering upon the property of another for the sole purpose of
retrieving personal property which has accidentally or inadvertently been
thrown, fallen, strayed, or blown onto the property of another, provided that
the person retrieving the property takes the most direct and accessible route to
and from the property to be retrieved, quits the property as quickly as is
possible, and does not unduly interfere with the lawful use of the property.
This paragraph does not apply to public utility property where the person has
been notified or requested by posted signage or other means to abstain from
entering.
B. Entering upon the right-of-way of a public road or highway.
42.02 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. It is unlawful, for any person who has no right to do so, to
intentionally damage, deface, alter or destroy property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.03 DEFACING PROCLAMATIONS OR NOTICES. It is unlawful for a person
intentionally to deface, obliterate, tear down, or destroy in whole or in part, any transcript or
extract from or of any law of the United States or the State, or any proclamation,
advertisement or notification, set up at any place within the City by authority of the law or by
order of any court, during the time for which the same is to remain set up.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
42.04 UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY. No unauthorized person shall enter or remain in or
upon any public building, premises or grounds in violation of any notice posted thereon or
when said building, premises or grounds are closed and not open to the public. When open to
the public, a failure to pay any required admission fee also constitutes an unauthorized entry.
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 243 -
42.05 FRAUD. It is unlawful for any person to commit a fraudulent practice as defined in
Section 714.8 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.8)
42.06 THEFT. It is unlawful for any person to commit theft as defined in Section 714.1 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 714.1)
42.07 OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OFFENSES. The following chapters of this Code
of Ordinances contain regulations prohibiting or restricting other activities or conditions that
are also deemed to be public property offenses:
1. Chapter 23 – Library
A. Section 23.10 – Injury to Books or Property
B. Section 23.11 – Theft of Library Property
2. Chapter 105 – Solid Waste Control
A. Section 105.07 – Littering Prohibited
B. Section 105.08 – Open Dumping Prohibited
3. Chapter 135 – Street Use and Maintenance
A. Section 135.01 – Removal of Warning Devices
B. Section 135.02 – Obstructing or Defacing
C. Section 135.03 – Placing Debris On
D. Section 135.04 – Playing In
E. Section 135.05 – Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley
F. Section 135.08 – Burning Prohibited
G. Section 135.12 – Dumping of Snow
4. Chapter 136 – Sidewalk Regulations
A. Section 136.12 – Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
B. Section 136.17 – Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
C. Section 136.18 – Defacing
D. Section 136.19 – Debris on Sidewalks
E. Section 136.20 – Merchandise Display
F. Section 136.21 – Sales Stands
CHAPTER 42 PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 244 -
[The next page is 251]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 251 -
CHAPTER 45
ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
45.01 Persons Under Legal Age 45.03 Open Containers in Motor Vehicles
45.02 Public Consumption or Intoxication 45.04 Social Host
45.01 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. As used in this section, “legal age” means
twenty-one (21) years of age or more.
1. A person or persons under legal age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase,
consume, or individually or jointly have alcoholic liquor, wine or beer in their
possession or control; except in the case of liquor, wine or beer given or dispensed to
a person under legal age within a private home and with the knowledge, presence and
consent of the parent or guardian, for beverage or medicinal purposes or as
administered to the person by either a physician or dentist for medicinal purposes and
except to the extent that a person under legal age may handle alcoholic beverages,
wine, and beer during the regular course of the person’s employment by a liquor
control licensee, or wine or beer permittee under State laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[2])
2. A person under legal age shall not misrepresent the person’s age for the
purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer
from any licensee or permittee.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[3])
45.02 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OR INTOXICATION.
1. As used in this section unless the context otherwise requires:
A. “Arrest” means the same as defined in Section 804.5 of the Code of
Iowa and includes taking into custody pursuant to Section 232.19 of the Code
of Iowa.
B. “Chemical test” means a test of a person’s blood, breath, or urine to
determine the percentage of alcohol present by a qualified person using
devices and methods approved by the Commissioner of Public Safety.
C. “Peace Officer” means the same as defined in Section 801.4 of the
Code of Iowa.
D. “School” means a public or private school or that portion of a public
or private school which provides teaching for any grade from kindergarten
through grade twelve.
2. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor, wine or beer upon the
public streets or highways. A person shall not use or consume alcoholic liquor in any
public place, except premises covered by a liquor control license. A person shall not
possess or consume alcoholic liquors, wine, or beer on public school property or while
attending any public or private school-related function. A person shall not be
intoxicated in a public place.
3. A person shall not simulate intoxication in a public place.
CHAPTER 45 ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION AND INTOXICATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 252 -
4. When a peace officer arrests a person on a charge of public intoxication under
this section, the peace officer shall inform the person that the person may have a
chemical test administered at the person’s own expense. If a device approved by the
Commissioner of Public Safety for testing a sample of a person’s breath to determine
the person’s blood alcohol concentration is available, that is the only test that need be
offered the person arrested. In a prosecution for public intoxication, evidence of the
results of a chemical test performed under this subsection is admissible upon proof of
a proper foundation. The percentage of alcohol present in a person’s blood, breath, or
urine established by the results of a chemical test performed within two hours after the
person’s arrest on a charge of public intoxication is presumed to be the percentage of
alcohol present at the time of arrest.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.46)
45.03 OPEN CONTAINERS IN MOTOR VEHICLES. (See Section 62.01(49) and (50)
of this Code of Ordinances.)
45.04 SOCIAL HOST. A person who is the owner or lessee of, or who otherwise has
control over, property that is not a licensed premises shall not knowingly permit any person,
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe the person to be under the age of eighteen, to
consume or possess on such property any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer. The provisions of
this subsection shall not apply to a landlord or manager of the property or to a person under
legal age who consumes or possesses any alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer in connection with a
religious observance, ceremony, or rite.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.47[1A])
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 253 -
CHAPTER 46
MINORS
46.01 Cigarettes and Tobacco 46.03 Curfew
46.02 Contributing to Delinquency
46.01 CIGARETTES AND TOBACCO. It is unlawful for any person under eighteen (18)
years of age to smoke, use, possess, purchase, or attempt to purchase any tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes. Possession of tobacco,
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes by a person under
eighteen years of age shall not constitute a violation of this section if said person possesses the
tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes as part
of the person’s employment and said person is employed by a person who holds a valid permit
under Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or who lawfully offers for sale or sells cigarettes or
tobacco products.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2)
46.02 CONTRIBUTING TO DELINQUENCY. It is unlawful for any per-son to
encourage any child under eighteen (18) years of age to commit any act of delinquency.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 709A.1)
46.03 CURFEW. The Council has determined that a curfew for minors under the age of 15
is necessary to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City and
specifically to reinforce the primary authority and responsibility of adults responsible for
minors, and to protect minors from improper influences and criminal activity that may exist in
public places after the curfew hour.
1. Definitions. For use in this section, the following terms are defined:
A. “Emergency errand” means, but is not limited to, an errand relating to
a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any other situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious illness, bodily injury or loss of
life.
B. “Knowingly” means knowledge which a responsible adult should
reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that
responsible adult’s custody. It is intended to continue to hold the neglectful
or careless adult responsible for a minor to a reasonable standard of adult
responsibility through an objective test. It is therefore no defense that an
adult responsible for a minor was completely indifferent to the activities or
conduct or whereabouts of the minor.
C. “Minor” means any unmarried person under the age of eighteen (18)
years.
D. “Public place” includes stores, parking lots, parks, playgrounds,
streets, alleys and sidewalks dedicated to public use; and also includes such
parts of buildings and other premises whether publicly or privately owned
which are used by the general public or to which the general public is invited
commercially for a fee or otherwise; or in or on which the general public is
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 254 -
permitted without specific invitation; or to which the general public has
access. For purposes of this section, a vehicle or other conveyance is
considered to be a public place when in the areas defined above.
E. “Responsible adult” means a parent, guardian or other adult
specifically authorized by law or authorized by a parent or guardian to have
custody or control of a minor.
2. Curfew Established. It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 15 to be or
remain upon any of the alleys, streets or public places or to be in places of business
and amusement in the City between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the
following day on weekdays (Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday).
The curfew on Friday and Saturday shall be from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Saturday
and Sunday.
3. Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the curfew:
A. The minor is accompanied by a responsible adult.
B. The minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor resides or
on either side of the place where the minor resides and the adult responsible
for the minor has given permission for the minor to be there.
C. The minor is present at or is traveling between home and one of the
following:
(1) Minor’s place of employment in a business, trade or occupation
in which the minor is permitted by law to be engaged or, if traveling,
within 30 minutes after the end of work;
(2) Minor’s place of religious activity or, if traveling, within 30
minutes after the end of the religious activity;
(3) Governmental or political activity or, if traveling, within 30
minutes after the end of the activity;
(4) School activity or, if traveling, within 30 minutes after the end
of the activity;
(5) Assembly such as a march, protest, demonstration, sit-in or
meeting of an association for the advancement of economic, political,
religious or cultural matters, or for any other activity protected by the
First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution guarantees of free exercise
of religion, freedom of speech, freedom of assembly or, if traveling,
within 30 minutes after the end of the activity.
D. The minor is on an emergency errand for a responsible adult.
E. The minor is engaged in interstate travel through the City beginning,
ending or passing through the City when such travel is by direct route.
F. The minor’s business, trade or occupation, in which the minor is
permitted by law to be engaged, requires the presence of the minor in the
public place.
4. Responsibility of Adults. It is unlawful for any responsible adult knowingly
to permit or to allow a minor to be in any public place in the City within the time
periods prohibited by this section unless the minor’s presence falls within one of the
above exceptions.
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 255 -
5. Enforcement.
A. Determination of Age. In determining the age of the juvenile and in
the absence of convincing evidence such as a birth certificate or driver’s
license, a peace officer or reserve officer on the street shall, in the first
instance, use his or her best judgment in determining age.
B. Officer’s Discretion. When a curfew violation has been identified, an
officer may use reasonable discretion in determining an appropriate course of
action. These options include directing the juvenile to proceed directly home,
transporting the juvenile home, arresting the juvenile and detaining him/her
until his/her parents or guardian can be reached for pickup, issuance of a
citation to the juvenile, and issuance of a citation to the responsible adult(s)
having custody or control of the minor child. Each option is not exclusive but
may be utilized cumulatively with the other options at the discretion of the
officer.
6. Penalties.
A. Responsible Adult’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation by
a minor, the law enforcement officer shall, by certified mail, send to the adult
responsible for the minor, written notice of the violation with a warning that
any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew
ordinance against both the responsible adult and minor, with applicable
penalties.
B. Responsible Adult’s Second Violation. Any responsible adult as
defined in this section who, following receipt of a warning, knowingly allows
the minor to violate any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
municipal infraction.
C. Minor’s First Violation. In the case of a first violation by a minor, the
law enforcement officer shall give the minor a written warning, which states
that any subsequent violation will result in full enforcement of the curfew
ordinance against the responsible adult and the minor, with applicable
penalties, or, at the law enforcement officer’s discretion, may issue the minor
a citation for a first violation.
D. Minor’s Second Violation. For the minor’s second and subsequent
violations of any of the provisions of this section, the minor is guilty of a
municipal infraction.
CHAPTER 46 MINORS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 256 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 257 -
CHAPTER 47
PROHIBITIVE USE OF PROPERTY
FOR CRIMINAL PURPOSES
47.01 Purpose 47.03 Specified Crime Property Prohibited
47.02 Definitions 47.04 Civil Violations and Penalties
47.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the use of property for criminal
purposes as subject to the definitions appearing in Section 47.02.
47.02 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for the purpose of this chapter:
1. “Bootlegging” means the illegal sale or service of alcoholic liquor, wine or
beer in violation of Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa.
2. “Controlled substance” means a drug, substance or immediate precursor as
defined in Chapter 124 of the Code of Iowa.
3. “Gambling” means gaming or betting as defined by Section 725.7 of the Code
of Iowa.
4. “Owner” means any person, agent, firm, corporation, association or
partnership in whom or in which has been vested all or part of the legal title to
property or all or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to present use and
enjoyment of the premises, or an occupant of that structure.
5. “Prostitution, pimping and pandering” means those acts or activities as
defined by Chapter 725 of the Code of Iowa.
6. “Specified crime property” means any structure in which activity involving
the unauthorized delivery or manufacture of a controlled substance, illegal gaming or
betting, bootlegging, prostitution, pimping or pandering is occurring.
7. “Structure” means any building or structure including, but not limited to,
single-family residences, multi-family residences, commercial buildings, or any
portion thereof.
47.03 SPECIFIED CRIME PROPERTY PROHIBITED. No person shall use or allow to
be used any structure as a specified crime property.
47.04 CIVIL VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. Any person who violates the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a municipal infraction. A charge filed against an owner for
violation of this chapter shall not preclude the City from seeking additional relief, including,
but not limited to, an order for abatement or injunctive relief from the court in the same action
or as a separate action.
CHAPTER 47 PROHIBITIVE USE OF PROPERTY
FOR CRIMINAL PURPOSES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 258 -
[The next page is 277]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 277 -
CHAPTER 50
NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
50.01 Definition of Nuisance 50.08 Request for Hearing
50.02 Nuisances Enumerated 50.09 Abatement in Emergency
50.03 Other Conditions 50.10 Abatement by City
50.04 Nuisances Prohibited 50.11 Collection of Costs
50.05 Nuisance Abatement 50.12 Installment Payment of Cost of Abatement
50.06 Notice to Abate: Contents 50.13 Failure to Abate
50.07 Method of Service
50.01 DEFINITION OF NUISANCE. Whatever is injurious to health, indecent, or
unreasonably offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as
essentially to interfere unreasonably with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property is a
nuisance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.1)
50.02 NUISANCES ENUMERATED. The following subsections include, but do not limit,
the conditions which are deemed to be nuisances in the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.2)
1. Offensive Smells. Erecting, continuing or using any building or other place
for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, unreasonably offensive smells, or other annoyances, becomes
injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals or the public.
2. Filth or Noisome Substance. Causing or suffering any offal, filth or noisome
substance to be collected or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others.
3. Impeding Passage of Navigable River. Obstructing or impeding without legal
authority the passage of any navigable river, harbor or collection of water.
4. Water Pollution. Corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water
of any river, stream or pond, or unlawfully diverting the same from its natural course
or state, to the injury or prejudice of others.
5. Blocking Public and Private Ways. Obstructing or encumbering, by fences,
buildings or otherwise, the public roads, private ways, streets, alleys, commons,
landing places or burying grounds.
6. Billboards. Billboards, signboards and advertising signs, whether erected and
constructed on public or private property, which so obstruct and impair the view of
any portion or part of a public street, avenue, highway, boulevard or alley or of a
railroad or street railway track as to render dangerous the use thereof. (See also
Section 62.06)
7. Storing of Flammable Junk. Depositing or storing of flammable junk, such as
old rags, rope, cordage, rubber, bones and paper, by dealers in such articles within the
fire limits of the City, unless in a building of fireproof construction. (See also
Chapter 51)
8. Air Pollution. Emission of dense smoke, noxious fumes or fly ash.
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 278 -
† EDITOR’S NOTE: A suggested form of notice for the abatement of nuisances is included in the
appendix of this Code of Ordinances. Caution is urged in the use of this administrative abatement
procedure, particularly where cost of abatement is more than minimal or where there is doubt as to
whether or not a nuisance does in fact exist. If compliance is not secured following notice and hearings,
we recommend you review the situation with your attorney before proceeding with abatement and
9. Weeds, Brush. Dense growth of all weeds and grasses over six (6) inches in
height or other vegetation having reached a height exceeding eight (8) inches, except
for any cultivated agricultural commodities which are planted and harvested within
the City, provided the same are regularly maintained and otherwise free from the type
of offensive vegetation that would constitute a health, safety or fire hazard. The
property owner shall cause all weeds, vines, grasses and vegetation to be cut or
destroyed within seven (7) days of receipt of notice to cut or destroy.
10. Dutch Elm Disease. Trees infected with Dutch Elm Disease. (See also
Chapter 151)
11. Airport Air Space. Any object or structure hereafter erected within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the limits of any municipal or regularly established airport or
landing place, which may endanger or obstruct aerial navigation including take-off
and landing, unless such object or structure constitutes a proper use or enjoyment of
the land on which the same is located.
12. Houses of Ill Fame. Houses of ill fame, kept for the purpose of prostitution
and lewdness; gambling houses; places resorted to by persons participating in criminal
gang activity prohibited by Chapter 723A of the Code of Iowa or places resorted to by
persons using controlled substances, as defined in Section 124.101 of the Code of
Iowa, in violation of law, or houses where drunkenness, quarreling, fighting or
breaches of the peace are carried on or permitted to the disturbance of others.
50.03 OTHER CONDITIONS. The following chapters of this Code of Ordinances contain
regulations prohibiting or restricting other conditions which are deemed to be nuisances:
1. Junk and Junk Vehicles (See Chapter 51)
2. Dangerous Buildings (See Chapter 145)
3. Storage and Disposal of Solid Waste (See Chapter 105)
4. Trees (See Chapter 151)
5. Property Maintenance Code (See Chapter 158)
50.04 NUISANCES PROHIBITED. The creation or maintenance of a nuisance is
prohibited, and a nuisance, public or private, may be abated in the manner provided for in this
chapter or State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657.3)
50.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT. Whenever the Mayor or other authorized municipal
officer finds that a nuisance exists, such officer shall cause to be served upon the property
owner or occupant a written order to abate the nuisance within a reasonable time after notice.
Authorized municipal officers include the Mayor, the Public Safety Director, the Fire Chief,
the Police Chief, and the Building Official, each of whom shall have authority to issue notices
and orders and to execute civil citations as necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter
and the provisions of any other chapter of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to prohibited
nuisances.†
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 279 -
assessment of costs. Your attorney may recommend proceedings in court under Chapter 657 of the
Code of Iowa rather than this procedure.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.06 NOTICE TO ABATE: CONTENTS. The notice to abate shall contain:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
1. Description of Nuisance. A description of what constitutes the nuisance.
2. Location of Nuisance. The location of the nuisance.
3. Acts Necessary to Abate. A statement of the act or acts necessary to abate the
nuisance.
4. Reasonable Time. A reasonable time within which to complete the
abatement.
5. Description of Remedial Action. A statement that if the nuisance or condition
is not abated as directed that the City may: (a) abate the nuisance and assess the costs
against the person and/or the property; or (b) file a civil citation for municipal
infraction pursuant to Chapter 4 of the Charles City Code of Ordinances. If the City
intends to abate the nuisance, upon the offender’s failure to do so, and without filing a
municipal infraction citation, it must also include notification of the person’s right to
contest the City’s finding of a nuisance at hearing before the City Council by filing a
written request with the City Clerk as provided in Section 50.08 of this chapter.
50.07 METHOD OF SERVICE. The notice to the property owner or occupant may be
served by certified mail, by personal service as provided by Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure
1.305, by publication in the manner provided by Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.310 and
subject to the conditions of Iowa Rule of Civil Procedure 1.311, or by both ordinary and
certified mail and posting the notice at the residence of the person being served or at the
building that is the subject of the notice. In the event that the nuisance to be abated is the
growth of weeds, grasses, or other vegetation, as described in Section 50.02(8) of this Code of
Ordinances and a Notice to Abate has been previously served upon the owner or occupant of
the property as provided in this Section, then for all subsequent occasions during the same
growing year that similar nuisance conditions arise on the property, the Notice to Abate may
be served by posting it in a conspicuous location on the property at least 48 hours prior to
remediation of the nuisance conditions by the City. In such case, the Notice to Abate shall
contain a statement notifying the owner or occupant that he or she must abate the nuisance
conditions within 48 hours of the posted date or alternatively file a written request for hearing
with the City Clerk within this same 48 hour period.
(Ord. 1095 – Aug. 16 Supp.)
50.08 REQUEST FOR HEARING. Any person who is advised by an order to abate
nuisance, given pursuant to Section 50.06 of this chapter, of the right to a hearing before the
City Council to contest the finding of nuisance, must file a written request for hearing with the
City Clerk within the time stated in the order to abate nuisance, or it will be conclusively
presumed that a nuisance exists and it must be abated as ordered. The hearing will be before
the Council at a time and place fixed by the Council. Findings of the Council shall be
CHAPTER 50 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 280 -
conclusive and, if a nuisance is found to exist, it shall be ordered abated within a reasonable
time under the circumstances.
50.09 ABATEMENT IN EMERGENCY. If it is determined that an emergency exists by
reason of the continuing maintenance of the nuisance or condition, the City may perform any
action which may be required under this chapter without prior notice. The City shall assess
the costs as provided in Section 50.11 after notice to the property owner under the applicable
provisions of Sections 50.05, 50.06 and 50.07 and hearing as provided in Section 50.08.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.10 ABATEMENT BY CITY. If the person notified to abate a nuisance or condition
neglects or fails to abate as directed, the City may perform the required action to abate,
keeping an accurate account of the expense incurred. The itemized expense account shall be
filed with the Clerk who shall pay such expenses on behalf of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.11 COLLECTION OF COSTS. The Clerk shall send a statement of the total expense
incurred by certified mail to the property owner who has failed to abide by the notice to abate,
and if the amount shown by the statement has not been paid within one month, the Clerk shall
certify the costs to the County Treasurer and such costs shall then be collected with, and in the
same manner, as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
50.12 INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF COST OF ABATEMENT. If the amount
expended to abate the nuisance or condition exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), the City
may permit the assessment to be paid in up to ten (10) annual installments, to be paid in the
same manner and with the same interest rates provided for assessments against benefited
property under State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.13)
50.13 FAILURE TO ABATE. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance who shall
fail or refuse to abate or remove the same within the reasonable time required and specified in
the notice to abate is in violation of this Code of Ordinances.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 281 -
CHAPTER 51
JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
51.01 Definitions 51.05 Notice to Abate
51.02 Junk and Junk Vehicles Prohibited 51.06 Sale of Junk or Junk Vehicles
51.03 Junk and Junk Vehicles a Nuisance 51.07 Collection of Costs
51.04 Exceptions
51.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Junk” means all old or scrap copper, brass, lead, or any other non-ferrous
metal; old or discarded rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste or used
lumber, or salvaged wood; dismantled vehicles, machinery and appliances or parts of
such vehicles, machinery or appliances; iron, steel or other old or scrap ferrous
materials; old or discarded glass, tinware, plastic or old or discarded household goods
or hardware. Neatly stacked firewood located on a side yard or a rear yard is not
considered junk.
2. “Junk vehicle” means any vehicle legally placed in storage with the County
Treasurer or unlicensed and which has any of the following characteristics:
A. Broken Glass. Any vehicle with a broken or cracked windshield,
window, headlight or tail light, or any other cracked or broken glass.
B. Broken, Loose or Missing Part. Any vehicle with a broken, loose or
missing fender, door, bumper, hood, steering wheel or trunk lid.
C. Habitat for Nuisance Animals or Insects. Any vehicle which has
become the habitat for rats, mice, or snakes, or any other vermin or insects.
D. Flammable Fuel. Any vehicle which contains gasoline or any other
flammable fuel.
E. Inoperable. Any motor vehicle which lacks an engine or two or more
wheels or other structural parts, rendering said motor vehicle totally
inoperable, or which cannot be moved under its own power or has not been
used as an operating vehicle for a period of thirty (30) days or more.
F. Defective or Obsolete Condition. Any other vehicle which, because
of its defective or obsolete condition, in any other way constitutes a threat to
the public health and safety.
Mere licensing of such vehicle shall not constitute a defense to the finding that the
vehicle is a junk vehicle.
3. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon, or by which a person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway or street, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and includes without
limitation a motor vehicle, automobile, truck, motorcycle, tractor, buggy, wagon, farm
machinery, or any combination thereof.
CHAPTER 51 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 282 -
51.02 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person to
store, accumulate, or allow to remain on any private property within the corporate limits of the
City any junk or junk vehicle.
51.03 JUNK AND JUNK VEHICLES A NUISANCE. It is hereby declared that any junk
or junk vehicle located upon private property, unless excepted by Section 51.04, constitutes a
threat to the health and safety of the citizens and is a nuisance within the meaning of Section
657.1 of the Code of Iowa. If any junk or junk vehicle is kept upon private property in
violation hereof, the owner of or person occupying the property upon which it is located shall
be prima facie liable for said violation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.04 EXCEPTIONS. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to any junk or a junk
vehicle stored within:
1. A garage or other enclosed structure; or
2. The premises of a business enterprise operated in a district properly zoned
therefor, when necessary to the operation of said business enterprise, as authorized
under the Zoning Ordinance of the City; or
3. An appropriate storage space or depository maintained in a lawful place and
lawful manner by the City for vehicles impounded by the City.
51.05 NOTICE TO ABATE. Upon discovery of any junk or junk vehicle located upon
private property in violation of Section 51.03, the City shall within five (5) days initiate
abatement procedures as outlined in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a])
51.06 SALE OF JUNK OR JUNK VEHICLES. If the City, in its sole discretion,
determines that any junk or junk vehicles which it has removed from property through
abatement action can be sold to help defray the costs of the abatement, then the City may sell
such property at public auction or at private sale and apply the proceeds realized from sale to
the cost of abatement and the cost of sale. Any excess revenue, over these costs, shall be paid
to the owner of the junk or junk vehicle if such ownership can be ascertained. If junk or junk
vehicles are sold at private sale, then written notice by certified mail or personal service shall
be provided to the owner at least five (5) days prior to the date of sale, advising the owner of
the time, place and terms of the sale. If, prior to the time of sale as set forth in the notice, the
owner makes payment to the Clerk of the costs of abatement and sale or of the proposed sale
price of the junk or junk vehicles, if less than the total costs incurred for abatement and sale,
then the owner may thereby redeem the items to be sold and retrieve the same from the City at
the owner’s expense.
51.07 COLLECTION OF COSTS. Costs incurred by the City to abate the nuisance and
which are not recovered from the sale of the junk or junk vehicles removed from the property
pursuant to Section 51.06 of this chapter shall be collected in the same manner as provided in
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
[The next page is 291]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 291 -
CHAPTER 52
PROCEDURES FOR ABATING AND REMEDYING
UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES THAT REPEATEDLY OCCUR
AT A PROPERTY
52.01 Purpose 52.04 Procedure
52.02 Definitions 52.05 Violation and Penalties
52.03 Chronic Nuisance Properties
52.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a procedure for abating and
remedying unlawful activities that repeatedly occur or exist at a property, which activities
create a chronic nuisance and negatively impact the quality of life and safety in neighborhoods
where such activities occur.
52.02 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
1. “Abate” or “Abatement” means:
A. As applied to Occupants: The removal or correction of the condition
or circumstances causing the property to be deemed a chronic nuisance
property or the complete cessation of the action causing the same.
B. As applied to non-occupant Owners: The initiation of all such actions
or steps as may be reasonable and legal under the circumstances (and which
would ordinarily lead to an abatement of the problem) together with a good
faith continuation of those efforts.
2. “Chronic Nuisance Property” means any Property on which three or more
Nuisance Activities have occurred within a twelve (12) month period which result in
Enforcement Action.
3. “Enforcement Action” means an arrest, the issuance of a citation, or issuance
of a verbal or written warning associated with a nuisance activity as defined herein.
4. “Nuisance Activity” means any of the following behaviors, activities, or
conduct:
A. Public disturbances, assaults, brawls, fights, indecent exposure, or
public urination;
B. Harassment under Iowa Code §708.7 or Section 40.02 of this Code;
C. Disorderly Conduct under Iowa Code §723.4 or Section 40.03 of this
Code;
D. Unlawful sale, manufacture, or possession of a controlled substance,
or related offenses, under Chapter 124 of the Iowa Code;
E. Unlawful intoxication, social host, and/or underage consumption
under Chapter 45 of this Code;
F. Discharge of a firearm under Section 41.11 of this Code;
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 292 -
G. Public property offenses in violation of Section 42.07 of this Code;
H. Unlawful use of fireworks in violation of Section 41.14 of this Code;
I. Violations of Chapter 55 of this Code relating to animal protection
and control;
J. Violations of Sections 50.02 and 50.03 of the Code relating to
nuisance conditions.
“Nuisance Activity” does not include activities, behaviors, or conduct that result in a
call for assistance made by the Owner or Occupant requesting police services nor calls
for assistance relating to any of the following:
K. Domestic abuse under Chapter 236 of the Iowa Code
L. Sexual Assault under Chapter 209 of the Iowa Code
M. Stalking under Iowa Code §708.11
5. “Occupant” means any person, persons, entity, or entities, individually or
collectively, that resides at, or that have possession and/or control of, a Property.
6. “Owner” means any person, persons, entity or entities that have legal title,
individually or collectively, to a Property.
7. “Property” means any building, lot, parcel, dwelling, rental unit, real estate,
land, or portion thereof, including but not limited to property used as residential or
commercial property. For property consisting of more than dwelling one unit, property
is limited to the unit or the portion of the property on which any nuisance activity has
occurred or is occurring, but includes areas of the property used in common by all
units of property including without limitation other structures erected on the property
and areas used for parking, loading and landscaping.
Property does not include any real property owned by a governmental entity.
52.03 CHRONIC NUISANCES PROPERTIES. The Owner of a Property deemed to be a
Chronic Nuisance Property who fails or refuses to abate the Nuisance Activities as set forth
herein is in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to its remedies.
52.04 PROCEDURE.
1. When the Chief of Police receives two or more police reports documenting
the occurrence of Nuisance Activities on a Property which result in Enforcement
Action, the Chief of Police shall independently review such reports to determine
whether they describe the activities, behaviors or conduct enumerated under Charles
City Code 52.02(4)(a)-(j). Upon such a finding, the Chief of Police or his or her
designee (hereafter collectively referred to as the Chief of Police) shall notify the
Owner in writing that the Property is in danger of becoming a Chronic Nuisance
Property under this chapter (“the initial notice”). The initial notice shall contain the
following information:
A. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of
the Property; and, if the Property has multiple units, the particular dwelling
unit(s), commercial unit(s), or common area which is the subject of the notice;
B. A statement that the City of Charles City Police Department has
documented the occurrence of two or more Nuisance Activities which have
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 293 -
resulted in Enforcement Action on the Property, with a concise description of
the Nuisance Activities that exist, or that have occurred. The Chief of Police
shall offer the Owner an opportunity to propose a course of action that the
Chief of Police agrees will abate the Nuisance Activities giving rise to the
initial notice.
C. Demand that the Person in Charge respond to the Chief of Police the
within ten (10) days to discuss the Nuisance Activities.
2. When the Chief of Police receives a police report documenting the occurrence
of additional Nuisance Activity on a Property which results in Enforcement Action
after providing the Owner with the initial notice, the Chief of Police notify the Owner
in writing that the Property has been determined to be a Chronic Nuisance Property
(“the final notice”). The final notice shall contain the following information:
A. The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of
the Property; and, if the Property has multiple units, the particular dwelling
unit(s), commercial unit(s), or common area(s) which is the subject of the
notice;
B. A concise statement of the Nuisance Activities which have resulted in
Enforcement Action that have occurred at the Property within the last twelve
months;
C. A demand that the Owner respond within ten (10) days to the Chief of
Police and propose a course of action that the Chief of Police agrees will
result in the abatement of the Nuisance Activities giving rise to the violation.
D. A statement that if the Owner fails to respond to the notice, the City
may file a civil citation for a municipal infraction against the Owner
requesting imposition of a civil penalty of not less than $750.00 and/or
requesting authorization for the City to assess the costs of abatement to the
Owner and/or Property in an amount not to exceed $50.00 for each
subsequent Nuisance Activity on the Property which results in Enforcement
Action.
E. The name, address, telephone number of a representative of the
Charles City Police Department to contact concerning the notice.
3. Service of the final notice shall be made and addressed to the Owner at the
address shown on the tax rolls of Floyd County and shall also be made on the
Occupant at the address of the Property, if the Occupant is different than the Owner,
and shall be made either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
4. If the Owner fails to respond to the final notice as required by Section
52.04(2)(c), the Chief of Police may direct the City Attorney to file a civil citation for
a municipal infraction against the Owner requesting imposition of a civil penalty of
not less than $750.00 and/or requesting authorization for the City to assess the costs of
abatement to the Owner and/or Property in an amount not to exceed $50.00 for each
subsequent Nuisance Activity on the Property which results in Enforcement Action.
Prior to taking such action, the final notice shall also be posted at the Property.
5. If the Owner responds to the final notice as required by Section 52.04(2)(c),
the Chief of Police shall postpone referring the matter to the City Attorney. If the
agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the Nuisance Activities
within forty-five (45) days; or, if no agreement concerning abatement is reached
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 294 -
within forty-five (45) days, the Chief of Police may direct the City Attorney to file a
civil citation for municipal infraction against the Owner requesting imposition of a
civil penalty of not less than $750.00 and/or requesting authorization for the City to
assess the costs of abatement to the Owner and/or Property in an amount not to exceed
$50.00 for each subsequent Nuisance Activity on the Property which results in
Enforcement Action.
6. There shall be a conclusive presumption that the Owner has taken appropriate
corrective action to abate the Nuisance Activities if there is no additional Enforcement
Action associated with the Property from the end of the forty-five day period until the
earlier of (1) the end of the calendar year or (2) the conclusion of ninety days.
52.05 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES. The Owner of a Chronic Nuisance Property is in
violation of this chapter and the Charles City Code of Ordinances and shall be subject to a
civil citation for a municipal infraction under Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances. Such
penalty is not exclusive and does not preclude the City from seeking any other remedies
available under state law or local ordinance, including, but not limited to, any order for
abatement, injunctive relief, and/or any order assessing the costs of abatement to the Owner
and against the Property in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of the Charles City Code of
Ordinances and Chapter 364.22 of the Iowa Code.
(Ch. 52 – Ord. 1111 – Nov. 17 Supp.)
[The next page is 301]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 301 -
CHAPTER 55
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
55.01 Definitions 55.09 Vicious Dogs
55.02 Animal Neglect 55.10 Rabies Prevention
55.03 Livestock 55.11 Dog Registration Required
55.04 Abandonment of Cats and Dogs 55.12 Impounding Animals
55.05 At Large Prohibited 55.13 Number of Animals Limited
55.06 Animals at Public Events 55.14 Pet Awards Prohibited
55.07 Damage or Interference 55.15 Disposition of Impounded Dogs Adjudicated to be
55.08 Annoyance or Disturbance Vicious
55.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1. “Animal” means a nonhuman vertebrate.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.1)
2. “At large” means off the premises of the owner and:
A. Not within an enclosed structure or area such as a house, garage,
veterinary office, fenced yard, etc. that controls the animal’s movement and
contact with other persons or animals, or
B. Not restrained by a firmly anchored chain or rope that prevents the
animal from having contact with persons on a public or private walkway or in
a public area, or
C. Not restrained by a leash of six feet or less in length controlled by a
competent person, or
D. Not within an area designated by the City (either temporarily or
permanently) as an animal or dog park, or
E. Not a certified police dog acting on behalf of a public safety agency.
3. “Livestock” means an animal belonging to the bovine, caprine, equine, ovine
or porcine species, ostriches, rheas and emus; farm deer as defined in Section 170.1 of
the Code of Iowa; or poultry.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717.1)
4. “Owner” means any person owning, keeping, sheltering or harboring an
animal.
55.02 ANIMAL NEGLECT. It is unlawful for a person who impounds or confines, in any
place, an animal, excluding livestock, to fail to supply the animal during confinement with a
sufficient quantity of food or water, or to fail to provide a confined dog or cat with adequate
shelter, or to torture, deprive of necessary sustenance, mutilate, beat, or kill such animal by
any means which causes unjustified pain, distress or suffering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.3)
55.03 LIVESTOCK. It is unlawful for a person to keep livestock within the City except by
written consent of the Council or except in compliance with the City’s zoning regulations.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 302 -
55.04 ABANDONMENT OF CATS AND DOGS. A person who has ownership or
custody of a cat or dog shall not abandon the cat or dog, except the person may deliver the cat
or dog to another person who will accept ownership and custody or the person may deliver the
cat or dog to an animal shelter or pound.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 717B.8)
55.05 AT LARGE PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person to allow any animal to
run at large within the corporate limits of the City. (See definition for “at large.”)
55.06 ANIMALS AT PUBLIC EVENTS. The City Council on its own motion or upon the
petition of any citizen may prohibit the presence of animals at an event held on public
property. If the Council acts to prohibit the presence of animals from an event held on public
property it shall post a notice of such prohibition at the location of the event at least four (4)
hours prior to the time that the event begins. This prohibition shall not act to prohibit the
presence of a certified service dog in the custody and control of its owner.
55.07 DAMAGE OR INTERFERENCE. It is unlawful for any owner, keeper or walker
of any dog or cat or other animal to permit said dog or cat or other animal to discharge said
animal’s feces upon any public or private property, other than the property of the owner of the
dog or cat or other animal, within the City if such owner, keeper or walker does not
immediately thereafter remove and clean up said animal’s feces from the public or private
property.
55.08 ANNOYANCE OR DISTURBANCE. It is unlawful for the owner of a dog to allow
or permit such dog to cause serious annoyance or disturbance to any person or persons by
frequent and habitual howling, yelping, barking, or otherwise; or, by running after or chasing
persons, bicycles, automobiles or other vehicles.
55.09 VICIOUS DOGS. It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious dog
within the City. A dog is deemed to be vicious when:
1. It has attacked, or bitten, or otherwise injured, any person without
provocation; or
2. It has attacked or bitten another dog or cat on the property where the other
dog or cat resides; or
3. The dog is at large and attacks and injures another dog or cat that is
restrained; or
4. The propensity to attack or bite persons exists and is known or reasonably
should be known to the owner.
55.10 RABIES PREVENTION.
1. Vaccination. Every owner of a dog shall obtain a rabies vaccination for such
animal. It is unlawful for any person to own or have a dog in said person’s
possession, six months of age or over, which has not been vaccinated against rabies.
Dogs kept in kennels and not allowed to run at large are not subject to these
vaccination requirements.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.33)
2. Duty to Report. It is the duty of the owner of any dog, cat or other animal
which has bitten or attacked a person or any person having knowledge of such bite or
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 303 -
attack to report this act to a local health or law enforcement official. It is the duty of
physicians and veterinarians to report to the local board of health the existence of any
animal known or suspected to be suffering from rabies.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.38)
3. Confinement. If a local board of health or local law enforcement officer
receives information that an animal has bitten a person or that a dog or animal is
suspected of having rabies, the board or officer shall order the owner to confine such
animal in the manner it directs. If the owner fails to confine such animal in the
manner directed, the animal shall be apprehended and impounded, and after ten (10)
days the animal may be humanely destroyed. If such animal is returned to the owner,
the owner shall pay the cost of impoundment. This section does not apply if a police
service dog or a horse used by a law enforcement agency and acting in the
performance of its duties has bitten a person.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 351.39)
55.11 DOG REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
1. Registration of Dogs. Owners of dogs over six months of age shall register
their dogs with the City Clerk or other person or entity designated by the City on or
before March 1 beginning in the year 2016. An owner may register a dog for a period
of one, two, or three years, at the discretion of the owner. Proof of vaccination for
rabies in the form of a certificate of vaccination by a licensed veterinarian must be
presented at the time of registration. The registration fees, with late registration
penalty, will be established by resolution of the City Council. For those dogs which
do not have an implanted microchip that provides identification of ownership, a
numbered tag will be issued by the City or its designated representative, which shall
be securely fastened to the collar worn by the dog, together with a rabies tag supplied
by the City or its designated representative. The registration must be renewed by
application to the City Clerk or the City’s designee before the date of expiration, and
with each renewal proof of current vaccination for rabies must be presented together
with current information of ownership and owner’s place of residence. If the dog has
an implanted microchip, then in addition to maintaining its registration with the City,
the owner must maintain registration with the microchip registration company.
(Ord. 1089 – May 16 Supp.)
2. Transfer of Ownership. If ownership of a dog is transferred to another person,
then the City Clerk must be notified within 30 days of transfer so that the transfer of
ownership can be noted in the City’s records. If the dog bears an implanted microchip
then the transferring owner is responsible for ensuring that the microchip registration
company is also notified of the change of ownership within 30 days of the transfer.
Thereafter, the new owner will be responsible for renewal of the dog’s registration
with the City.
3. Exemptions. This section shall not apply to kennel animals that are kept and
raised solely for the bona fide purpose of sale in state or federally licensed kennels.
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 304 -
55.12 IMPOUNDING ANIMALS.
1. Impoundment. Any animal may be impounded when any of the following
apply:
A. The animal is found at large;
B. The animal is required to be registered and does not have a current
registration;
C. The owner of a dog has been issued a citation for keeping or
harboring a vicious dog within the City and the Chief of Police has reasonably
concluded that allowing the dog to remain in the possession of the owner
pending trial on this citation presents an unreasonable risk to the safety of
other persons or domestic animals. Factors that will be considered by the
Police Chief in making this determination include: a. the history of the
animal’s aggression, b. the nature of the incident that caused the citation to
issue, c. the restraints that are available to keep the dog from having contact
with other persons or animals, and d. the ability and willingness of the owners
to effectively confine or restrain the animal pending trial on the citation.
D. The dog is causing serious annoyance or disturbance to other person
or persons by frequent and habitual howling, barking, or yelping and the
owner cannot be contacted to resolve the nuisance condition.
2. Reclamation of Animal from Impoundment.
A. Notice. Within two business days after impounding an animal, notice
shall be given to its owner (if the owner’s name and current address can be
reasonably determined from a tag or other device that is on or part of the
animal) by ordinary mail, that the owner’s animal may be reclaimed by
payment of the costs associated with care and treatment of the animal as set
forth herein. Notice shall be deemed to be received by the owner three
business days after the date that the notice is deposited for delivery in the U.S.
Mail. If the owner does not reclaim its animal within seven days after
receiving notice, then the owner shall forfeit all ownership rights to the animal
and it may thereupon be placed for adoption with another owner or
euthanized, at the discretion of the City or its designated representative.
B. Payment of Costs. All impounded dogs will receive a microchip and,
if proof of vaccination is not received within the seven day period for
reclamation, then the dog shall also receive a rabies vaccination. The owner
must pay for the cost of implant and vaccination and for the daily cost of care
before the animal is released to the owner. The foregoing costs shall be
prescribed by resolution of the City Council.
C. Animals Not Eligible for Reclamation. The following animals may
not be reclaimed:
(1) A dog that has been adjudicated to be a vicious dog;
(2) A dog whose owner has a pending citation for harboring or
keeping a vicious dog within the City and which is detained pursuant
to Section 55.12(1)(C). A dog that is retained under this subparagraph
but whose owner is found not guilty on the citation for owning and
harboring a vicious dog may then reclaim the dog upon payment of
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 305 -
the vaccination and microchipping expenses, but will not be charged
for the cost of impoundment;
(3) Dogs which have not been reclaimed within the 7 day notice
period described in Paragraph 1 of this subsection, except that dogs
which have not displayed aggressive conduct and which are eligible
for adoption but have not been placed for adoption within the 7 day
period, may be released to the owner at the discretion of the City or
its designated representative upon payment by the owner of all costs
associated with the care and impoundment of the dog.
55.13 NUMBER OF ANIMALS LIMITED. The total combined number of cats and dogs
over the age of four (4) months which may be kept in any one household shall be limited to
five (5). This section shall not apply to a person who operates a commercial kennel in an area
properly zoned therefor.
55.14 PET AWARDS PROHIBITED.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 717E)
1. Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to award a pet or advertise that a pet
may be awarded as any of the following:
A. A prize for participating in a game.
B. A prize for participating in a fair.
C. An inducement or condition for visiting a place of business or
attending an event sponsored by a business.
D. An inducement or condition for executing a contract that includes
provisions unrelated to the ownership, care or disposition of the pet.
2. Exceptions. This section does not apply to any of the following:
A. A pet shop licensed pursuant to Section 162.5 of the Code of Iowa if
the award of a pet is provided in connection with the sale of a pet on the
premises of the pet shop.
B. Youth programs associated with 4-H Clubs; Future Farmers of
America; the Izaak Walton League of America; or organizations associated
with outdoor recreation, hunting or fishing, including but not limited to the
Iowa Sportsmen’s Federation.
(Ch. 55 – Ord. 1087 – Jan. 16 Supp.)
55.15 DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS ADJUDICATED TO BE VICIOUS.
1. Disposition of Impounded Dog.
A. After a dog which is impounded pursuant to Section 55.12 is
adjudicated to be a vicious dog under Section 55.09 by a Court of competent
jurisdiction, the Charles City Chief of Police, or his or her designated
representative (hereafter collectively referred to in this Section 55.15 as the
Chief of Police), shall review the circumstances surrounding the adjudication
and shall do one of the following:
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 306 -
(1) Cause the animal to be humanely destroyed if, in the opinion of
the Chief of Police the release of such animal would create an
unreasonable risk of harm to the public safety; or
(2) Release such animal to the control of its owner pursuant to a
written agreement to be signed by the owner, upon such terms and
conditions as the Charles City Chief of Police reasonably necessary to
ensure the public safety. Such terms and conditions shall include the
relocation of the dog outside of the City of Charles City in accordance
with Section 55.09.
B. In making its determination regarding the disposition of the animal,
the Chief of Police shall consider all of the relevant circumstances
surrounding the impoundment and adjudication, including but not limited to
the factors set forth in Section 55.12(1)(C).
2. Notice of Destruction of Dog; Appeal
A. Notification of Owner; Appeal Procedure. If the Chief of Police
determines that a dog which has been impounded is to be destroyed pursuant
to the provisions of Section 55.15(1)(A)(1), the Chief of Police shall provide
written notice to its owner, by personal service or by both ordinary and
certified mail and posting the notice at the residence of the owner, of the
intent to humanely destroy the dog. The notice shall inform such owner of
his/her right to appeal as provided by this section. Notice shall be deemed to
be received by the owner three business days after the date the notice is
deposited for delivery in the U.S. mail.
(1) The owner of such dog may, within five (5) days of receiving
written notice, appeal the determination of the Chief of Police to the
City Administrator by filing a written notice of such appeal with the
City Clerk.
(2) After receipt of a notice of appeal under this section, the City
Clerk shall calendar the appeal for hearing by the City Administrator,
and shall notify the owner, the facility at which the dog is impounded,
and the Chief of Police of such action.
(3) The dog shall not thereafter be destroyed until the City
Administrator shall have first heard the appeal and rendered his or her
decision.
(4) Any owner of an impounded dog which has been adjudicated to
be vicious who fails to file an appeal within five (5) days after
receiving notice as provided in this section shall be deemed to have
waived any right in and claim to such animal and any right to claim
any damages or other relief by reason of any action by the City of
Charles City pursuant to this section.
B. Action by City Administrator. After hearing such testimony and
evidence as it may deem proper, the City Administrator may:
(1) Uphold the decision of the Chief of Police and order the animal
humanely destroyed.
(2) Modify or reverse, either in whole or in part, the decision of the
Chief of Police, and order the return of the animal to its owner, and
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 307 -
impose such conditions upon such return as may be reasonably
necessary to ensure the public safety.
3. Enforcement of Decision. After the decision of the City Administrator has
been rendered as provided in this section, the Chief of Police shall cause such action
to be taken as is necessary to carry out such decision.
4. Costs. The owner of the dog shall be responsible for all costs set forth in
Section 55.12(2)(B), including but not limited to the daily cost of care for the
impounded animal and all costs associated with the humane destruction of the animal.
(Section 55.15 – Ord. 1108 – Oct. 17 Supp.)
CHAPTER 55 ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 308 -
[The next page is 329]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 329 -
CHAPTER 60
ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC CODE
60.01 Title 60.05 Traffic Accidents: Reports
60.02 Definitions 60.06 Peace Officer’s Authority
60.03 Administration and Enforcement 60.07 Obedience to Peace Officers
60.04 Power to Direct Traffic 60.08 Parades Regulated
60.01 TITLE. Chapters 60 through 70 of this Code of Ordinances may be known and cited
as the “Charles City Traffic Code.”
60.02 DEFINITIONS. Where words and phrases used in the Traffic Code are defined by
State law, such definitions apply to their use in said Traffic Code and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that need further definition or are reiterated, and other
words and phrases used herein, have the following meanings:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
1. “Business District” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway
when fifty percent (50%) or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of three
hundred (300) feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business.
2. “Park” or “parking” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers.
3. “Peace officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or
to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
4. “Residence district” means the territory contiguous to and including a
highway not comprising a business, suburban or school district, where forty percent
(40%) or more of the frontage on such a highway for a distance of three hundred (300)
feet or more is occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
5. “School district” means the territory contiguous to and including a highway
for a distance of two hundred (200) feet in either direction from a school house.
6. “Stand” or “standing” means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or
not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
7. “Stop” means when required, the complete cessation of movement.
8. “Stop” or “stopping” means when prohibited, any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or traffic control
sign or signal.
9. “Suburban district” means all other parts of the City not included in the
business, school or residence districts.
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 330 -
10. “Traffic control device” means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not
inconsistent with this chapter, lawfully placed or erected for the purpose of regulating,
warning, or guiding traffic.
11. “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, street, or alley.
60.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. Provisions of this Traffic Code and
State law relating to motor vehicles and law of the road are enforced by the Police Chief.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13 [4])
60.04 POWER TO DIRECT TRAFFIC. A peace officer, and, in the absence of a peace
officer, any officer of the fire department when at the scene of a fire, is authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of an
emergency, traffic may be directed as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the
traffic laws.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 102.4 & 321.236[2])
60.05 TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: REPORTS. The driver of a vehicle involved in an
accident within the limits of the City shall file a report as and when required by the Iowa
Department of Transportation. A copy of this report shall be filed with the City for the
confidential use of peace officers and shall be subject to the provisions of Section 321.271 of
the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.273)
60.06 PEACE OFFICER’S AUTHORITY. A peace officer is authorized to stop a vehicle
to require exhibition of the driver’s license of the driver, to serve a summons or memorandum
of traffic violation, to inspect the condition of the vehicle, to inspect the vehicle with reference
to size, weight, cargo, log book, bills of lading or other manifest of employment, tires and
safety equipment, or to inspect the registration certificate, the compensation certificate, travel
order, or permit of such vehicle. A peace officer having probable cause to stop a vehicle may
require exhibition of the proof of financial liability coverage card issued for the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.492)
60.07 OBEDIENCE TO PEACE OFFICERS. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of any peace officer invested by law with authority
to direct, control, or regulate traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.229)
60.08 PARADES REGULATED. No person shall conduct or cause any parade on any
street except as provided herein:
1. “Parade” Defined. “Parade” means any march or procession of persons or
vehicles organized for marching or moving on the streets in an organized fashion or
manner or any march or procession of persons or vehicles represented or advertised to
the public as a parade.
2. Permit Required. No parade shall be conducted without first obtaining a
written permit from the Mayor or Police Chief not less than four (4) days prior to the
date of the parade. Such permit shall state the time and date for the parade to be held
and the streets or general route therefor. Such written permit granted to the person
organizing or sponsoring the parade shall be permission for all participants therein to
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 331 -
parade when such participants have been invited by the permittee to participate
therein. No fee shall be required for such permit.
3. Parade Not A Street Obstruction. Any parade for which a permit has been
issued as herein required, and the persons lawfully participating therein, shall not be
deemed an obstruction of the streets notwithstanding the provisions of any other
ordinance to the contrary.
4. Control By Police and Firefighters. Persons participating in any parade shall
at all times be subject to the lawful orders and directions in the performance of their
duties of law enforcement personnel and members of the Fire Department.
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 332 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 333 -
CHAPTER 61
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
61.01 Traffic Control Devices 61.04 Crosswalks
61.02 Installation 61.05 Traffic Lanes
61.03 Compliance 61.06 Standards
61.01 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. The Council shall establish by resolution, and
cause to be placed and maintained, appropriate traffic control devices to indicate parking
spaces and zones, no parking zones, limited parking zones, reserved parking zones, loading
zones, safety zones, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic zones other than the
above, truck routes, school stops, stop intersections, yield right-of-way intersections, one-way
streets, streets to be laned for traffic and play streets. The Council shall also have the power to
designate and indicate by resolution intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by traffic
signals; intersections at which left turns, right turns and U-turns shall be prohibited; and
intersections at which markers, buttons or other indications shall be placed to indicate the
course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning at such intersections.
61.02 INSTALLATION. The Council shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic
control devices to carry out the provisions of the Traffic Code of the City under State law or to
regulate, guide or warn traffic. The City shall keep a record of all such traffic control devices.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.254 & 321.255)
61.03 COMPLIANCE. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless at the
time otherwise directed by a peace officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle under Section 321.231 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.256)
61.04 CROSSWALKS. The Police Chief is hereby authorized to designate and maintain
crosswalks by appropriate traffic control devices at intersections where, due to traffic
conditions, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the street or road-way, and at
such other places as traffic conditions require.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.05 TRAFFIC LANES. Where traffic lanes have been marked on street pavements at
such places as traffic conditions require, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or
refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully
passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4] & 321.255)
61.06 STANDARDS. Traffic control devices shall comply with standards established by
The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 334 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 335 -
CHAPTER 62
GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
62.01 Violation of Regulations 62.07 Offensive Noise
62.02 Play Streets Designated 62.08 Vehicles and Horses on Pedestrian Bridges
62.03 Vehicles on Sidewalks and Bicycle Paths
62.04 Clinging to Vehicle 62.09 Vehicles On Cedar River
62.05 Quiet Zones 62.10 Traveling Off Roadway
62.06 Obstructing View at Intersections 62.11 Traveling On Airport Runways
62.01 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS. Any person who willfully fails or refuses to
comply with any lawful order of a peace officer or direction of a fire department officer during
a fire, or who fails to abide by the applicable provisions of the following Iowa statutory laws
relating to motor vehicles and the statutory law of the road is in violation of this section.
These sections of the Code of Iowa are adopted by reference and are as follows:
1. Section 321.17 – Misdemeanor to violate registration provisions.
2. Section 321.32 – Registration card, carried and exhibited; exception.
3. Section 321.37 – Display of plates.
4. Section 321.38 – Plates, method of attaching, imitations prohibited.
5. Section 321.57 – Operation under special plates.
6. Section 321.67 – Certificate of title must be executed.
7. Section 321.78 – Injuring or tampering with vehicle.
8. Section 321.79 – Intent to injure.
9. Section 321.91 – Penalty for abandonment.
10. Section 321.98 – Operation without registration.
11. Section 321.99 – Fraudulent use of registration.
12. Section 321.104 – Penal offenses against title law.
13. Section 321.115 – Antique vehicles; model year plates permitted.
14. Section 321.174 – Operators licensed.
15. Section 321.174A – Operation of motor vehicles with expired license.
16. Section 321.180 – Instruction permits.
17. Section 321.180B – Graduated driver’s licenses for persons aged fourteen
through seventeen.
18. Section 321.193 – Restricted licenses.
19. Section 321.194 – Special minor’s licenses.
20. Section 321.208A – Operation in violation of out-of-service order.
21. Section 321.216 – Unlawful use of license and nonoperator’s identification
card.
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 336 -
22. Section 321.216B – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification
card by underage person to obtain alcohol.
23. Section 321.216C – Use of driver’s license or nonoperator’s identification
card by underage person to obtain cigarettes or tobacco products.
24. Section 321.218 – Operating without valid driver’s license or when
disqualified.
25. Section 321.219 – Permitting unauthorized minor to drive.
26. Section 321.220 – Permitting unauthorized person to drive.
27. Section 321.221 – Employing unlicensed chauffeur.
28. Section 321.222 – Renting motor vehicle to another.
29. Section 321.223 – License inspected.
30. Section 321.224 – Record kept.
31. Section 321.232 – Speed detection jamming devices; penalty.
32. Section 321.234A – All-terrain vehicles.
33. Section 321.235A – Electric personal assistive mobility devices.
34. Section 321.247 – Golf cart operation on City streets.
35. Section 321.257 – Official traffic control signal.
36. Section 321.259 – Unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
37. Section 321.260 – Interference with devices, signs or signals; unlawful
possession.
38. Section 321.262 – Damage to vehicle.
39. Section 321.263 – Information and aid.
40. Section 321.264 – Striking unattended vehicle.
41. Section 321.265 – Striking fixtures upon a highway.
42. Section 321.266 – Reporting accidents.
43. Section 321.275 – Operation of motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
44. Section 321.276 – Use of electronic communication device while driving;
text-messaging.
45. Section 321.277 – Reckless driving.
46. Section 321.277A – Careless driving.
47. Section 321.278 – Drag racing prohibited.
48. Section 321.281 – Actions against bicyclists.
49. Section 321.284 – Open container; drivers.
50. Section 321.284A – Open container; passengers.
51. Section 321.288 – Control of vehicle; reduced speed.
52. Section 321.295 – Limitation on bridge or elevated structures.
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 337 -
53. Section 321.297 – Driving on right-hand side of roadways; exceptions.
54. Section 321.298 – Meeting and turning to right.
55. Section 321.299 – Overtaking a vehicle.
56. Section 321.302 – Overtaking and passing.
57. Section 321.303 – Limitations on overtaking on the left.
58. Section 321.304 – Prohibited passing.
59. Section 321.306 – Roadways laned for traffic.
60. Section 321.307 – Following too closely.
61. Section 321.308 – Motor trucks and towed vehicles; distance requirements.
62. Section 321.309 – Towing; convoys; drawbars.
63. Section 321.310 – Towing four-wheel trailers.
64. Section 321.312 – Turning on curve or crest of grade.
65. Section 321.313 – Starting parked vehicle.
66. Section 321.314 – When signal required.
67. Section 321.315 – Signal continuous.
68. Section 321.316 – Stopping.
69. Section 321.317 – Signals by hand and arm or signal device.
70. Section 321.318 – Method of giving hand and arm signals.
71. Section 321.319 – Entering intersections from different highways.
72. Section 321.320 – Left turns; yielding.
73. Section 321.321 – Entering through highways.
74. Section 321.322 – Vehicles entering stop or yield intersection.
75. Section 321.323 – Moving vehicle backward on highway.
76. Section 321.323A – Approaching certain stationary vehicles.
77. Section 321.324 – Operation on approach of emergency vehicles.
78. Section 321.324A – Funeral processions.
79. Section 321.329 – Duty of driver; pedestrians crossing or working on
highways.
80. Section 321.330 – Use of crosswalks.
81. Section 321.332 – White canes restricted to blind persons.
82. Section 321.333 – Duty of drivers approaching blind persons.
83. Section 321.340 – Driving through safety zone.
84. Section 321.341 – Obedience to signal indicating approach of railroad train or
railroad track equipment.
85. Section 321.342 – Stop at certain railroad crossings; posting warning.
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 338 -
86. Section 321.343 – Certain vehicles must stop.
87. Section 321.344 – Heavy equipment at crossing.
88. Section 321.344B – Immediate safety threat; penalty.
89. Section 321.354 – Stopping on traveled way.
90. Section 321.359 – Moving other vehicle.
91. Section 321.362 – Unattended motor vehicle.
92. Section 321.363 – Obstruction to driver’s view.
93. Section 321.364 – Vehicles shipping food; preventing contamination by
hazardous material.
94. Section 321.365 – Coasting prohibited.
95. Section 321.367 – Following fire apparatus.
96. Section 321.368 – Crossing fire hose.
97. Section 321.369 – Putting debris on highway.
98. Section 321.370 – Removing injurious material.
99. Section 321.371 – Clearing up wrecks.
100. Section 321.372 – School buses.
101. Section 321.381 – Movement of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles.
102. Section 321.381A – Operation of low-speed vehicles.
103. Section 321.382 – Upgrade pulls; minimum speed.
104. Section 321.383 – Exceptions; slow vehicles identified.
105. Section 321.384 – When lighted lamps required.
106. Section 321.385 – Head lamps on motor vehicles.
107. Section 321.386 – Head lamps on motorcycles and motorized bicycles.
108. Section 321.387 – Rear lamps.
109. Section 321.388 – Illuminating plates.
110. Section 321.389 – Reflector requirement.
111. Section 321.390 – Reflector requirements.
112. Section 321.392 – Clearance and identification lights.
113. Section 321.393 – Color and mounting.
114. Section 321.394 – Lamp or flag on projecting load.
115. Section 321.395 – Lamps on parked vehicles.
116. Section 321.398 – Lamps on other vehicles and equipment.
117. Section 321.402 – Spot lamps.
118. Section 321.403 – Auxiliary driving lamps.
119. Section 321.404 – Signal lamps and signal devices.
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 339 -
120. Section 321.404A – Light-restricting devices prohibited.
121. Section 321.405 – Self-illumination.
122. Section 321.408 – Back-up lamps.
123. Section 321.409 – Mandatory lighting equipment.
124. Section 321.415 – Required usage of lighting devices.
125. Section 321.417 – Single-beam road-lighting equipment.
126. Section 321.418 – Alternate road-lighting equipment.
127. Section 321.419 – Number of driving lamps required or permitted.
128. Section 321.420 – Number of lamps lighted.
129. Section 321.421 – Special restrictions on lamps.
130. Section 321.422 – Red light in front.
131. Section 321.423 – Flashing lights.
132. Section 321.430 – Brake, hitch, and control requirements.
133. Section 321.431 – Performance ability.
134. Section 321.432 – Horns and warning devices.
135. Section 321.433 – Sirens, whistles, and bells prohibited.
136. Section 321.434 – Bicycle sirens or whistles.
137. Section 321.436 – Mufflers, prevention of noise.
138. Section 321.437 – Mirrors.
139. Section 321.438 – Windshields and windows.
140. Section 321.439 – Windshield wipers.
141. Section 321.440 – Restrictions as to tire equipment.
142. Section 321.441 – Metal tires prohibited.
143. Section 321.442 – Projections on wheels.
144. Section 321.444 – Safety glass.
145. Section 321.445 – Safety belts and safety harnesses; use required.
146. Section 321.446 – Child restraint devices.
147. Section 321.449 – Motor carrier safety regulations.
148. Section 321.449A – Rail crew transport drivers.
149. Section 321.450 – Hazardous materials transportation.
150. Section 321.454 – Width of vehicles.
151. Section 321.455 – Projecting loads on passenger vehicles.
152. Section 321.456 – Height of vehicles; permits.
153. Section 321.457 – Maximum length.
154. Section 321.458 – Loading beyond front.
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 340 -
155. Section 321.460 – Spilling loads on highways.
156. Section 321.461 – Trailers and towed vehicles.
157. Section 321.462 – Drawbars and safety chains.
158. Section 321.463 – Maximum gross weight.
159. Section 321.465 – Weighing vehicles and removal of excess.
160. Section 321.466 – Increased loading capacity; reregistration.
62.02 PLAY STREETS DESIGNATED. Whenever authorized signs are erected
indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any
such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences
are within such closed area, and then any said driver shall exercise the greatest care in driving
upon any such street or portion thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.255)
62.03 VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon or
within any sidewalk area except at a driveway. No person shall drive or ride any of the
following described vehicles or devices on all interior sidewalks located in Blocks 65 and 70,
Kelly and Company’s Addition to the City of Charles City, Iowa, commonly known as Cedar
Terrace North: any motorized vehicle, or any vehicle or mechanical device designed or
constructed for the transportation of humans, including automobiles, motorcycles, bicycles,
tricycles, skateboards, roller skates or any vehicle or recreational device wherein mobility for
said vehicle or device is directly or indirectly controlled or aided by wheels, except devices
designed for transportation of persons with disabilities.
62.04 CLINGING TO VEHICLE. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on the streets of
the City unless all passengers of said vehicle are inside the vehicle in the place intended for
their accommodation. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, in-line skates,
sled or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
62.05 QUIET ZONES. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a quiet zone, no
person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
62.06 OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS. It is unlawful to allow any tree,
hedge, billboard or other object to obstruct the view of an intersection by preventing persons
from having a clear view of traffic approaching the intersection from cross streets. Any such
obstruction shall be deemed a nuisance and in addition to the standard penalty may be abated
in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.07 OFFENSIVE NOISE. It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle
upon the streets and public ways of the City in such a manner as to create loud and offensive
noises and sounds or to create annoying smoke by the use of inadequate, defective or altered
mufflers, or to cause tires to screech or squeal upon the surface of streets and public ways of
the City. It is unlawful for a person to play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or
operated, any radio, tape recorder, cassette, CD, DVD or other equipment for producing,
reproducing or amplifying sound within or on a motor vehicle if the sound generated is
audible at a distance of more than fifty (50) feet from the vehicle. EXCEPTION: The Police
Chief or City Council may grant a temporary variance to this section to facilitate special
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 341 -
events, subject to terms and conditions as may be established, but any violation of any of the
terms and conditions of the variance shall be considered a violation of this section.
62.08 VEHICLES AND HORSES ON PEDESTRIAN BRIDGES AND BICYCLE
PATHS. No person shall drive a motorized vehicle, ride a bicycle or ride a horse on any
pedestrian bridge. No person shall drive a motorized vehicle or ride a horse on any designated
bicycle path other than bicycle paths which are dedicated street right-of-ways.
62.09 VEHICLES ON CEDAR RIVER. No person shall operate any vehicle upon the
Cedar River within the City limits between sunset and sunrise of each day except for
snowmobiles, in accordance with Chapter 75 of this Code of Ordinances, and boats, in
accordance with Chapter 78 of this Code of Ordinances.
62.10 TRAVELING OFF ROADWAY. It is unlawful for any person to operate or park
any motorized vehicle, other than golf carts, on any public park or public property except on
designated traveled roadways.
62.11 TRAVELING ON AIRPORT RUNWAYS. It is unlawful for any person other than
authorized airport personnel to operate any motorized vehicle other than airplanes on any
airport runway.
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 342 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 343 -
CHAPTER 63
SPEED REGULATIONS
63.01 General 63.04 Towing Speed
63.02 State Code Speed Limits 63.05 Special Speed Zones
63.03 Parks, Cemeteries and Parking Lots 63.06 Minimum Speed
63.01 GENERAL. Every driver of a motor vehicle on a street shall drive the same at a
careful and prudent speed not greater than nor less than is reasonable and proper, having due
regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street and of any other conditions then existing,
and no person shall drive a vehicle on any street at a speed greater than will permit said driver
to bring it to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, such driver having the right to
assume, however, that all persons using said street will observe the law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.285)
63.02 STATE CODE SPEED LIMITS. The following speed limits are established in
Section 321.285 of the Code of Iowa and any speed in excess thereof is unlawful unless
specifically designated otherwise in this chapter as a special speed zone.
1. Business District – twenty (20) miles per hour.
2. Residence or School District – twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
3. Suburban District – forty-five (45) miles per hour.
63.03 PARKS, CEMETERIES AND PARKING LOTS. A speed in excess of fifteen (15)
miles per hour in any public park, cemetery or parking lot, unless specifically designated
otherwise in this chapter, is unlawful.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[5])
63.04 TOWING SPEED. No vehicle towing or pulling any other vehicle shall exceed a
speed of forty (40) miles per hour at any time within the City.
63.05 SPECIAL SPEED ZONES. In accordance with requirements of the Iowa
Department of Transportation, or whenever the Council shall determine upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that any speed limit listed in Section 63.02 is greater or
less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other
place or upon any part of the City street system, the Council shall determine and adopt by
ordinance such higher or lower speed limit as it deems reasonable and safe at such location.
The following special speed zones have been established:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.290)
1. Special 15 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. Blunt Parkway from North Main Street to Fourth Avenue.
B. Clark Street, from a point 250 feet east of the intersection of Clark
Street and Brantingham Street to a point 775 feet east of the intersection of
Clark Street and Brantingham Street when light is flashing.
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 344 -
2. Special 25 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles
per hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. Clark Street from North Grand Avenue to Shaw Avenue.
B. Cleveland Street from Thirteenth Avenue to Sixteenth Avenue.
C. North Grand Avenue from Sixteenth Avenue to the north corporate
line.
D. North Jackson Street from North Main Street to Lane Street.
E. Cleveland Avenue from Sixteenth Avenue to the north corporate line.
F. Eleventh Street from 150 feet east of Corporate Drive (east leg) to
South Grand Avenue.
G. East Corporate Drive, from 11th Street to 215th Street, including
Outlot A.
3. Special 30 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour
is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. Iowa Highway No. 14, from Gilbert Street to a point 100 feet west of
the Iowa Terminal Railroad tracks.
B. U.S. Highway No. 18, from Second Street to the east corporate line.
C. U.S. Highway No. 218, from the west corporate line of Beck Street.
4. Special 35 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. U.S. Highway No. 218, from Beck Street to the south corporate line.
B. Clark Street, from Shaw Avenue to the east corporate line.
C. Kellogg Avenue, from a point 500 feet north of the intersection of
Hart Street and Kellogg Avenue north to the north corporate line.
D. 215th Street, from South Grand Avenue to South Main Street.
5. Special 45 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of forty-five (45) miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
A. Thirteenth Avenue, from a point 250 feet east of the centerline of the
intersection of Thirteenth Avenue and Cleveland Avenue, to the east
corporate line.
B. On Iowa 14 from a point 800 feet east of the west line of SE¼,
Section 11, T95N, R16W, of the 5th P.M., to a point 100 feet west of the Iowa
Terminal Railroad.
C. Eleventh Street, from 150 feet west of Ridgeway to 150 feet east of
Corporate Drive (east leg).
D. On Gilbert Street (Highway 18-218) from the north line of the SE¼,
Section 2, Township 95 North, Range 16 West, to the west line of the SW¼,
Section 1, Range 16 West of the 5th P.M.
6. Special 55 MPH Speed Zones. A speed in excess of fifty-five (55) miles per
hour is unlawful on any of the following designated streets or parts thereof.
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 345 -
A. Iowa 14 from the west line of SE¼, Section 11, T95N, R16W, of the
5th P.M. and to a point 800 feet east from the point of beginning.
63.06 MINIMUM SPEED. A person shall not drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed
as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.294)
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 346 -
[The next page is 351]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 351 -
CHAPTER 64
TURNING REGULATIONS
64.01 Turning at Intersections 64.02 U-turns
64.01 TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an
intersection shall do so as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
1. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as
practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
2. Approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the
roadway nearest the centerline thereof and after entering the intersection the left turn
shall be made so as to depart from the intersection to the right of the centerline of the
roadway being entered.
3. Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be
made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and
by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection. A left turn
from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of
the centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection.
The Council may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to
intersections and thereby require and direct, as traffic conditions require, that a different
course from that specified above be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, and when
markers, buttons or signs are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an
intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.311)
64.02 U-TURNS. It is unlawful for a driver to make a U-turn except at an intersection,
however, U-turns are prohibited within the business district and at any intersection where a
sign prohibiting U-turns is posted in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code and at
intersections where there are automatic traffic signals.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[9])
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 352 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 353 -
CHAPTER 65
STOP OR YIELD REQUIRED
65.01 Stop or Yield 65.04 Stop When Traffic Is Obstructed
65.02 School Stops 65.05 Yield to Pedestrians in Crosswalks
65.03 Stop Before Crossing Sidewalk
65.01 STOP OR YIELD. Every driver of a vehicle shall stop or yield as directed by traffic
control devices posted in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
65.02 SCHOOL STOPS. At any school crossing zone, every driver of a vehicle
approaching said zone shall bring the vehicle to a full stop at a point ten (10) feet from the
approach side of the crosswalk marked by an authorized school stop sign and thereafter
proceed in a careful and prudent manner until the vehicle shall have passed through such
school crossing zone.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.249)
65.03 STOP BEFORE CROSSING SIDEWALK. The driver of a vehicle emerging from
a private roadway, alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to
driving onto the sidewalk area and thereafter shall proceed into the sidewalk area only when
able to do so without danger to pedestrian traffic and shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicular traffic on the street into which the vehicle is entering.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.353)
65.04 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC IS OBSTRUCTED. Notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed, no driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the
vehicle.
65.05 YIELD TO PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS. Where traffic control signals are
not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down
or stopping, if need be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked
crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.327)
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 354 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 355 -
CHAPTER 66
LOAD AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
66.01 Temporary Embargo 66.04 Load Limits on Bridges
66.02 Permits for Excess Size and Weight 66.05 Truck Route
66.03 Load Limits Upon Certain Streets
66.01 TEMPORARY EMBARGO. If the Council declares an embargo when it appears by
reason of deterioration, rain, snow or other climatic conditions that certain streets will be
seriously damaged or destroyed by vehicles weighing in excess of an amount specified by the
signs, no such vehicles shall be operated on streets so designated by such signs erected in
accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471 & 472)
66.02 PERMITS FOR EXCESS SIZE AND WEIGHT. The Police Chief may, upon
application and good cause being shown, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the
applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight or load
exceeding the maximum specified by State law or the City over those streets or bridges named
in the permit which are under the jurisdiction of the City and for which the City is responsible
for maintenance.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 321E.1)
66.03 LOAD LIMITS UPON CERTAIN STREETS. When signs are erected giving
notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the
amounts specified on such signs at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets for
which said signs are erected in accordance with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473 & 475)
66.04 LOAD LIMITS ON BRIDGES. Where it has been determined that any City bridge
has a capacity less than the maximum permitted on the streets of the City, or on the street
serving the bridge, the Council may cause to be posted and maintained signs, in accordance
with Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code, on said bridge and at suitable distances ahead of the
entrances thereof to warn drivers of such maximum load limits, and no person shall drive a
vehicle weighing, loaded or unloaded, upon said bridge in excess of such posted limit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.471)
66.05 TRUCK ROUTE. When truck routes have been designated in accordance with
Chapter 61, any motor vehicle exceeding established weight limits shall comply with the
following:
1. Use of Established Routes. Every such motor vehicle having no fixed
terminal within the City or making no scheduled or definite stops within the City for
the purpose of loading or unloading shall travel over or upon those streets within the
City designated as truck routes and none other.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
2. Deliveries Off Truck Route. Any such motor vehicle, when loaded or empty,
having a fixed terminal, making a scheduled or definite stop within the City for the
purpose of loading or unloading shall proceed over or upon the designated routes to
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 356 -
the nearest point of its scheduled or definite stop and shall proceed thereto, load or
unload and return, by the most direct route to its point of departure from said
designated route.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
3. Employer’s Responsibility. The owner, or any other person, employing or
otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle shall not require or knowingly permit the
operation of such vehicle upon a street in any manner contrary to this section.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.473)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 357 -
CHAPTER 67
PEDESTRIANS
67.01 Walking in Street 67.03 Pedestrian Crossing
67.02 Hitchhiking 67.04 Use of Sidewalks
67.01 WALKING IN STREET. Pedestrians shall at all times, when walking on or along a
street, walk on the left side of the street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.326)
67.02 HITCHHIKING. No person shall stand in the traveled portion of a street for the
purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.331)
67.03 PEDESTRIAN CROSSING. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other
than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.328)
67.04 USE OF SIDEWALKS. Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any
pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent street.
CHAPTER 67 PEDESTRIANS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 358 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 359 -
CHAPTER 68
ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
68.01 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC REQUIRED. When appropriate signs are in place, as
provided for in Chapter 61 of this Traffic Code, vehicular traffic, other than permitted cross
traffic, shall move only in the direction indicated on such signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [4])
CHAPTER 68 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 360 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 361 -
CHAPTER 69
PARKING REGULATIONS
69.01 Parking Limited or Controlled 69.07 Parking Prohibited
69.02 Park Adjacent to Curb 69.08 Persons With Disabilities Parking
69.03 Parking on One-way Streets 69.09 Truck Parking Limited
69.04 Angle Parking 69.10 Snow Removal
69.05 Manner of Angle Parking 69.11 Controlled Access Facilities
69.06 Parking for Certain Purposes Illegal
69.01 PARKING LIMITED OR CONTROLLED. Parking of vehicles shall be controlled
or limited where so indicated by designated traffic control devices in accordance with Chapter
61 of this Traffic Code. No person shall stop, park or stand a vehicle in violation of any such
posted parking regulations unless in compliance with the directions of a peace officer.
69.02 PARK ADJACENT TO CURB. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a
roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of
the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the case of angle parking
and vehicles parked on the left-hand side of one-way streets.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.03 PARKING ON ONE-WAY STREETS. No person shall stand or park a vehicle on
the left-hand side of a one-way street other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed
in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within
eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway except as hereinafter provided in the
case of angle parking.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.04 ANGLE PARKING. Angle or diagonal parking is permitted only in the following
locations:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
- NONE -
69.05 MANNER OF ANGLE PARKING. Upon those streets or portions of streets which
have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other
than at an angle to the curb or edge of the roadway or in the center of the roadway as indicated
by such signs and markings. No part of any vehicle, or the load thereon, when parked within a
diagonal parking district, shall extend into the roadway more than a distance of sixteen (16)
feet when measured at right angles to the adjacent curb or edge of roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.361)
69.06 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES ILLEGAL. No person shall park a
vehicle upon public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours, unless otherwise limited
under the provisions of this chapter, or for any of the following principal purposes:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [1])
1. Sale. Displaying such vehicle for sale.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 362 -
2. Repairing. For lubricating, repairing or for commercial washing of such
vehicle except such repairs as are necessitated by an emergency.
3. Advertising. Displaying advertising.
4. Merchandise Sales. Selling merchandise from such vehicle except in a duly
established market place or when so authorized or licensed under this Code of
Ordinances.
69.07 PARKING PROHIBITED. No one shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace
officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
1. Crosswalk. On a crosswalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[5])
2. Center Parkway. On the center parkway or dividing area of any divided
street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
3. Mailboxes. Within twenty (20) feet on either side of a mailbox which is so
placed and so equipped as to permit the depositing of mail from vehicles on the
roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
4. Sidewalks. On or across a sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[1])
5. Driveway. In front of a public or private driveway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[2])
6. Intersection. Within an intersection or within ten (10) feet of an intersection
of any street or alley.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[3])
7. Fire Hydrant. Within five (5) feet of a fire hydrant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[4])
8. Stop Sign or Signal. Within ten (10) feet upon the approach to any flashing
beacon, stop or yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[6])
9. Railroad Crossing. Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing, except when parked parallel with such rail and not exhibiting a red light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[8])
10. Fire Station. Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire
station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance when properly sign posted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[9])
11. Excavations. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[10])
12. Double Parking. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[11])
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 363 -
13. Hazardous Locations. When, because of restricted visibility or when standing
or parked vehicles would constitute a hazard to moving traffic, or when other traffic
conditions require, the Council may cause curbs to be painted with a yellow color and
erect no parking or standing signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[13])
14. Churches, Nursing Homes and Other Buildings. A space of fifty (50) feet is
hereby reserved at the side of the street in front of any theatre, auditorium, hotel
having more than twenty-five (25) sleeping rooms, hospital, nursing home, taxicab
stand, bus depot, church, or other building where large assemblages of people are
being held, within which space, when clearly marked as such, no motor vehicle shall
be left standing, parked or stopped except in taking on or discharging passengers or
freight, and then only for such length of time as is necessary for such purpose.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.360)
15. Alleys. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or
under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to
any abutting property. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a vehicle
parked in any alley which is eighteen (18) feet wide or less; provided said vehicle is
parked to deliver goods or services.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
16. Ramps. In front of a curb cut or ramp which is located on public or private
property in a manner which blocks access to the curb cut or ramp.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.358[15])
17. In More Than One Space. In any designated parking space so that any part of
the vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the markings
designating such space.
69.08 PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES PARKING. The following regulations shall
apply to the establishment and use of persons with disabilities parking spaces:
1. Establishment. Persons with disabilities parking spaces shall be established
and designated in accordance with Chapter 321L of the Code of Iowa and Iowa
Administrative Code, 661-18. No unauthorized person shall establish any on-street
persons with disabilities parking space without first obtaining Council approval.
2. Improper Use. The following uses of a persons with disabilities parking
space, located on either public or private property, constitute improper use of a
persons with disabilities parking permit, which is a violation of this Code of
Ordinances:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321L.4[2])
A. Use by an operator of a vehicle not displaying a persons with
disabilities parking permit;
B. Use by an operator of a vehicle displaying a persons with disabilities
parking permit but not being used by a person issued a permit or being
transported in accordance with Section 321L.2[1b] of the Code of Iowa;
C. Use by a vehicle in violation of the rules adopted under Section
321L.8 of the Code of Iowa.
CHAPTER 69 PARKING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 364 -
3. Wheelchair Parking Cones. No person shall use or interfere with a wheelchair
parking cone in violation of the following:
A. A person issued a persons with disabilities parking permit must
comply with the requirements of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of Iowa
when utilizing a wheelchair parking cone.
B. A person shall not interfere with a wheelchair parking cone which is
properly placed under the provisions of Section 321L.2A[1] of the Code of
Iowa.
69.09 TRUCK PARKING LIMITED. No person shall park or leave unattended on any
streets within a district zoned as or directly abutting a Residential District or a Business
District a motor truck, semi-tractor, or semi-trailer excepting only when such vehicles are
actually engaged in the delivery or receiving of merchandise or cargo. When actually
receiving or delivering merchandise or cargo, such vehicle shall be stopped or parked in a
manner which will not interfere with other traffic. The provisions of this section do not apply
to pick-up or light delivery trucks. (Ord. 1117 – Aug. 18 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
69.10 SNOW REMOVAL. No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle
on any public street, alley, or City-owned off-street parking area during snow removal
operations unless the snow has been removed or plowed from said street, alley or parking area
and the snow has ceased to fall.
(Code of Iowa, 321.236[1])
69.11 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES. Parking restrictions on controlled access
facilities are as specified in Chapter 142 of this Code of Ordinances.
[The next page is 385]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 385 -
CHAPTER 70
TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
70.01 Arrest or Citation 70.04 Parking Violations: Vehicle Unattended
70.02 Scheduled Violations 70.05 Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking
70.03 Parking Violations: Alternate 70.06 Impounding Vehicles
70.01 ARREST OR CITATION. Whenever a peace officer has reasonable cause to
believe that a person has violated any provision of the Traffic Code, such officer may:
1. Immediate Arrest. Immediately arrest such person and take such person
before a local magistrate, or
2. Issue Citation. Without arresting the person, prepare in quintuplicate a
combined traffic citation and complaint as adopted by the Iowa Commissioner of
Public Safety, or issue a uniform citation and complaint utilizing a State-approved
computerized device.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.6 & 321.485)
70.02 SCHEDULED VIOLATIONS. For violations of the Traffic Code which are
designated by Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa to be scheduled violations, the scheduled
fine for each of those violations shall be as specified in Section 805.8A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 805.8 & 805.8A)
70.03 PARKING VIOLATIONS: ALTERNATE. Uncontested violations of parking
restrictions imposed by this Code of Ordinances shall be charged upon a simple notice of a
fine payable at the office of the City Clerk. The simple notice of a fine shall be in the amount
of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for all violations except improper use of a persons with disabilities
parking permit. If such fine is not paid within thirty (30) days, it shall be increased by five
dollars ($5.00). The simple notice of a fine for improper use of a persons with disabilities
parking permit is one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1b] & 321L.4[2])
70.04 PARKING VIOLATIONS: VEHICLE UNATTENDED. When a vehicle is
parked in violation of any provision of the Traffic Code, and the driver is not present, the
notice of fine or citation as herein provided shall be attached to the vehicle in a conspicuous
place.
70.05 PRESUMPTION IN REFERENCE TO ILLEGAL PARKING. In any proceeding
charging a standing or parking violation, a prima facie presumption that the registered owner
was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during
which, such violation occurred, shall be raised by proof that:
1. Described Vehicle. The particular vehicle described in the information was
parked in violation of the Traffic Code, and
2. Registered Owner. The defendant named in the information was the
registered owner at the time in question.
CHAPTER 70 TRAFFIC CODE ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 386 -
70.06 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES. A peace officer is hereby authorized to remove, or
cause to be removed, a vehicle from a street, public alley, public parking lot or highway to the
nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the City,
under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
1. Disabled Vehicle. When a vehicle is so disabled as to constitute an
obstruction to traffic and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason
of physical injury incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its
custody or removal.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
2. Illegally Parked Vehicle. When any vehicle is left unattended and is so
illegally parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
3. Snow Removal. When any vehicle is left parked in violation of a ban on
parking during snow removal operations.
4. Parked Over Limited Time Period. When any vehicle is left parked for a
continuous period in violation of any limited parking time. If the owner can be
located, the owner shall be given an opportunity to remove the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
5. Costs. In addition to the standard penalties provided, the owner or driver of
any vehicle impounded for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be required to pay the reasonable cost of towing and storage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[1])
[The next page is 395]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 395 -
CHAPTER 75
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
75.01 Purpose 75.06 Operation of All-Terrain Vehicles
75.02 Definitions 75.07 Negligence
75.03 General Regulations 75.08 Accident Reports
75.04 Hours of Operation 75.09 Thaw Ban
75.05 Operation of Snowmobiles
75.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the operation of all-terrain
vehicles and snowmobiles within the City.
75.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “All-terrain vehicle” or “ATV” means a motorized vehicle, with not less than
three and not more than six non-highway tires, that is limited in engine displacement
to less than 1,000 cubic centimeters and in total dry weight to less than 1,200 pounds
and that has a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars
for steering control.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
2. “Off-road motorcycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle that has a seat or
saddle designed to be straddled by the operator and handlebars for steering control and
that is intended by the manufacturer for use on natural terrain. “Off-road motorcycle”
includes a motorcycle that was originally issued a certificate of title and registered for
highway use under Chapter 321 of the Code of Iowa, but that contains design features
that enable operation over natural terrain. An operator of an off-road motorcycle is
also subject to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation of all-terrain
vehicles.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
3. “Off-road utility vehicle” means a motorized vehicle, with not less than four
and not more than eight non-highway tires or rubberized tracks, that has a seat that is
of bucket or bench design, not intended to be straddled by the operator, and a steering
wheel or control levers for control. “Off-road utility vehicle” includes the following
vehicles:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.1)
A. “Off-road utility vehicle – type 1” includes vehicles with a total dry
weight of 1,200 pounds or less and a width of 50 inches or less.
B. “Off-road utility vehicle – type 2” includes vehicles, other than type 1
vehicles, with a total dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less and a width of 65
inches or less.
C. “Off-road utility vehicle – type 3” includes vehicles with a total dry
weight of more than 2,000 pounds or a width of more than 65 inches, or both.
An operator of an off-road utility vehicle is also subject to the provisions of this
chapter governing the operation of all-terrain vehicles.
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 396 -
4. “Snowmobile” means a motorized vehicle that weighs less than 1,000 pounds,
that uses sled-type runners or skis, endless belt-type tread with a width of 48 inches or
less, or any combination of runners, skis, or tread, and is designed for travel on snow
or ice. “Snowmobile” does not include an all-terrain vehicle that has been altered or
equipped with runners, skis, belt-type tracks, or treads.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.1)
75.03 GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall operate an ATV, off-road
motorcycle or off-road utility vehicle within the City in violation of Chapter 321I of the Code
of Iowa or a snowmobile within the City in violation of the provisions of Chapter 321G of the
Code of Iowa or in violation of rules established by the Natural Resource Commission of the
Department of Natural Resources governing their registration, equipment and manner of
operation.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 321G & Ch. 321I)
75.04 HOURS OF OPERATION. No snowmobile shall be operated upon the streets of the
City or upon the Cedar River within the corporate limits of the City, on Saturday between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., and on Sunday through Friday, inclusive, between the hours of
12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., subject, however, to the following exceptions: During periods of
local emergency, the Mayor may suspend these restrictions, and clubs and social groups of
snowmobile operators may obtain permits for the operation of snowmobiles outside these
prescribed hours of operation from the Police Chief by making advance application. The Police
Chief shall have the authority to prescribe the hours of operation in each permit granted.
75.05 OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES. The operators of snowmobiles shall comply
with the following restrictions as to where snowmobiles may be operated within the City:
1. Streets. Snowmobiles shall be operated only upon streets which have not
been plowed during the snow season and on such other streets as may be designated
by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4a])
2. Exceptions. Snowmobiles may be operated on prohibited streets only under
the following circumstances:
A. Emergencies. Snowmobiles may be operated on any street in an
emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon
the roadway renders travel by conventional motor vehicles impractical.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4c])
B. Direct Crossing. Snowmobiles may make a direct crossing of a
prohibited street provided all of the following occur:
(1) The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety
degrees (90°) to the direction of the street and at a place where no
obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
(2) The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before
crossing the street;
(3) The driver yields the right-of-way to all on-coming traffic
which constitutes an immediate hazard; and
(4) In crossing a divided street, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of such street with another street.
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 397 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[2])
3. Railroad Right-of-way. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on an operating
railroad right-of-way. A snowmobile may be driven directly across a railroad rightof-
way only at an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of
law may, if necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after
yielding to all oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.13[1h])
4. Trails. Snowmobiles shall not be operated on all-terrain vehicle trails except
where so designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.9[4f])
5. Parks and Other City Land. Snowmobiles shall not be operated in any park,
playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of
the City. A snowmobile shall not be operated on any City land without a snow cover
of at least one-tenth of one inch.
6. Sidewalk or Parking. Snowmobiles shall not be operated upon the public
sidewalk or that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or
property line commonly referred to as the “parking” except for purposes of crossing
the same to a public street upon which operation is authorized by this chapter.
75.06 OPERATION OF ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES. The operators of ATVs shall
comply with the following restrictions as to where ATVs may be operated within the City:
1. Streets. ATVs and off-road utility vehicles may be operated on streets only in
accordance with Section 321.234A of the Code of Iowa or on such streets as may be
designated by resolution of the Council for the operation of registered ATVs or
registered off-road utility vehicles. In designating such streets, the Council may
authorize ATVs and off-road utility vehicles to stop at service stations or convenience
stores along a designated street.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[1 & 3])
2. Trails. ATVs shall not be operated on snowmobile trails except where
designated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.10[3])
3. Railroad Right-of-way. ATVs shall not be operated on an operating railroad
right-of-way. An ATV may be driven directly across a railroad right-of-way only at
an established crossing and notwithstanding any other provisions of law may, if
necessary, use the improved portion of the established crossing after yielding to all
oncoming traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321I.14[h])
4. Parks and Other City Land. ATVs shall not be operated in any park,
playground or upon any other City-owned property without the express permission of
the City.
5. Sidewalk or Parking. ATVs shall not be operated upon the public sidewalk or
that portion of the street located between the curb line and the sidewalk or property
line commonly referred to as the “parking.”
75.07 NEGLIGENCE. The owner and operator of an ATV or snowmobile are liable for
any injury or damage occasioned by the negligent operation of the ATV or snowmobile. The
owner of an ATV or snowmobile shall be liable for any such injury or damage only if the
CHAPTER 75 ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES AND SNOWMOBILES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 398 -
owner was the operator of the ATV or snowmobile at the time the injury or damage occurred
or if the operator had the owner’s consent to operate the ATV or snowmobile at the time the
injury or damage occurred.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.18 & 321I.19)
75.08 ACCIDENT REPORTS. Whenever an ATV or snowmobile is involved in an
accident resulting in injury or death to anyone or property damage amounting to one thousand
five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or more, either the operator or someone acting for the
operator shall immediately notify a law enforcement officer and shall file an accident report,
in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321G.10 & 321I.11)
75.09 THAW BAN. Snowmobiles shall not be operated during a publicized thaw ban in
areas posted to prohibit such operation.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 399 -
CHAPTER 76
BICYCLE REGULATIONS
76.01 Scope of Regulations 76.08 Riding on Sidewalks
76.02 Traffic Code Applies 76.09 Towing
76.03 Double Riding Restricted 76.10 Improper Riding
76.04 Two Abreast Limit 76.11 Parking
76.05 Speed 76.12 Equipment Requirements
76.06 Emerging from Alley or Driveway 76.13 Special Penalty
76.07 Carrying Articles
76.01 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS. These regulations shall apply whenever a bicycle is
operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
subject to those exceptions stated herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.02 TRAFFIC CODE APPLIES. Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be
granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of the State declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles or by the
traffic code of the City applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to those provisions
which by their nature can have no application. Whenever such person dismounts from a
bicycle the person shall be subject to all regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234)
76.03 DOUBLE RIDING RESTRICTED. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride
other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. No bicycle shall be used to
carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.234[3 and 4])
76.04 TWO ABREAST LIMIT. Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride
more than two (2) abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles. All bicycles ridden on the roadway shall be kept to the right and shall be operated
as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.05 SPEED. No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.06 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY. The operator of a bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 400 -
approaching on said sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.07 CARRYING ARTICLES. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package,
bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.08 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS. The following shall apply to riding bicycles on
sidewalks:
1. Business District. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the
Business District, as defined in Section 60.02(1) of this Code of Ordinances.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
2. Other Locations. When signs are erected on any sidewalk or roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, no person shall disobey the
signs.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
3. Yield Right-of-way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a
sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give
audible signal before overtaking and passing.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.09 TOWING. It is unlawful for any person riding a bicycle to be towed or to tow any
other vehicle upon the streets of the City unless the vehicle is manufactured for such use.
76.10 IMPROPER RIDING. No person shall ride a bicycle in an irregular or reckless
manner such as zigzagging, stunting, speeding or otherwise so as to disregard the safety of the
operator or others.
76.11 PARKING. No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or
at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
76.12 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS. Every person riding a bicycle shall be
responsible for providing and using equipment as provided herein:
1. Lamps Required. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped
with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at
least three hundred (300) feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear exhibiting a red
light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear except that a red reflector on the
rear, of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty (50) feet to 300 feet
to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor
vehicle, may be used in lieu of a rear light.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.397)
2. Brakes Required. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will
enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236[10])
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 401 -
76.13 SPECIAL PENALTY. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter may, in
lieu of the scheduled fine for bicyclists or standard penalty provided for violations of the Code
of Ordinances, allow the person’s bicycle to be impounded by the City for not less than five
(5) days for the first offense, ten (10) days for a second offense and thirty (30) days for a third
offense.
CHAPTER 76 BICYCLE REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 402 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 403 -
CHAPTER 77
BICYCLE LICENSING
77.01 License Required 77.05 Rental Bicycles
77.02 License Application 77.06 Loss of License
77.03 Issuance of License 77.07 Removal of License Prohibited
77.04 Transfer or Sale 77.08 Alteration Prohibited
77.01 LICENSE REQUIRED. No person who resides within the City shall ride or propel a
bicycle on any street or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles unless
such bicycle has been licensed and a license plate is attached thereto as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.236 [10])
77.02 LICENSE APPLICATION. Application for a bicycle license shall be made upon a
form provided by the City and shall be made to the Police Department. Such form shall
provide for the furnishing of proper identification of the bicycle and the name and address of
its owner. It shall include the manufacturer’s name of the bicycle, any manufacture number
on the bicycle, and other information identifying the bicycle.
77.03 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE. Upon proper application and payment of a fee of fifty
cents ($.50) the Police Department shall issue a license tag, plate or other means of
identification which thereafter shall be kept permanently attached to said bicycle by the owner
thereof. Such license shall be permanent until said bicycle is dismantled or no longer
operated.
77.04 TRANSFER OR SALE. If a licensed bicycle is sold or transferred, the license tag,
plate or other means of identification shall pass and be transferred to the new owner or
transferee and the sale or the transfer of said bicycle shall be reported to the Police
Department by the former owner within five (5) days after the sale or transfer of such bicycle
and the Police Department shall make a record of said sale or transfer together with the name
of the new owner or transferee of said bicycle. Every person engaged in the business of
buying or selling new or second hand bicycles shall make a report to the Police Department on
the first day of each month giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased
or to whom sold, description of such bicycle by name or make, the frame number thereof and
the number of the license tag, if any, found thereon, of each bicycle purchased, sold or
transferred during the preceding month. Such report by such dealer shall be in lieu of the
provisions of this section requiring the report thereof within five (5) days after the sale or
transfer.
77.05 RENTAL BICYCLES. No person shall rent or offer any bicycle for rental unless the
bicycle is registered and licensed as provided by this chapter and is equipped as provided by
Chapter 76.
77.06 LOSS OF LICENSE. If any owner of a bicycle loses the license tag, plate or other
means of identification, or if the same is destroyed or stolen, said owner shall report the same
immediately to the Police Department. The Police Department shall then issue to such owner
a new license tag, plate or other means of identification upon the payment of a fee of ten cents
($.10).
CHAPTER 77 BICYCLE LICENSING
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 404 -
77.07 REMOVAL OF LICENSE PROHIBITED. No person shall remove a license tag
from a bicycle during the period for which issued except in the event the bicycle is dismantled
and is no longer operated in the City. Every owner shall give notice to the City of the
dismantling of a bicycle and shall surrender the license tag to the Police Department.
77.08 ALTERATION PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for any person to alter or counterfeit
any license tag, plate or other means of identification issued in conformity with this chapter.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 405 -
CHAPTER 78
BOATING REGULATIONS
78.01 Definitions 78.04 Restrictions
78.02 General Regulations 78.05 Public Dock and Ramp
78.03 Restricted Speed Area
78.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Motorboat” means any vessel propelled by machinery, whether or not such
machinery is the principal source of propulsion, or any vessel attached to another craft
which is propelled by machinery.
2. “Vessel” means every description of watercraft, other than a seaplane, used or
capable of being used as a means of transportation on water or ice. Ice boats are
watercraft.
3. “Watercraft” means any vessel which, through the buoyant force of water,
floats upon the water and is capable of carrying one or more persons.
78.02 GENERAL REGULATIONS. No person shall operate a vessel on the Cedar River,
within the corporate limits of the City, in violation of the provisions of Chapter 462A of the
Code of Iowa or rules established by the Natural Resource Commission of the Department of
Natural Resources governing their registration, numbering, equipment and manner of
operation.
78.03 RESTRICTED SPEED AREA. No vessel shall be operated at a speed in excess of
ten (10) miles per hour in the area from Johnson Street to the Main Street Dam except when
motorboats towing skis or surfboards are starting from this area.
78.04 RESTRICTIONS.
1. No water skiers, surfboard riders or motorboats towing either shall come
closer than fifty (50) feet to any docks, vessels or people along the bank participating
in any other activities such as fishing, etc.
2. There shall be no swimming in the Cedar River between the Main Street Dam
and the western City limits.
3. There shall be no more than two (2) persons using water skis, surfboards or
other aquaplaning devices being towed behind any one motor boat upon the Cedar
River within the corporate limits.
78.05 PUBLIC DOCK AND RAMP. Use of the public dock and ramp shall be subject to
the following:
1. Boats Attended. There shall be no unattended boat tied to the public dock or
ramps.
2. Time Limit. Use of the ramp shall be limited to five minutes per boat for
loading and unloading.
CHAPTER 78 BOATING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 406 -
3. Loading Area. That part of Jackson Street lying between Court Street and the
Cedar River shall be used only for the loading and unloading of boats.
[The next page is 419]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 419 -
CHAPTER 80
ABANDONED VEHICLES
80.01 Definitions 80.06 Disposal of Abandoned Vehicles
80.02 Authority to Take Possession of Abandoned Vehicles 80.07 Disposal of Totally Inoperable Vehicles
80.03 Notice by Mail 80.08 Proceeds from Sales
80.04 Notification in Newspaper 80.09 Duties of Demolisher
80.05 Fees for Impoundment
80.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[1] & Sec. 321.90)
1. “Abandoned vehicle” means any of the following:
A. A vehicle that has been left unattended on public property for more
than twenty-four (24) hours and lacks current registration plates or two or
more wheels or other parts which renders the vehicle totally inoperable.
B. A vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for more than
24 hours.
C. A vehicle that has been unlawfully parked or placed on private
property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property
for more than 24 hours.
D. A vehicle that has been legally impounded by order of a police
authority and has not been reclaimed for a period of ten (10) days. However,
a police authority may declare the vehicle abandoned within the ten-day
period by commencing the notification process.
E. Any vehicle parked on the highway determined by a police authority
to create a hazard to other vehicle traffic.
F. A vehicle that has been impounded pursuant to Section 321J.4B of
the Code of Iowa by order of the court and whose owner has not paid the
impoundment fees after notification by the person or agency responsible for
carrying out the impoundment order.
2. “Demolisher” means a person licensed under Chapter 321H of the Code of
Iowa whose business it is to convert a vehicle to junk, processed scrap or scrap metal,
or otherwise to wreck, or dismantle vehicles.
3. “Garage keeper” means any operator of a parking place or establishment,
motor vehicle storage facility, or establishment for the servicing, repair, or
maintenance of motor vehicles.
4. “Police authority” means the Iowa State Patrol or any law enforcement
agency of a county or city.
80.02 AUTHORITY TO TAKE POSSESSION OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. A
police authority, upon the authority’s own initiative or upon the request of any other authority
having the duties of control of highways or traffic, shall take into custody an abandoned
vehicle on public property and may take into custody any abandoned vehicle on private
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 420 -
property. The police authority may employ its own personnel, equipment, and facilities or
hire a private entity, equipment, and facilities for the purpose of removing, preserving, storing,
or disposing of abandoned vehicles. A property owner or other person in control of private
property may employ a private entity that is a garage keeper to dispose of an abandoned
vehicle, and the private entity may take into custody the abandoned vehicle without a police
authority’s initiative. If a police authority employs a private entity to dispose of abandoned
vehicles, the police authority shall provide the private entity with the names and addresses of
the registered owners, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the vehicle or
the personal property found in the vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[2])
80.03 NOTICE BY MAIL. The police authority or private entity that takes into custody an
abandoned vehicle shall notify, within twenty (20) days, by certified mail, the last known
registered owner of the vehicle, all lienholders of record, and any other known claimant to the
vehicle or to personal property found in the vehicle, addressed to the parties’ last known
addresses of record, that the abandoned vehicle has been taken into custody. Notice shall be
deemed given when mailed. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle
identification number of the vehicle, describe the personal property found in the vehicle, set
forth the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held, and inform the persons
receiving the notice of their right to reclaim the vehicle and personal property within ten (10)
days after the effective date of the notice upon payment of all towing, preservation, and
storage charges resulting from placing the vehicle in custody and upon payment of the costs of
the notice. The notice shall also state that the failure of the owner, lienholders or claimants to
exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the time provided shall
be deemed a waiver by the owner, lienholders and claimants of all right, title, claim and
interest in the vehicle or personal property and that failure to reclaim the vehicle or personal
property is deemed consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public auction or disposal of the
vehicle to a demolisher and to disposal of the personal property by sale or destruction. If the
abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a private entity without a police authority’s
initiative, the notice shall state that the private entity may claim a garage keeper’s lien as
described in Section 321.90 of the Code of Iowa, and may proceed to sell or dispose of the
vehicle. If the abandoned vehicle was taken into custody by a police authority or by a private
entity hired by a police authority, the notice shall state that any person claiming rightful
possession of the vehicle or personal property who disputes the planned disposition of the
vehicle or property by the police authority or private entity or of the assessment of fees and
charges provided by this section may ask for an evidentiary hearing before the police authority
to contest those matters. If the persons receiving notice do not ask for a hearing or exercise
their right to reclaim the vehicle or personal property within the ten-day reclaiming period, the
owner, lienholders or claimants shall no longer have any right, title, claim, or interest in or to
the vehicle or the personal property. A court in any case in law or equity shall not recognize
any right, title, claim, or interest of the owner, lienholders or claimants after the expiration of
the ten-day reclaiming period.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.04 NOTIFICATION IN NEWSPAPER. If it is impossible to determine with
reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of the last registered owner and all lienholders,
notice by one publication in one newspaper of general circulation in the area where the vehicle
was abandoned shall be sufficient to meet all requirements of notice under Section 80.03. The
published notice may contain multiple listings of abandoned vehicles and personal property
but shall be published within the same time requirements and contain the same information as
prescribed for mailed notice in Section 80.03.
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 421 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3b])
80.05 FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT. The owner, lienholder, or claimant shall pay five
dollars ($5.00) if claimed within five (5) days of impounding, plus one dollar ($1.00) for each
additional day within the reclaiming period plus towing charges, if stored by the City, or
towing and storage fees, if stored in a public garage, whereupon said vehicle shall be released.
The amount of towing charges, and the rate of storage charges by privately owned garages,
shall be established by such facility.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[3a])
80.06 DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES. If an abandoned vehicle has not been
reclaimed as provided herein, the police authority or private entity shall make a determination
as to whether or not the motor vehicle should be sold for use upon the highways, and shall
dispose of the motor vehicle in accordance with State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.07 DISPOSAL OF TOTALLY INOPERABLE VEHICLES. The City or any person
upon whose property or in whose possession is found any abandoned motor vehicle, or any
person being the owner of a motor vehicle whose title certificate is faulty, lost or destroyed,
may dispose of such motor vehicle to a demolisher for junk, without a title and without
notification procedures, if such motor vehicle lacks an engine or two or more wheels or other
structural part which renders the vehicle totally inoperable. The police authority shall give the
applicant a certificate of authority. The applicant shall then apply to the County Treasurer for
a junking certificate and shall surrender the certificate of authority in lieu of the certificate of
title.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[2e])
80.08 PROCEEDS FROM SALES. Proceeds from the sale of any abandoned vehicle shall
be applied to the expense of auction, cost of towing, preserving, storing, and notification
required, in accordance with State law. Any balance shall be held for the owner of the motor
vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and then shall be deposited in the State
Road Use Tax Fund. Where the sale of any vehicle fails to realize the amount necessary to
meet costs the police authority shall apply for reimbursement from the Department of
Transportation.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.89[4])
80.09 DUTIES OF DEMOLISHER. Any demolisher who purchases or otherwise acquires
an abandoned motor vehicle for junk shall junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or otherwise
demolish such motor vehicle. A demolisher shall not junk, scrap, wreck, dismantle, or
demolish a vehicle until the demolisher has obtained the junking certificate issued for the
vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.90[3a])
CHAPTER 80 ABANDONED VEHICLES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 422 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 423 -
CHAPTER 81
RAILROAD REGULATIONS
81.01 Definitions 81.04 Crossing Maintenance
81.02 Warning Signals 81.05 Speed
81.03 Obstructing Streets
81.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Operator” means any individual, partnership, corporation or other
association which owns, operates, drives or controls a railroad train.
2. “Railroad train” means an engine or locomotive, with or without cars coupled
thereto, operated upon rails.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.1)
81.02 WARNING SIGNALS. Operators shall sound a horn at least 1,000 feet before a
street crossing is reached and after sounding the horn, shall ring the bell continuously until the
crossing is passed.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.13)
81.03 OBSTRUCTING STREETS. Operators shall not operate any train in such a manner
as to prevent vehicular use of any highway, street or alley for a period of time in excess of ten
(10) minutes except:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 327G.32)
1. Comply with Signals. When necessary to comply with signals affecting the
safety of the movement of trains.
2. Avoid Striking. When necessary to avoid striking any object or person on the
track.
3. Disabled. When the train is disabled.
4. Safety Regulations. When necessary to comply with governmental safety
regulations including, but not limited to, speed ordinances and speed regulations.
An employee is not guilty of a violation of this section if the employee’s action was necessary
to comply with the direct order or instructions of a railroad corporation or its supervisors.
Guilt is then with the railroad corporation.
81.04 CROSSING MAINTENANCE. Operators shall construct and maintain good,
sufficient and safe crossings over any street traversed by their rails.
(Bourett vs. Chicago & N.W. Ry. 152 Iowa 579, 132 N.W. 973 [1943])
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.11)
81.05 SPEED. It is unlawful to operate any railroad train through any street crossing within
the platted areas of the City at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
(Girl vs. United States R. Admin., 194 Iowa 1382, 189 N.W. 834, [1923])
CHAPTER 81 RAILROAD REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 424 -
[The next page is 455]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 455 -
CHAPTER 90
WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
90.01 Definitions 90.11 Installation of Water Service Pipe
90.02 Superintendent’s Duties 90.12 Responsibility for Water Service Pipe
90.03 Mandatory Connection to Public Water System 90.13 Failure to Maintain
and Use of Private Wells 90.14 Curb Valve
90.04 Abandoned Connections 90.15 Interior Valve
90.05 Permit 90.16 Inspection and Approval
90.06 Permit Fee and Tapping Fee 90.17 Completion by the City
90.07 Compliance with Plumbing Code 90.18 Shutting off Water Supply
90.08 Plumber Required 90.19 Operation of Curb Valve and Hydrants
90.09 Excavations 90.20 Fluoridation
90.10 Tapping Mains 90.21 Water Supply Interconnections
90.01 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in the chapters in this Code
of Ordinances pertaining to the Water Service System:
1. “Combined service account” means a customer service account for the
provision of two or more utility services.
2. “Customer” means, in addition to any person receiving water service from the
City, the owner of the property served, and as between such parties the duties,
responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter imposed shall be joint and
several.
3. “Superintendent” means the person directly responsible for the municipal
water supply and system as assigned by the City Administrator.
4. “Water main” means a water supply pipe provided for public or community
use.
5. “Water service pipe” means the pipe from the water main to the building
served.
6. “Water system” or “water works” means all public facilities for securing,
collecting, storing, pumping, treating and distributing water.
90.02 SUPERINTENDENT’S DUTIES. The Superintendent shall supervise the installation
of water service pipes and their connection to the water main and enforce all regulations
pertaining to water services in the City in accordance with this chapter. This chapter shall apply
to all replacements of existing water service pipes as well as to new ones. The Superintendent
shall make such rules, not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, as may be needed for
the detailed operation of the water system, subject to the approval of the Council. In the event of
an emergency the Superintendent may make temporary rules for the protection of the system
until due consideration by the Council may be had.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 456 -
90.03 MANDATORY CONNECTION TO PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM AND USE OF
PRIVATE WELLS.
1. Connection to the Public Water System. Except as otherwise provided herein,
all residences and business establishments within the City limits using water for
human habitation or occupancy shall connect to the public water system. Water shall
be deemed to be used for human habitation or occupancy if it is used in the plumbing
system of a residence or a business occupied by humans. This section does not
prohibit use of water from a private well upon a residential or business property for
other purposes such as irrigation.
2. Exceptions. A residence or business establishment within the City limits
using water for human habitation or occupancy may obtain its water from a private
well as follows:
A. Wells in Use on Effective Date of Ordinance - 07/11/03. A well in
use on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section and which is
serving property located within 200 feet of the City water system or which
serves a property later having access to the City water system within 200 feet
may nevertheless continue in use for human habitation or occupancy until
repairs requiring a permit are made to the well. At such time, use of the well
for human habitation or occupancy shall be discontinued and connection
made to the City water system.
B. New Wells. A well may be drilled only upon property which does
not have access to the City water system within 200 feet of the property, and
use of the well for human habitation or occupancy may continue until access
to the City water system becomes available within 200 feet of the property
and repairs requiring a permit are made to the well. At such time, use of the
well for human habitation or occupancy shall be discontinued and connection
made to the City water system.
3. Contaminated Areas. No new wells shall be drilled and no repairs requiring a
permit shall be made to a well within an area that is contaminated or that may become
contaminated due to contamination in the vicinity of the well site.
4. Permit Procedure. Permits for the construction of new wells or for repair or
maintenance of existing wells shall be obtained through the Floyd County Health
Department.
90.04 ABANDONED CONNECTIONS. When an existing water service is abandoned or
a service is renewed with a new tap in the main, all abandoned connections with the mains
shall have the corporation stop removed and replaced with a permanent brass plug and made
absolutely watertight.
90.05 PERMIT. Before any person makes a connection with the public water system, a
written permit must be obtained from the City. The application for the permit shall include a
legal description of the property, the name of the property owner, the name and address of the
person who will do the work, and the general uses of the water. If the proposed work meets
all the requirements of this chapter and if all fees required under this chapter have been paid,
the permit shall be issued. Work under any permit must be completed within sixty (60) days
after the permit is issued, except that when such time period is inequitable or unfair due to
conditions beyond the control of the person making the application, an extension of time
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 457 -
within which to complete the work may be granted. The permit may be revoked at any time
for any violation of these chapters.
90.06 PERMIT FEE AND TAPPING FEE. A permit fee and a tapping fee as established
by resolution of the Council shall be paid to the City prior to issuance of the permit. In the
event that work has commenced without first obtaining a permit, the permit fee shall be
doubled.
90.07 COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE. The installation of any water service
pipe and any connection with the water system shall comply with all pertinent and applicable
provisions, whether regulatory, procedural or enforcement provisions, of the State Plumbing
Code. Backflow prevention devices approved by the Superintendent shall be installed on
water lines servicing any type of chemical process when in the opinion of the Superintendent
such devices are needed to protect the public water supply.
90.08 PLUMBER REQUIRED. All installations of water service pipes and connections to
the water system shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
90.09 EXCAVATIONS. All trench work, excavation, and backfilling required in making a
connection shall be performed in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and the provisions
of Chapter 135 of this Code of Ordinances.
90.10 TAPPING MAINS. All taps into water mains shall be made by or under the direct
supervision of the Superintendent and in accord with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Independent Services. No more than one house, building, or premises shall be
supplied from one tap unless special written permission is obtained from the
Superintendent and unless provision is made so that each house, building, or premises
may be shut off independently of the other.
2. Sizes and Location of Taps. All mains six (6) inches or less in diameter shall
receive no larger than a ¾-inch tap. All mains of over six inches in diameter shall
receive no larger than a one-inch tap. Where a larger connection than a one-inch tap
is desired, two or more small taps or saddles shall be used, as the Superintendent shall
order. All taps in the mains shall be made in the top half of the pipe, at least eighteen
(18) inches apart. No main shall be tapped nearer than two (2) feet of the joint in the
main.
3. Corporation Stop. A brass corporation stop, of the pattern and weight
approved by the Superintendent, shall be inserted in every tap in the main. The
corporation stop in the main shall be of the same size as the service pipe.
4. Location Record. An accurate and dimensional sketch showing the exact
location of the tap shall be filed with the Superintendent in such form as the
Superintendent shall require.
90.11 INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPE. Water service pipes from the
main to the meter setting shall be of standard construction materials as contained in the State
Building Code. Pipe must be laid sufficiently waving, and to such depth, as to prevent rupture
from settlement or freezing.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 458 -
90.12 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SERVICE PIPE. All costs and expenses
incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the water service pipe from the
main to the building served shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or
maintenance of said water service pipe.
90.13 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN. When any portion of the water service pipe which is
the responsibility of the property owner becomes defective or creates a nuisance and the
owner fails to correct such nuisance, the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the
property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.14 CURB VALVE. There shall be installed within the public right-of-way a main shutoff
valve on the water service pipe of a pattern approved by the Superintendent. The shut-off
valve shall be constructed to be visible and even with the pavement or ground.
90.15 INTERIOR VALVE. There shall be installed a shut-off valve on every service pipe
inside the building as close to the entrance of the pipe within the building as possible and so
located that the water can be shut off conveniently. Where one service pipe supplies more
than one customer within the building, there shall be separate valves for each such customer
so that service may be shut off for one without interfering with service to the others.
90.16 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL. All water service pipes and their connections to
the water system must be inspected and approved in writing by the Superintendent before they
are covered, and the Superintendent shall keep a record of such approvals. If the
Superintendent refuses to approve the work, the plumber or property owner must proceed
immediately to correct the work. Every person who uses or intends to use the municipal water
system shall permit the Superintendent to enter the premises to inspect or make necessary
alterations or repairs at all reasonable hours and on proof of authority.
90.17 COMPLETION BY THE CITY. Should any excavation be left open or only partly
refilled for twenty-four (24) hours after the water service pipe is installed and connected with
the water system, or should the work be improperly done, the City shall have the right to
finish or correct the work, and the Council shall assess the costs to the property owner or the
plumber. If the plumber is assessed, the plumber must pay the costs before receiving another
permit. If the property owner is assessed, such assessment may be collected with and in the
same manner as general property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3a & h])
90.18 SHUTTING OFF WATER SUPPLY. The Superintendent may shut off the supply
of water to any customer because of any violation of the regulations contained in these Water
Service System chapters that is not being contested in good faith. The supply shall not be
turned on again until all violations have been corrected and the Superintendent has ordered the
water to be turned on.
90.19 OPERATION OF CURB VALVE AND HYDRANTS. It is unlawful for any
person except the Superintendent to turn water on at the curb valve, and no person, unless
specifically authorized by the City, shall open or attempt to draw water from any fire hydrant
for any purpose whatsoever.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 459 -
90.20 FLUORIDATION. There shall be installed in the water system of the City the
necessary equipment to provide a continuous and controlled addition of fluoride into the
public water supply of the City. The Water Department of the City is directed to install said
equipment and operate the same, subject to inspection by and direction of the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Division.
90.21 WATER SUPPLY INTERCONNECTIONS. There shall be no physical connection
between the public potable water supply system and an individual well or central water system
which will permit the passage of any water from the individual well or central water system
into the public potable water supply system.
CHAPTER 90 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 460 -
[The next page is 465]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 465 -
CHAPTER 91
WATER METERS
91.01 Purpose 91.05 Meter Setting
91.02 Water Use Metered 91.06 Meter Repair Costs
91.03 Fire Sprinkler Systems – Exception 91.07 Right of Entry
91.04 Location of Meters 91.08 Accuracy Test
91.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the conservation of water
and facilitate the equitable distribution of charges for water service among customers.
91.02 WATER USE METERED. All water furnished customers shall be measured
through meters furnished by the City in accordance with the following:
1. The City shall furnish at no charge and be responsible for the installation cost
of the first standard-sized meter for the property.
2. If a customer requests installation of a meter larger than the standard size, the
customer shall be responsible for the additional meter cost and installation cost.
3. The full cost of any subsequent meter, or additional meter installed for
sprinkling system, and installation cost shall be the responsibility of the customer.
4. All water meters shall remain the property of the City.
91.03 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS – EXCEPTION. Fire sprinkler systems may be
connected to water mains by direct connection without meters under the direct supervision of
the Superintendent. No open connection can be incorporated in the system, and there shall be
no valves except a main control valve at the entrance to the building which must be sealed
open.
91.04 LOCATION OF METERS. All meters shall be so located that they are easily
accessible to meter readers and repairmen and protected from freezing.
91.05 METER SETTING. The property owner shall provide all necessary piping and
fittings for proper setting of a meter including, for all new construction, a valve on each side
of the meter. Meter pits may be used only upon approval of the Superintendent and shall be of
a design and construction approved by the Superintendent. (Ord. 1093 – Aug. 16 Supp.)
91.06 METER REPAIR COSTS. Whenever a water meter is found to be out of order, the
Superintendent shall have it repaired. If it is found that damage to the meter has occurred due
to the carelessness or negligence of the customer or property owner, then the property owner
shall be liable for the cost of repairs.
91.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Superintendent shall be permitted to enter the premises of
any customer at any reasonable time to read, remove, or change a meter.
91.08 ACCURACY TEST. The City shall make a test of the accuracy of any water meter
at any time when requested in writing. Such request shall be accompanied by a refundable
deposit of $25.00 guaranteeing payment of costs if found due. If the meter is found to overrun
CHAPTER 91 WATER METERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 466 -
to the extent of two percent (2%) or more, the cost of the test shall be paid by the City and a
refund of the test deposit shall be made to the customer. If the meter is found to be accurate or
slow, or less than 2% fast, the customer deposit shall be forfeited as the reasonable cost of the
test.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 467 -
CHAPTER 92
WATER RATES
92.01 Service Charges 92.06 Lien for Nonpayment
92.02 Rates For Service 92.07 Lien Exemption
92.03 Billing for Water Service 92.08 Lien Notice
92.04 Service Discontinued 92.09 Utility Deposits
92.05 Disconnect and Reconnect Fees
92.01 SERVICE CHARGES. Each customer shall pay for water service provided by the
City based upon use of water as determined by meters provided for in Chapter 91. Each
location, building, premises or connection shall be considered a separate and distinct customer
whether owned or controlled by the same person or not.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.02 RATES FOR SERVICE. Water service shall be furnished at the following monthly
rates within the City:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Effective July 1, 2014, each customer shall pay a monthly access charge,
based upon the size of the customer’s meter, as follows:
A. 5/8-inch meter............................ $ 15.06
B. 3/4-inch meter............................ $ 16.57
C. 1-inch meter................................$ 21.08
D. 1½-inch meter.............................$ 27.11
E. 2-inch meter................................$ 43.66
F. 3-inch meter................................$ 165.63
G. 4-inch meter................................$ 210.81
H. 6-inch meter................................$ 315.01
I. 8-inch meter................................$ 436.70
2. Regular Customer Rates. Except for large industrial users and occasional
(bulk) users, effective July 1, 2014, each customer shall pay a monthly water use
charge, based upon the number of gallons used each month, as follows:
A..........First 2,000 gallons......................$3.25 per 1,000 gallons
B..........Next 48,000 gallons....................$3.00 per 1,000 gallons
C..........Next 450,000 gallons..................$2.49 per 1,000 gallons
D..........Over 500,000 gallons................. $1.88 per 1,000 gallons
3. Large Industrial User Charges. Regular industrial users of water consuming
in excess of 100,000,000 gallons of water per year shall be charged for water usage at
a rate to be negotiated by the City and such user.
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 468 -
4. Occasional (Bulk) Use Rates. Except for those customers using water on an
occasional basis for irrigation of agricultural property, effective July 1, 2014, each
occasional user of water from a hydrant or similar source shall pay the following
water usage rates:
$26.80 base charge + $3.25 per 1,000 gallons
5. Surcharge for Customers Located Outside of the Corporate Limits.
Customers receiving water service to a location outside of the corporate limits shall
pay a monthly surcharge equal to 15% of the customer’s water usage bill and access
charge. This surcharge shall not apply to use for irrigation of agricultural property or
to regular industrial users for whom a rate has been negotiated pursuant to subsection
3 above.
6. Annual Adjustment of Customer Access Charges, Regular Customer Usage
Charges, and Occasional (Bulk) User Charges. Effective the first day of July each
year, beginning in 2010, the customer monthly access charges, the regular customer
usage charges, and the occasional (bulk) user charges as set forth in subsections 1, 2
and 4 of this section, shall increased by 3.5% from the prior year. The City shall
review the access charges and user charges every two years to ensure that the system
generates adequate revenues to pay the costs of operation and maintenance, including
replacement, and that the system continues to provide for proportional distribution of
operation and maintenance, including replacement costs, among users and user
classes.
92.03 BILLING FOR WATER SERVICE. Water service shall be billed as part of a
combined service account, payable in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Bills Issued. The Utility Clerk shall prepare, date and issue bills for combined
service accounts. Bills shall be issued on the 10th day of each month.
2. Bills Payable. Bills for combined service accounts shall be due and payable
at the office of the City Clerk by the 6th day of the month next following the month in
which the bill is mailed. Such bill will be deemed paid only upon receipt of full
payment (including applicable fees and service charges) in the Clerk’s office.
3. Delinquent Bills Service Charge. Bills shall be considered delinquent when
not paid in full on or before the due date, and balances remaining unpaid on the 6th
day of that month shall be assessed a service charge equal to 1.5% of the delinquent
balance.
92.04 SERVICE DISCONTINUED. Water service to delinquent customers shall be
discontinued in accordance with the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Notice. The Clerk shall notify each delinquent customer that service will be
discontinued if payment of the combined service account, including late payment
charges, is not received within 14 days after the date specified in the notice of
delinquency. Such notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the customer in whose
name the delinquent charges were incurred and shall inform the customer of the nature
of the delinquency and afford the customer the opportunity for a hearing prior to the
discontinuance.
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 469 -
2. Notice to Landlords. If the customer is a tenant, and if the owner or landlord
of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the notice of
delinquency shall also be given to the owner or landlord. If the customer is a tenant
and requests a change of name for service under the account, such request shall be
sent to the owner or landlord of the property if the owner or landlord has made a
written request for notice of any change of name for service under the account to the
rental property.
3. Hearing. If a hearing is requested by noon of the day preceding the shut off,
the City Administrator shall conduct an informal hearing and shall make a
determination as to whether the disconnection is justified. The customer has the right
to appeal the City Administrator’s decision to the Council, and if the Council finds
that disconnection is justified, then such disconnection shall be made, unless payment
has been received.
4. Tagging and Shut Off. If full payment of a delinquent bill is not received by
the City Clerk within 14 days after the notice of delinquency is mailed to the
customer, the City will thereupon place a tag upon the building of the delinquent
customer, and if full payment of the bill is not received in the Clerk’s office by 5:00
p.m. on the next business day, then water service shall be disconnected. Water service
shall not be restored until the delinquent balance together with applicable fees is paid
in full.
5. Fees. The following fees shall be assessed as administrative charges
associated with services provided by the City under this section.
A. Notice Fee. A fee of $3.00 shall be assessed to the customer for the
notice provided under subsection 1 of this section.
B. Tag Fee. If full payment of a delinquent bill is not received by the
Clerk’s office before the City employee departs City Hall with the customer’s
building tag, then a tagging fee of $25.00 will be assessed to the customer.
C. Reconnect Fee. After water service has been shut off to a delinquent
customer, a fee of $50.00 shall be assessed to the customer to restore water
service during regular working hours and a fee of $100.00 assessed to the
customer to restore water service after regular business hours or on weekends
and holidays.
92.05 DISCONNECT AND RECONNECT FEES. If a customer requests the City to
disconnect the customer’s water service by using the curb value and/or removing the water
meter and the customer is not delinquent in payment of his/her combined service account at
the time that restoration of service is requested, then the City shall reconnect the customer’s
water service for a service charge of $20.00 during regular working hours and $50.00 after
hours or on weekends and holidays.
92.06 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. The owner of the premises served and any lessee or
tenant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable for water service charges to the premises.
Water service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the
premises served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in
the same manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.07 LIEN EXEMPTION.
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 470 -
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
1. Water Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall not apply to
charges for water service to a residential or commercial rental property where water
service is separately metered and the rates or charges for the water service are paid
directly to the City by the tenant, if the landlord gives written notice to the City that
the property is residential or commercial rental property and that the tenant is liable
for the rates or charges. The City may require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost
of ninety (90) days of such services to be paid to the City. When the tenant moves
from the rental property, the City shall refund the deposit if all service charges are
paid in full. The lien exemption does not apply to delinquent charges for repairs
related to any of the services.
2. Other Service Exemption. The lien for nonpayment shall also not apply to the
charges for any of the services of sewer systems, storm water drainage systems,
sewage treatment, solid waste collection, and solid waste disposal for a residential
rental property where the charge is paid directly to the City by the tenant, if the
landlord gives written notice to the City that the property is residential rental property
and that the tenant is liable for the rates or charges for such service. The City may
require a deposit not exceeding the usual cost of ninety (90) days of such services to
be paid to the City. When the tenant moves from the rental property, the City shall
refund the deposit if all service charges are paid in full. The lien exemption does not
apply to delinquent charges for repairs related to any of the services.
3. Written Notice. The landlord’s written notice shall contain the name of the
tenant responsible for charges, the address of the residential or commercial rental
property that the tenant is to occupy, and the date that the occupancy begins. Upon
receipt, the City shall acknowledge the notice and deposit. A change in tenant for a
residential rental property shall require a new written notice to be given to the City
within thirty (30) business days of the change in tenant. A change in tenant for a
commercial rental property shall require a new written notice to be given to the City
within ten (10) business days of the change in tenant. A change in the ownership of
the residential rental property shall require written notice of such change to be given
to the City within thirty (30) business days of the completion of the change of
ownership. A change in the ownership of the commercial rental property shall require
written notice of such change to be given to the City within ten (10) business days of
the completion of the change of ownership.
92.08 LIEN NOTICE. A lien for delinquent water service charges shall not be certified to
the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is given to the
customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If the customer is a tenant and
if the owner or landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for notice, the
notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the appropriate
persons by ordinary mail not less than thirty (30) days prior to certification of the lien to the
County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
92.09 UTILITY DEPOSITS. A utility deposit is required of all customers in the following
amounts:
1. Residential and Commercial Users...................... $90.00
2. Industrial Users.....................................................(by agreement)
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 471 -
3. All others.............................................................. $90.00
An occurrence or recurrence of a bad payment record shall be the cause for requiring a new or
larger deposit for the continuation of service. The owner of the property shall be responsible
for any uncollected utility service charges.
CHAPTER 92 WATER RATES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 472 -
[The next page is 475]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 475 -
CHAPTER 93
WATER CONSERVATION
93.01 Control of Water Supply 93.05 Reduction In Flow of Water To Any Customer
93.02 Advisory For Voluntary Conservation 93.06 Penalties
93.03 Limited Usage Conservation 93.07 Exemptions
93.04 Maximum Usage Rationing
93.01 CONTROL OF WATER SUPPLY. During conditions when the supply of water to
the water distribution system becomes depleted, such as drought or mechanical failure, water
may need to be rationed. The Council may declare, by resolution, a public emergency water
shortage. The shortage may require one of three possible actions contained in the following
sections, which shall be imposed for water consumption until the water shortage emergency is
ended.
93.02 ADVISORY FOR VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION. The City shall advise the
public through the local news media that a water shortage exists and all users are requested to
reduce consumption of water in order to conserve water supplies.
93.03 LIMITED USAGE CONSERVATION. If voluntary conservation is not adequate to
guarantee sufficient water supply for general use and fire protection, the City shall limit usage
by enforcing a premium rate charge as follows:
1. Base Allocation. The base allocation of water for each customer shall be
equal to said customer’s estimated average consumption per billing period.
2. Appeal and Adjustment of the Base Allocation. Any customer may appeal to
the Superintendent to adjust the base allocation amount. An adjustment may be
granted using the following criteria:
A. For Single-Family Residential use, the base allocation may be
increased to 15% above the actual average consumption for the previous
winter (November through April).
B. For Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and Multi-Family
Residential use, the base allocation may be increased based on factors
appropriate to the individual customer, such as the average consumption
during the previous winter (November through April), production, service,
and occupancy data provided by the customer.
3. Premium Rate for Over-Consumption. In addition to the water rates duly
enacted by the Council, all customers shall pay a premium rate of $10.00 per 1,000
gallons consumed in excess of the Base Allocation.
4. Adjustment of Premium Rate Charges. Any customer may file for an
adjustment of the premium rate charges. The Superintendent may grant an adjustment
in accordance with the following criteria:
A. The cause of the high consumption shall be mechanical in nature
(such as broken or leaky pipes or fixtures) rather than human carelessness.
CHAPTER 93 WATER CONSERVATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 476 -
B. The customer shall furnish proof that the mechanical failure was
repaired promptly. This should be in the form of a licensed plumber’s
invoice, statement or a materials receipt.
C. The adjustment shall be granted only for the billing period
immediately prior to the correction of the failure.
D. There shall be a minimum adjusted rate of $5.00 for accounts granted
an adjustment of the premium rate charges.
93.04 MAXIMUM USAGE RATIONING. If voluntary and limited usage conservation
are not adequate to guarantee sufficient water supply for essential use, the City shall limit
usage by prohibiting certain water uses, and, if necessary, as a separate measurement or in
conjunction therewith, by enforcing an accelerated premium rate as follows:
1. Accelerated Premium. All customers shall pay a premium rate of $25.00 per
1,000 gallons consumed in excess of the base allocation.
2. Prohibited and Restricted Water Uses. The following are prohibited and
restricted water uses during a water shortage emergency:
A. No outdoor watering or irrigation of lawns in any way whatsoever.
B. No outdoor watering of any kind between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. daily.
C. Watering or irrigation of flowers and vegetable gardens, trees and
shrub trees less than four years old, and new seeding or sod is permitted once
per week with an application not to exceed one inch.
D. No car washing is allowed except at commercial establishments
which provide that service.
E. No water shall be used to fill private swimming pools, children’s
wading pools or any other outdoor pool or pond of any kind or description
whatsoever.
However, water reclaimed or recycled after some other primary use and water derived
from sources other than the municipal water supply are not subject to this chapter.
93.05 REDUCTION IN FLOW OF WATER TO ANY CUSTOMER. The
Superintendent is authorized, after giving notice and opportunity for hearing, to reduce the
flow of water in any manner not in accordance with this chapter.
93.06 PENALTIES. Any customers who, in making application to the Superintendent for
adjustment of the base allocation or premium rate charges, intentionally provides false or
incorrect statements or information shall automatically have their requests denied and shall
additionally be liable to a penalty of $25.00 for the first offense and a penalty of $100.00 for
the next and each succeeding or additional violation. Failure to pay the penalty within five (5)
working days after assessment shall mean discontinuation of water service until the fine and a
$5.00 reconnect charge are paid in full.
93.07 EXEMPTIONS. The Council may by contract waive enforcement of this chapter or
limit its application as to a particular individual, organization, or business; or may waive
enforcement of this chapter or limit its application upon petition to the Council by an
individual, organization, or business after public hearing.
CHAPTER 93 WATER CONSERVATION
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 477 -
[The next page is 493]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 493 -
CHAPTER 95
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
95.01 Purpose 95.06 Service Outside the City
95.02 Definitions 95.07 Right of Entry
95.03 Superintendent 95.08 Use of Easements
95.04 Prohibited Acts 95.09 Special Penalties
95.05 Sewer Connection Required
95.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters of this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Sanitary Sewers is to establish rules and regulations governing the treatment and disposal of
sanitary sewage within the City in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
95.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms are defined:
1. “B.O.D.” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees (20º) C, expressed in
milligrams per liter or parts per million.
2. “Building drain” means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning
five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
3.
“Building sewer” means that part of the horizontal piping from the building
wall to its connection with the main sewer or the primary treatment portion of an onsite
wastewater treatment and disposal system conveying the drainage of one building
site.
4. “Combined sewer” means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage.
5. “Customer” means any person responsible for the production of domestic,
commercial or industrial waste which is directly or indirectly discharged into the
public sewer system.
6. “Garbage” means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale
of produce.
7. “Industrial wastes” means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
8. “Inspector” means the person duly authorized by the Council to inspect and
approve the installation of building sewers and their connections to the public sewer
system; and to inspect such sewage as may be discharged therefrom.
9. “Natural outlet” means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.
10. “On-site wastewater treatment and disposal system” means all equipment and
devices necessary for proper conduction, collection, storage, treatment, and disposal
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 494 -
of wastewater from four or fewer dwelling units or other facilities serving the
equivalent of fifteen persons (1500 gpd) or less.
11. “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
12. “Public sewer” means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
13. “Sanitary sewage” means sewage discharging from the sanitary conveniences
of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories or
institutions, and free from storm, surface water, and industrial waste.
14. “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm,
surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
15. “Sewage” means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
16. “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures
used for treating sewage.
17. “Sewage works” or “sewage system” means all facilities for collecting,
pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
18. “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
19. “Sewer service charges” means any and all charges, rates or fees levied
against and payable by customers, as consideration for the servicing of said customers
by said sewer system.
20. “Slug” means any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average 24-hour
concentration or flows during normal operation.
21. “Storm drain” or “storm sewer” means a sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than
unpolluted cooling water.
22. “Superintendent” means the Director of Public Works/City Engineer of the
City or any authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
23. “Suspended solids” means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory
filtering.
24. “Watercourse” means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
95.03 SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent shall exercise the following powers and
duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Operation and Maintenance. Operate and maintain the City sewage system.
2. Inspection and Tests. Conduct necessary inspections and tests to assure
compliance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters.
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 495 -
3. Records. Maintain a complete and accurate record of all sewers, sewage
connections and manholes constructed showing the location and grades thereof.
95.04 PROHIBITED ACTS. No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
1. Damage Sewer System. Maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the sewer system.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
2. Surface Run-off or Groundwater. Connect a roof downspout, sump pump,
exterior foundation drain, areaway drain, or other source of surface run-off or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer, except when application has been made to the
Superintendent to connect the above-enumerated items to the public sanitary sewer
and written approval has been given by the Superintendent to make such connection.
3. Manholes. Open or enter any manhole of the sewer system, except by
authority of the Superintendent.
4. Objectionable Wastes. Place or deposit in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any
human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
5. Septic Tanks. Construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage except as
provided in these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
6. Untreated Discharge. Discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in
any area under its jurisdiction, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of these chapters.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
95.05 SEWER CONNECTION REQUIRED. The owners of any houses, buildings, or
properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated
within the City and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located,
or may in the future be located, a public sanitary or combined sewer, are hereby required to
install, at such owner’s expense, suitable toilet facilities therein and a building sewer
connecting such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, and to maintain the same all in
accordance with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters, such compliance to be
completed within ninety (90) days after date of official notice from the City to do so provided
that said public sewer is located within two hundred (200) feet (61 meters) of the property line
of such owner and is of such design as to receive and convey by gravity such sewage as may
be conveyed to it. Billing for sanitary sewer service will begin the date of official notice to
connect to the public sewer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [3f])
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
CHAPTER 95 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 496 -
95.06 SERVICE OUTSIDE THE CITY. The owners of property outside the corporate
limits of the City so situated that it may be served by the City sewer system may apply to the
Council for permission to connect to the public sewer upon the terms and conditions stipulated
by resolution of the Council.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.4 [2 & 3])
95.07 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of
the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties
for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance
with the provisions of these Sanitary Sewer chapters. The Superintendent or representatives
shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil,
refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the
kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
95.08 USE OF EASEMENTS. The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees
of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but
not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of
any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work,
if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
95.09 SPECIAL PENALTIES. The following special penalty provisions shall apply to
violations of these Sanitary Sewer chapters:
1. Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provision of these
chapters except subsections 1, 3 and 4 of Section 95.04, shall be served by the City
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
2. Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided for in subsection 1 hereof shall be in violation of this Code of
Ordinances. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.
3. Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of these
chapters shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned
the City by reason of such violation.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 497 -
CHAPTER 96
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
96.01 Permit 96.06 Inspection Required
96.02 Permit Fee and Tapping Fee 96.07 Property Owner’s Responsibility
96.03 Plumber Required 96.08 Abatement of Violations
96.04 Connection Requirements 96.09 Abandoned Connections
96.05 Sewer Tap
96.01 PERMIT. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the City. There are two classes of building sewer permits: for
residential and commercial service, and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. The application for a permit shall set forth the location and description of the property
to be connected with the sewer system and the purpose for which the sewer is to be used, and
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent.
The permit shall require the owner to complete construction and connection of the building
sewer to the public sewer within sixty (60) days after the issuance of the permit, except that
when a property owner makes sufficient showing that due to conditions beyond the owner’s
control or peculiar hardship, such time period is inequitable or unfair, an extension of time
within which to comply with the provisions herein may be granted. Any sewer connection
permit may be revoked at any time for a violation of these chapters.
96.02 PERMIT FEE AND TAPPING FEE. A permit fee and a tapping fee as established
by resolution of the Council shall be paid to the City prior to issuance of the permit. In the
event that work has commenced without first obtaining a permit, the permit fee shall be
doubled.
96.03 PLUMBER REQUIRED. All installations of building sewers and connections to the
public sewer shall be made by a State-licensed plumber.
96.04 CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS. The installation of the building sewer and its
connection to the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the State Building Code,
the laws of the State and other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
96.05 SEWER TAP. Connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made
at the wye branch, if such branch is available at a suitable location. If no properly located wye
branch is available, a saddle wye shall be installed at the location specified by the
Superintendent. The public sewer shall be tapped with a tapping machine and a saddle
appropriate to the type of public sewer shall be glued or attached with a gasket and stainless
steel clamps to the sewer. At no time shall a building sewer be constructed so as to enter a
manhole unless special written permission is received from the Superintendent and in
accordance with the Superintendent’s direction if such connection is approved.
96.06 INSPECTION REQUIRED. No building sewer shall be covered, concealed or put
into use until it has been tested, inspected and accepted as prescribed in the State Building
Code, the laws of the State and other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
CHAPTER 96 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 498 -
96.07 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY. All costs and expenses incident to
the installation, connection and maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the
owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
96.08 ABATEMENT OF VIOLATIONS. Building sewers, whether located upon the
private property of any owner or in the public right-of-way, which are constructed or
maintained in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and the same shall be abated by the City in the manner provided for the abatement of
nuisances.
96.09 ABANDONED CONNECTIONS. When an existing building sewer service is
abandoned, the disconnection and capping shall be at the main. If the main and/or wye is
damaged or cracked, the wye fitting is removed and the main replaced. An inspection by a
City representative is required prior to backfilling.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 499 -
CHAPTER 97
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
97.01 Storm Water 97.05 Restricted Discharges; Powers of Superintendent
97.02 Surface Waters Exception 97.06 Special Facilities
97.03 Prohibited Discharges 97.07 Control Manholes
97.04 Restricted Discharges 97.08 Testing of Wastes
97.01 STORM WATER. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm
water, surface water, groundwater, roof run-off, sub-surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Storm water and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as
combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the
Superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
97.02 SURFACE WATERS EXCEPTION. Special permits for discharging surface
waters to a public sanitary sewer may be issued by the Council upon recommendation of the
Superintendent where such discharge is deemed necessary or advisable for purposes of
flushing, but any permit so issued shall be subject to revocation at any time when deemed to
the best interests of the sewer system.
97.03 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Flammable or Explosive Material. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil,
or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
2. Toxic or Poisonous Materials. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction
with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides
in excess of two (2) milligrams per liter as CN in the wastes as discharged to the
public sewer.
3. Corrosive Wastes. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or Viscous Substances. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of
such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper
dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
5. Excessive B.O.D., Solids or Flow.
A. Any waters or wastes: (i) having a five-day biochemical oxygen
demand greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or (ii) containing more
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 500 -
than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or (iii) having an
average daily flow greater than two percent of the average sewage flow of the
City, shall be subject to the review of the Superintendent.
B. Where necessary in the opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall
provide, at the owner’s expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to: (i) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per
million by weight; or (ii) reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million
by weight; or (iii) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters
or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating
to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
97.04 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely
in the opinion of the Superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion
as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Superintendent will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the
sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and
other pertinent factors. The substances restricted are:
1. High Temperature. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one
hundred fifty degrees (150º) F (65º C).
2. Fat, Oil, Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or 600 milligrams per
liter of dispersed or other soluble matter.
3. Viscous Substances. Water or wastes containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32º F and 150º F (0º to 65º C).
4. Garbage. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, that is, to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (½) inch in any
dimension.
5. Acids. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
6. Toxic or Objectionable Wastes. Any waters or wastes containing iron,
chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes
exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits
established by the Superintendent for such materials.
7. Odor or Taste. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of State, federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 501 -
8. Radioactive Wastes. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance
with applicable State or federal regulations.
9. Excess Alkalinity. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
10. Unusual Wastes. Materials which exert or cause:
A. Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
B. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
C. Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
D. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
11. Noxious or Malodorous Gases. Any noxious or malodorous gas or other
substance which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is capable of creating
a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their
maintenance and repair.
12. Damaging Substances. Any waters, wastes, materials or substances which
react with water or wastes in the sewer system to release noxious gases, develop color
of undesirable intensity, form suspended solids in objectionable concentration or
create any other condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
13. Untreatable Wastes. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not
amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or
are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent
cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to
the receiving waters.
97.05 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES; POWERS OF SUPERINTENDENT. If any
waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which
waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 97.04 and
which in the judgment of the Superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage
works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
1. Rejection. Reject the wastes by requiring disconnection from the public
sewage system;
2. Pretreatment. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers;
3. Controls Imposed. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or
4. Special Charges. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the
provisions of Chapter 99.
CHAPTER 97 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 502 -
97.06 SPECIAL FACILITIES. If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing
facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at the owner’s expense.
97.07 CONTROL MANHOLES. When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the
owner’s expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all
times.
97.08 TESTING OF WASTES. All measurements, tests, and analyses of the
characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be
determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods
to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of
hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a
24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or
samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, B.O.D. and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH’s are determined from periodic
grab samples).
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 503 -
CHAPTER 98
ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
98.01 When Prohibited 98.05 Discharge Restrictions
98.02 When Required 98.06 Maintenance of System
98.03 Compliance with Regulations 98.07 Systems Abandoned
98.04 Permit Required 98.08 Disposal of Septage
98.01 WHEN PROHIBITED. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful
to construct or maintain any on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
98.02 WHEN REQUIRED. When a public sanitary sewer is not available under the
provisions of Section 95.05, every building wherein persons reside, congregate or are
employed shall be provided with an approved on-site wastewater treatment and disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.03 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS. The type, capacity, location and layout
of a private on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall comply with the
specifications and requirements set forth by the Iowa Administrative Code 567, Chapter 69,
and with such additional requirements as are prescribed by the regulations of the County
Board of Health.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3 & 4])
98.04 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall install or alter an on-site wastewater
treatment and disposal system without first obtaining a permit from the County Board of
Health.
98.05 DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS. It is unlawful to discharge any wastewater from
an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system (except under an NPDES permit) to any
ditch, stream, pond, lake, natural or artificial waterway, drain tile or to the surface of the
ground.
(IAC, 567-69.1[3])
98.06 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM. The owner of an on-site wastewater treatment and
disposal system shall operate and maintain the system in a sanitary manner at all times and at
no expense to the City.
98.07 SYSTEMS ABANDONED. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a
property served by an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, as provided in
Section 95.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with these
Sanitary Sewer chapters and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall be
abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3f])
CHAPTER 98 ON-SITE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 504 -
98.08 DISPOSAL OF SEPTAGE. No person shall dispose of septage from an on-site
treatment system at any location except an approved disposal site.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 505 -
CHAPTER 99
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS
USER CHARGES
99.01 Purpose 99.07 Special Rates
99.02 Definitions 99.08 Responsibility for Increased Costs
99.03 Use of Funds 99.09 Payment of Bills
99.04 Fund Established 99.10 Lien for Nonpayment
99.05 Charges Based on Usage 99.11 Annual Rate Adjustment and Review of Rates
99.06 User Charges 99.12 Notification of Rate Change
99.01 PURPOSE. It is determined and declared to be necessary and conducive to the
protection of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the City to collect charges
from all users who contribute wastewater to the City’s treatment works. The proceeds of such
charges so derived will be used for the purpose of operating, maintaining and retiring the debt
for such public wastewater treatment works.
99.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Normal domestic wastewater” means wastewater that has a BOD
concentration of not more than 300 mg/l and a suspended solids concentration of not
more than 350 mg/l.
2. “Operation and maintenance” means all expenditures during the useful life of
the wastewater treatment works for materials, labor, utilities and other items which are
necessary for managing and maintaining the treatment works to achieve the capacity
and performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
3. “Replacement” means expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes
replacement.
4. “Treatment works” means any devices and systems used for the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage, domestic sewage or liquid
industrial wastes. These include intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewage
collection systems, pumping, power and other equipment and their appurtenances;
extensions, improvement, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; elements
essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment units and
clear well facilities; and any works, including site acquisition of the land, that will be
an integral part of the treatment process or used for ultimate disposal of residues
resulting from such treatment (including land used for composting sludge, temporary
storage of such compost, and land used for the storage of treated wastewater in land
treatment systems before land application); or any other method or system for
preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of municipal
waste or industrial waste, including waste in combined storm water and sanitary sewer
systems.
CHAPTER 99 WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS
USER CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 506 -
5. “Useful life” means the estimated period during which a treatment works will
be operated.
6. “User charge” means that portion of the total wastewater service charge which
is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost of operation, maintenance
and replacement of the treatment works.
7. “Water meter” means a water volume measuring and recording device,
furnished by the City in accordance with Chapter 91 of this Code of Ordinances.
99.03 USE OF FUNDS. The user charge system shall generate adequate annual revenues to
pay costs of annual operation and maintenance including replacement and costs associated
with debt retirement of bonded capital associated with financing the treatment works which
the City may by ordinance designate to be paid by the user charge system. That portion of the
total user charge which is designated for operation and maintenance including replacement of
the treatment works shall be established by this chapter.
99.04 FUND ESTABLISHED. Revenue derived from user charges, as established in this
chapter, shall be deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund known as the Operation,
Maintenance and Replacement Fund.
99.05 CHARGES BASED ON USAGE. Each user shall pay for the services provided by
the City based on said user’s use of the treatment works, which shall be determined as follows:
1. Public Water System. The user charge for all customers whose premises are
served by the public water system will be based on actual water usage as determined
by water meter readings. If a customer has a consumptive use of water or in some
other manner uses water which does not enter the wastewater collection system, the
user charge for that customer may be:
A. Based on a wastewater meter installed and maintained at the
customer’s expense and in a manner acceptable to the City; or
B. Adjusted by metering such consumptive use on a separate meter
installed in accordance with Section 91.02 of this Code of Ordinances. The
user charge will be waived on the meter reading of the consumptive use
meter.
2. Private Water Systems. Customers whose premises are served by a private
water system shall pay user charges based upon the water used as determined by the
Superintendent either by an estimate agreed to by the customer or by metering the
water system at the customer’s expense. Any negotiated or agreed upon charges shall
be subject to approval of the Council.
99.06 USER CHARGES. Effective March 1, 2019, the minimum charge per month shall
be $11.43. In addition, each customer shall pay a user charge rate for operation and
maintenance including replacement of $5.82 per 1,000 gallons of water, as determined in the
preceding section. (Ord. 1126 – Mar. 19 Supp.)
99.07 SPECIAL RATES. The City may establish special rates by contract with major
contributing industries and with those who discharge to the sanitary sewer system from a
location outside of the corporate limits of the City whose type or quantity of use or service are
unusual.
CHAPTER 99 WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS
USER CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 507 -
99.08 RESPONSIBILITY FOR INCREASED COSTS. Any user which discharges any
toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge
from the City’s treatment works or any user which discharges any substance which singly or
by interaction with other substances causes identifiable increases in the cost of operation,
maintenance or replacement of the treatment works shall pay for such increased costs. The
charge to each such user shall be as determined by the responsible plant operating personnel
and approved by the Council.
99.09 PAYMENT OF BILLS. All users shall be billed under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in Section 92.03
of this Code of Ordinances. Sewer service may be discontinued in accordance with the
provisions contained in Section 92.04 if the combined service account becomes delinquent,
and the provisions contained in Section 92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the
event of a delinquent account.
99.10 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. Except as provided for in Section 92.07 of this Code
of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for sewer service charges to the premises. Sewer service charges
remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises served and shall be
certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same manner as property
taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
99.11 ANNUAL RATE ADJUSTMENT AND REVIEW OF RATES. Effective the 1st
day of July each year, beginning in 2008, the minimum monthly charge and user charge rate
as set forth in Section 99.06 of this chapter shall be increased by 3.5% from the minimum
monthly charge and user charge rate for the prior year. The City shall review the user charge
system every two years to ensure that the system generates adequate revenues to pay the costs
of operation and maintenance including replacement and that the system continues to provide
for the proportional distribution of operation and maintenance, including replacement costs
among users and user classes.
99.12 NOTIFICATION OF RATE CHANGE. The City will notify each user at least
annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate being charged for operation and
maintenance including replacement of the treatment works.
CHAPTER 99 WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS
USER CHARGES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 508 -
[The next page is 513]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 513 -
CHAPTER 100
STORMWATER UTILITY
100.01 Purpose 100.09 Lien for Nonpayment
100.02 Definitions 100.10 Lien Notice
100.03 Scope and Responsibility for the 100.11 Discontinuance of Service
Stormwater Utility 100.12 Annual Revision of Rates
100.04 Prohibited Acts 100.13 Sump Pump Systems; Connection to Storm Sewer
100.05 Right of Entry System
100.06 Penalties 100.14 Inspection and Approval
100.07 Service Charge 100.15 Responsibility for Sump Pump Discharge Line
100.08 Billing for Stormwater Service 100.16 Failure to Maintain; Connection Required
100.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a Stormwater Utility which
shall be responsible for stormwater management within the corporate boundaries of the City of
Charles City, Iowa, and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use
and enhancement of stormwater management systems and facilities.
100.02 DEFINITIONS.
1. “Customers of stormwater utility” includes all persons, properties and entities
served by and/or benefiting from the utility’s acquisition, management, maintenance,
extension and improvement of the public stormwater management system and
facilities.
2. “Service charge” means the periodic rate, fee or charge applicable to a parcel
of developed land, which shall be reflective of the service provided by the City
stormwater utility. Service charges shall be based upon the actual costs of operation,
maintenance, acquisition, extension and replacement of the City’s stormwater
management systems and facilities, including the costs of bond repayment, regulation,
administration, and services of the City.
3. “Stormwater management systems and facilities” addresses the issue of
drainage management (flooding) and environmental quality (pollution, erosion and
sedimentation) of receiving rivers, streams, creeks, lakes and ponds through
improvements, maintenance, regulation and funding of plants, structures and property
used in the collection, retention, detention and treatment of stormwater or surface
water drainage.
100.03 SCOPE AND RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE STORMWATER UTILITY. The
City of Charles City stormwater utility consists of all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes,
ponds, drainage ways, channels, ditches, swales, stormwater, culverts, inlets, catch basins,
pipes, dams, head walls and other structures, natural or man-made, within the corporate
boundaries of the City which control and/or convey stormwater through which the City
intentionally diverts surface waters from its public streets and properties. The City owns or
has legal access for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvement to those segments of
this system which: (i) are located within public streets, rights-of-ways and easements; (ii) are
subject to easement or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation,
maintenance and improvement of systems or facilities; or (iii) are located on public lands to
which the City has adequate access for operation, maintenance and improvement of systems or
facilities. Operation, maintenance and improvement of stormwater systems and facilities
CHAPTER 100 STORMWATER UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 514 -
which are located on private property or public property not owned by the City and for which
there has been no public dedication of such systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal
responsibility of the property owner, or its occupant.
100.04 PROHIBITED ACTS. No person shall do, or allow, any of the following:
1. Damage Stormwater Management Systems and Facilitates. Maliciously,
willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, pipe, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the stormwater
management systems or facilities.
2. Illicit Discharges. No person shall throw, drain or otherwise discharge or
cause to throw, drain, run or allow to seep or otherwise be discharged into the City
stormwater management system and facilities, including but not limited to pollutants
or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater.
3. Manholes. Open or enter any manhole, structure or intake of the stormwater
system, except by authority of the City.
4. Connection. Connection of any private stormwater system to the City’s
stormwater management system and facilities, except by authority of the City.
100.05 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Employees of the City bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing all private stormwater discharges directly or
indirectly entering into any public stormwater management system or facility in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
100.06 PENALTIES. The following penalty provisions shall apply to violations of this
chapter:
1. Notice of Violation. Any person found to be violating any provisions of this
chapter shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
remedy all violations.
2. Continuing Violations. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond
the time limit provided for in subsection 1 thereof, shall be subject to a civil penalty as
set forth in the Schedule of Civil Penalties in Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.
Each day which said violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
3. Liability Imposed. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the City by
reason of such violation.
100.07 SERVICE CHARGE. Each residential, commercial and industrial customer of the
stormwater utility within the corporate limits of the City shall pay a service charge of $5.00
per month. Exempt from these charges are property owned by a public governmental entity.
(Ord. 1103 – Jul. 17 Supp.)
100.08 BILLING FOR STORMWATER SERVICE. All stormwater service charges
shall be billed as part of the combined service account and shall be due and payable under the
same terms and conditions as set forth in Section 92.03 of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 100 STORMWATER UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 515 -
100.09 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. Except as provided for in Section 92.07 of this Code
of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for stormwater service charges to the premises. Stormwater
service charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises
served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same
manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
100.10 LIEN NOTICE. A lien for delinquent stormwater service charges shall not be
certified to the County Treasurer unless prior written notice of intent to certify a lien is given
to the customer in whose name the delinquent charges were incurred. If the customer is a
tenant and if the owner or landlord of the property or premises has made a written request for
notice, the notice shall also be given to the owner or landlord. The notice shall be sent to the
appropriate persons by ordinary mail not less than thirty (30) days prior to certification of the
lien to the County Treasurer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
100.11 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE. The City may discontinue water service to a
customer who is delinquent in payment of the combined service account in accordance with
the provisions contained in Section 92.04 of this Code of Ordinances. The fees for
discontinuance of service, disconnection and reconnection, as set forth in Sections 92.04 and
92.05 of this Code of Ordinances shall apply.
100.12 ANNUAL REVISION OF RATES. The City will review the stormwater service
charges at least yearly and revise the stormwater service charges as necessary to ensure that
such charges as herein established and specified generate adequate revenues to pay the costs
of maintenance and operation (including replacement and debt service) of a stormwater
management system and facilities. The liability of a stormwater service user to pay for
charges as provided in this chapter shall not be contingent, however, upon any such review or
revision.
100.13 SUMP PUMP SYSTEMS; CONNECTION TO STORM SEWER SYSTEM.
1. All sump pump systems must discharge into a City subdrain or storm sewer,
sump pump collection system, or natural outlet, such as a grass yard area or creek,
abutting the property. No sump pump system shall have a discharge point within ten
feet from any property line, and no discharge shall be directed so as to impact
neighboring properties or any City street, sidewalk, or right-of-way.
2. Any dwelling, building, or other unit, which, because of infiltration of water
into basements, crawl spaces, and the like, require a sump pump system to discharge
water, may have a permanently installed sump pump discharge line connected to a
City subdrain or storm sewer system. Such discharge line shall consist of a rigid
discharge line inside the structure, without valving or quick connections for altering
the path of discharge and, if connected to the City subdrain or storm sewer system,
shall include a check valve and an air gap valve at the building. Such discharge line
shall consist of a pipe that shall be installed through the outside foundation wall of the
dwelling, building, or other structure, with rigid pipe one and one-half inches (1 ½”)
inside diameter minimum, without valves or quick connections that would alter the
path of discharge.
3. Before any person makes a connection to a City subdrain or storm sewer
system, a written permit must be obtained from the City. The application for the
CHAPTER 100 STORMWATER UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 516 -
permit shall include a legal description of the property, the name of the property
owner, and the name and address of the person who will do the work. If the proposed
work meets all requirements of this chapter and if all fees required under this chapter
have been paid, the permit shall be issued. Work under any permit must be completed
within sixty (60) days after the permit is issued, except that when such time period is
inequitable or unfair due to conditions beyond the control of the person making the
application, an extension of time within which to complete the work may be granted.
The permit may be revoked at any time for any violation of this chapter. All
installations of sump pump discharge lines and connections to a City subdrain, or
storm sewer system shall be made by a City-licensed contractor.
4. A permit fee and a tapping fee as established by resolution of the Council
shall be paid to the City prior to issuance of a permit. In the event that work has
commenced without first obtaining a permit, the permit fee shall be doubled.
5. The installation of sump pump systems and their connection to the City storm
sewer system shall conform to the requirements of the State Building Code, the laws
of the State and other applicable rules and regulations of the City.
(Ord. 1128 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
100.14 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL. All sump pump discharge lines and their
connections to the storm sewer system must be inspected and approved in writing by the
Superintendent or other duly authorized employee of the City before they are covered, and the
City shall keep a record of such approvals. If the Superintendent refuses to approve the work,
the contractor or property owner must proceed immediately to correct the work. Every person
who uses or intends to use the City storm sewer system shall permit the Superintendent or
other duly authorized employee of the City to enter the premises to inspect or make necessary
alterations or repairs at all reasonable hours and on proof of authority.
(Ord. 1128 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
100.15 RESPONSIBILITY FOR SUMP PUMP DISCHARGE LINE. All costs and
expenses incident to the installation, connection and maintenance of the sump pump discharge
line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation or maintenance of said sump
pump discharge line. (Ord. 1128 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
100.16 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN; CONNECTION REQUIRED. When any portion of
the sump pump discharge line which is the responsibility of the property owner becomes
defective or creates a nuisance, and the property abuts on any street, alley, or right-of-way in
which there is located a City storm sewer or subdrain, the property owner shall be required to
install, at such owner’s expense, a suitable sump pump discharge line connecting such line
directly with the proper storm sewer or subdrain system, and to maintain the same all in
accordance with this chapter, such compliance to be completed within ninety (90) days after
date of official notice from the City to do so. If the property owner fails to do so, or otherwise
fails to correct such nuisance, the City may do so and assess the costs thereof to the property.
(Ord. 1128 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 100 STORMWATER UTILITY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 517 -
[The next page is 531]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 531 -
CHAPTER 105
SOLID WASTE CONTROL
105.01 Purpose 105.07 Littering Prohibited
105.02 Definitions 105.08 Open Dumping Prohibited
105.03 Sanitary Disposal Required 105.09 Toxic and Hazardous Waste
105.04 Health and Fire Hazard 105.10 Waste Storage Containers
105.05 Open Burning Restricted 105.11 Prohibited Practices
105.06 Separation of Yard Waste Required 105.12 Sanitary Disposal Project Designated
105.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of the chapters in this Code of Ordinances pertaining to
Solid Waste Control and Collection is to provide for the sanitary storage, collection and
disposal of solid waste and, thereby, to protect the citizens of the City from such hazards to
their health, safety and welfare as may result from the uncontrolled disposal of solid waste.
105.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in these chapters the following terms are defined:
1. “Collector” means any person authorized to gather solid waste from public
and private places.
2. “Contract collector” means the contract collector designated by the City
pursuant to contract to collect and distribute all solid waste material within the
corporate limits of the City.
3. “Discard” means to place, cause to be placed, throw, deposit or drop.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[2])
4. “Dwelling unit” means any room or group of rooms located within a structure
and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used, or are intended to be
used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
5. “Garbage” means all solid and semisolid, putrescible animal and vegetable
waste resulting from the handling, preparing, cooking, storing, serving and consuming
of food or of material intended for use as food, and all offal, excluding useful
industrial by-products, and includes all such substances from all public and private
establishments and from all residences.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
6. “Landscape waste” means any vegetable or plant waste except garbage. The
term includes trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery and yard trimmings.
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
7. “Litter” means any garbage, rubbish, trash, refuse, waste materials or debris.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.361[1])
8. “Owner” means, in addition to the record titleholder, any person residing in,
renting, leasing, occupying, operating or transacting business in any premises, and as
between such parties the duties, responsibilities, liabilities and obligations hereinafter
imposed shall be joint and several.
9. “Recyclable material” means those materials separated by a person from solid
waste incidental to the collection of the solid waste for utilization as raw materials to
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 532 -
be manufactured into a new product as determined from time to time by the Council.
Recyclable material may change from time to time based on available markets and
changing technology.
10. “Recycling center” means the site where recyclable materials are delivered
and processed.
11. “Refuse” means putrescible and non-putrescible waste, including but not
limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator residues, street cleanings, market and
industrial solid waste and sewage treatment waste in dry or semisolid form.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
12. “Residential premises” means a single-family dwelling and any multiplefamily
dwelling up to and including four separate dwelling units.
13. “Residential unit” means single-family dwelling units and each apartment in a
multi-family dwelling.
14. “Residential waste” means any refuse generated on the premises as a result of
residential activities, but the term excludes landscape waste, garbage, tires, trade
wastes and any locally recyclable goods or plastics. (Ord. 1113 – May 18 Supp.)
(IAC, 567-20.2[455B])
15. “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid waste consisting of combustible and
noncombustible waste, such as ashes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery or litter of any kind. (Ord. 1113 – May 18 Supp.)
(IAC, 567-100.2)
16. “Sanitary disposal” means a method of treating solid waste so that it does not
produce a hazard to the public health or safety or create a nuisance.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
17. “Sanitary disposal project” means all facilities and appurtenances including
all real and personal property connected with such facilities, which are acquired,
purchased, constructed, reconstructed, equipped, improved, extended, maintained, or
operated to facilitate the final disposition of solid waste without creating a significant
hazard to the public health or safety, and which are approved by the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
18. “Solid waste” means garbage, refuse, rubbish, and other similar discarded
solid or semisolid materials, including but not limited to such materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural, and domestic activities. Solid waste may include
vehicles, as defined by Section 321.1 of the Code of Iowa. Solid waste does not
include any of the following:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301)
A. Hazardous waste regulated under the Federal Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6921-6934.
B. Hazardous waste as defined in Section 455B.411 of the Code of Iowa,
except to the extent that rules allowing for the disposal of specific wastes have
been adopted by the State Environmental Protection Commission.
C. Source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended to January 1, 1979.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 533 -
D. Petroleum contaminated soil that has been remediated to acceptable
State or Federal standards.
E. Steel slag which is a product resulting from the steel manufacturing
process and is managed as an item of value in a controlled manner and not as
a discarded material.
105.03 SANITARY DISPOSAL REQUIRED. It is the duty of each owner to provide for
the sanitary disposal of all refuse accumulating on the owner’s premises before it becomes a
nuisance. Any such accumulation remaining on any premises for a period of more than thirty
(30) days shall be deemed a nuisance and the City may proceed to abate such nuisances in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 50 or by initiating proper action in district court.
(Code of Iowa, Ch. 657)
105.04 HEALTH AND FIRE HAZARD. It is unlawful for any person to permit to
accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, or on any public place, such quantities of
solid waste that constitute a health, sanitation or fire hazard.
105.05 OPEN BURNING RESTRICTED. Notwithstanding the provisions of the
International Fire Code, 2009 edition, no person shall allow, cause or permit open burning of
combustible materials where the products of combustion are emitted into the open air without
passing through a chimney or stack, except that open burning is permitted in the following
circumstances:
(IAC, 567-23.2[455B] and 567-100.2)
1. Disaster Rubbish. The open burning of rubbish, including landscape waste,
for the duration of the community disaster period in cases where an officially declared
emergency condition exists, provided that the burning of any structures or demolished
structures is conducted in accordance with 40 CFR Section 61.145.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3a])
2. Trees, Tree Trimmings and Leaves. The open burning of trees, tree trimmings
and leaves provided that the burn site is 1,000 or more feet distant from any occupied
structure, provided that such burning is conducted at a City-operated burning site, and
provided such burning is conducted in compliance with the rules established by the
State Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3b])
3. Flare Stacks. The open burning or flaring of waste gases, provided such open
burning or flaring is conducted in compliance with applicable rules of the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3c])
4. Recreational Fires. Supervised open fires for cooking, heating, pleasure,
ceremonial purposes, or similar purposes between the hours of 6:00 o’clock a.m. and
12:00 o’clock a.m. (midnight); utilizing only untreated wood or wood products;
having a total fuel area of three feet or less and two feet in height; and in compliance
with emission limits for visible air contaminants established by the Iowa Department
of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3e])
5. Training Fires and Controlled Burning. Fires set for the purpose of bona fide
training of public or industrial employees in the firefighting methods and the
controlled burning of a demolished building, provided that the training fires and
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 534 -
controlled burning are conducted in compliance with rules established by the State
Department of Natural Resources.
(IAC, 567-23.2[3g])
6. Variance. Any person wishing to conduct open burning of materials not
otherwise permitted by this section may make application for a permit to the Fire
Chief of Charles City, who may issue a permit for such open burning upon making the
following determinations:
A. That the applicant has designated a specific time and place for the
open burning;
B. That the burning will not cause unreasonable distress to citizens in
proximity to the burning. For the purpose of this paragraph, there shall be a
presumption that unreasonable distress will occur if occupied structures are
located within 300 feet of the burning location;
C. That the conditions are safe for the open burning of materials, and
that safeguards, including continuous supervision of the fire, are otherwise in
place to prevent damage to property or injury to persons;
D. That the applicant has met such other requirements, as deemed
necessary by the Fire Chief, for the protection of the public.
(Ord. 1094 – Aug. 16 Supp.)
105.06 SEPARATION OF YARD WASTE REQUIRED. All yard waste shall be
separated by the owner or occupant from all other solid waste accumulated on the premises
and shall be composted on the premises or shall be transported to a designated site established
by the City. As used in this section, “yard waste” means any debris such as grass clippings,
leaves, garden waste, brush, and trees. Yard waste does not include tree stumps.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may from time to time provide for pickup of leaves at
such dates to be announced by published notice. In such case, the owner or occupant may set
out separated leaves curbside for collection by the City or its authorized collector.
Additionally, the City may from time to time provide for pickup of brush at such dates to be
announced by published notice. In such case, the owner or occupant may set out separated
brush inside of the curb lines upon public streets for collection by the City or its authorized
collector.
(Ord. 1098 – Mar. 17 Supp.)
105.07 LITTERING PROHIBITED. No person shall discard any litter onto or in any
water or land, except that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the authorized
collection and discarding of such litter in or on areas or receptacles provided for such purpose.
When litter is discarded from a motor vehicle, the driver of the motor vehicle shall be
responsible for the act in any case where doubt exists as to which occupant of the motor
vehicle actually discarded the litter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.363)
105.08 OPEN DUMPING PROHIBITED. No person shall dump or deposit or permit the
dumping or depositing of any solid waste on the surface of the ground or into a body or stream
of water at any place other than a sanitary disposal project approved by the Director of the
State Department of Natural Resources, unless a special permit to dump or deposit solid waste
on land owned or leased by such person has been obtained from the Director of the State
Department of Natural Resources. However, this section does not prohibit the use of rubble at
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 535 -
places other than a sanitary disposal project. “Rubble” means dirt, stone, brick, or similar
inorganic materials used for beneficial fill, landscaping, excavation, or grading at places other
than a sanitary disposal project. Rubble includes asphalt waste only as long as it is not used in
contact with water or in a flood plain. For purposes of this section, rubble does not mean
gypsum or gypsum wallboard, coal combustion residue, foundry sand, or industrial process
wastes unless those wastes are approved by the State Department of Natural Resources.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 455B.301, Sec. 455B.307 and IAC, 567-100.2)
105.09 TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS WASTE. No person shall deposit in a solid waste
container or otherwise offer for collection any toxic or hazardous waste. Such materials shall
be transported and disposed of as prescribed by the Director of the State Department of
Natural Resources. As used in this section, “toxic and hazardous waste” means waste
materials, including but not limited to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics,
pathological waste, flammable or explosive materials and similar harmful waste which
requires special handling and which must be disposed of in such a manner as to conserve the
environment and protect the public health and safety.
(IAC, 567-100.2)
(IAC, 567-102.13[2] and 400-27.14[2])
105.10 WASTE STORAGE CONTAINERS. Every person owning, managing, operating,
leasing, or renting any premises, dwelling unit, or any place where refuse accumulates shall
provide and at all times maintain in good order and repair portable containers for refuse in
accordance with the following:
1. Residential Solid Waste. All residential solid waste, other than recyclables
and yard waste, shall be contained in approved green plastic tote containers in 35, 65,
or 95 gallon sizes provided by the contractor. Solid waste shall be placed and
contained in appropriate bags prior to placement in the green plastic tote containers.
Any excess residential solid waste which does not fit in the plastic container shall be
contained in approved plastic bags in 15-gallon and 33-gallon sizes provided by the
contractor and shall be placed next to the full plastic container for collection. Each
15-gallon approved plastic bag cannot exceed 25 pounds in weight and each 33-gallon
approved plastic bag cannot exceed 45 pounds in weight. The contractor shall replace
plastic containers damaged by the contractor or that become obsolete through ordinary
wear and tear.
2. Recyclable Materials. All recyclables, except glass, shall be placed in a 35,
65, or 95 gallon-sized blue plastic tote container provided by the contractor. Nonglass
recyclables must be placed loosely within the container and shall not be placed
within a plastic bag. Non-glass recyclables may be commingled, but must be rinsed,
dried, and cleaned or, in the case of cardboard, cleaned and flattened. Newsprint must
be dry and may not be contaminated with oil, grease, paint or other like materials.
Clear glass recyclables shall be placed in a similar rigid plastic or metal container, a
cardboard box, or a paper bag, but may not be enclosed in a plastic bag or the
contractor’s plastic recyclable container. Cardboard which cannot be placed into the
plastic container may be placed beside the plastic container provided it is cleaned,
flattened, and placed inside a cardboard box. The contractor may decline to collect
recyclables that are either mixed with non-recyclable materials or not prepared or
contained in compliance with these provisions. The contractor shall replace
recyclable containers damaged by the contractor or that become obsolete through
ordinary wear and tear.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 536 -
3. Containers. Solid waste disposal shall comply with the following:
A. Residential. All residential solid waste shall be contained in plastic
tote containers and in plastic bags provided by the contractor as outlined
above. These containers and bags shall be placed at curbside for collection
and shall not exceed the weight limits outlined in Subsection 2 above.
Approved plastic bags may not be placed curbside for collection unless the
plastic bags are placed next to a full plastic tote container. Plastic bags shall
be sealed and tied. There is no limit on the number of approved bags which
may be left for retrieval but each resident shall only dispose of solid waste
generated by that residential unit. The contractor shall not retrieve solid waste
which is contained in bags other than the approved plastic bags, which is
contained in a manner which violates the weight and volume restrictions set
forth herein, or which otherwise does not conform to the restrictions set forth
herein.
B. Commercial. Every person owning, managing, operating, leasing or
renting any commercial premises where an excessive amount of refuse
accumulates and where its storage in portable containers is impractical, shall
maintain metal bulk storage containers approved by the City.
C. Waste Container Storage. Commercial solid waste containers shall be
stored upon private property, unless the owner has been granted written
permission from the City to use public property for such purposes. The
storage site shall be well drained and fully accessible to collection equipment,
public health personnel and fire inspection personnel. All owners of
residential and commercial premises shall be responsible for proper storage of
all garbage and yard waste to prevent materials from being blown or scattered
around neighboring property and public streets and right-of-ways.
4. Location for Residential Collection. Both residential recyclables and solid
waste shall be placed curbside for collection with the open side of the plastic container
facing the street and with the lids to the containers fully closed. Plastic containers
shall not be placed curbside prior to twenty-four hours before scheduled collection,
and plastic containers shall be removed from the curbside within twenty-four hours
after collection. Adequate space at the curb of approximately four feet between the
plastic containers shall be provided for automated collection. Residents for whom
curbside collection constitutes a hardship because of age, infirmity or handicap, may
request off-curbside pickup subject to a doctor’s approval, and such service shall be
provided by the Contractor on a case by case basis.
5. Nonconforming Solid Waste and Recyclable Containers. Solid waste and
recyclable containers which are not in compliance with regulations will not be
collected until the problems are corrected with the contractor.
(Section 105.10 – Ord. 1113 – May 18 Supp.)
105.11 PROHIBITED PRACTICES. It is unlawful for any person to:
1. Unlawful Use of Containers. Deposit refuse in any solid waste containers not
owned by such person without the written consent of the owner of such containers.
2. Interfere with Collectors. Interfere in any manner with solid waste collection
equipment or with solid waste collectors in the lawful performance of their duties as
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 537 -
such, whether such equipment or collectors be those of the City, or those of any other
authorized waste collection service.
3. Incinerators. Burn rubbish or garbage except in incinerators designed for high
temperature operation, in which solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous combustible refuse
is ignited and burned efficiently, and from which the solid residues contain little or no
combustible material, as acceptable to the Environmental Protection Commission.
4. Scavenging. Take or collect any solid waste which has been placed out for
collection on any premises, unless such person is an authorized solid waste collector.
105.12 SANITARY DISPOSAL PROJECT DESIGNATED. The sanitary landfill
facilities operated by Floyd-Mitchell Solid Waste Management Agency are hereby designated
as the official “Public Sanitary Disposal Project” for the disposal of solid waste produced or
originating within the City.
CHAPTER 105 SOLID WASTE CONTROL
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 538 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 539 -
CHAPTER 106
COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
106.01 Collection Service 106.06 Right of Entry
106.02 Collection Vehicles 106.07 Collector's License
106.03 Loading 106.08 Collection Fees
106.04 Frequency of Collection 106.09 Lien for Nonpayment
106.05 Bulky Rubbish
106.01 COLLECTION SERVICE. The City shall provide by contract for the collection of
recyclable materials from residential units only and for the collection of solid waste, except
bulky rubbish as provided in Section 106.05, from residential premises only. The owners or
operators of commercial, industrial or institutional premises shall provide for the collection of
solid waste produced upon such premises.
106.02 COLLECTION VEHICLES. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and
transportation of garbage and similar putrescible waste or solid waste containing such
materials shall be leakproof, durable and of easily cleanable construction. They shall be
cleaned to prevent nuisances, pollution or insect breeding and shall be maintained in good
repair.
(IAC, 567-104.9[455B])
106.03 LOADING. Vehicles or containers used for the collection and transportation of any
solid waste shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not fall, leak, or
spill therefrom, and shall be covered to prevent blowing or loss of material. Where spillage
does occur, the material shall be picked up immediately by the collector or transporter and
returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly cleaned.
106.04 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION. All solid waste shall be collected from
residential premises at least once each week and from commercial, industrial and institutional
premises as frequently as may be necessary.
106.05 BULKY RUBBISH. Bulky rubbish which is too large or heavy to be collected in
the normal manner of other solid waste may be collected once each year as part of a special
collection of large and heavy non-recyclable materials for a fee, to be determined by the City.
The limit on the size, amount and character of these materials shall be determined by the City
and the franchise collector before the collection date and the public will be informed of the
restrictions.
106.06 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Solid waste collectors are hereby authorized to enter upon
private property for the purpose of collecting solid waste therefrom as required by this
chapter; however, solid waste collectors shall not enter dwelling units or other residential
buildings.
106.07 COLLECTOR’S LICENSE. No person shall engage in the business of collecting,
transporting, processing or disposing solid waste or recyclable materials or the selling of
approved plastic bags as provided for in Chapter 105 of this Code of Ordinances,
CHAPTER 106 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 540 -
other than the contract collector specifically authorized and franchised by the City, without
first obtaining from the City an annual license in accordance with the following:
1. Application. Application for the license shall be made to the City Clerk and
provide the following:
A. Name and Address. The full name and address of the applicant, and
if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers thereof.
B. Equipment. A complete and accurate listing of the number and type
of collection and transportation equipment to be used.
C. Collection Program. A complete description of the frequency, routes
and method of collection and transportation to be used.
D. Disposal. A statement as to the precise location and method of
disposal or processing facilities to be used.
2. Insurance. No collector’s license shall be issued until and unless the applicant
therefor, in addition to all other requirements set forth, shall file and maintain with the
City a certificate of insurance which specifically gives evidence of the following
forms of insurance protection:
A. Public liability insurance covering all operations performed by
persons employed by the collector, by a subcontractor or his/her employees,
or by an independent contractor.
B. Motor vehicle bodily injury liability insurance and property damage
liability insurance on all motor vehicles employed on the work, whether
owned by the collector or by other persons, firms, or corporations.
C. The minimum protection shall be as follows:
General Liability Insurance...............................$1,000,000 per person
Auto...................................................................$1,000,000 per person
Umbrella Policy................................................ $1,000,000
Each insurance policy required hereunder shall include as part thereof provisions
requiring the insurance carrier to notify the City of the expiration, cancellation or
other termination of coverage not less than ten (10) days prior to the effective date of
such action.
3. License Fee. A license fee in the amount of $100.00 plus $10.00 for each
collection vehicle shall accompany the application. In the event the requested license
is not granted, the fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant.
4. License Issued. If the Council, upon investigation, finds the application to be
in order and determines that the applicant will collect, transport, process or dispose of
solid waste or recyclable materials without hazard to the public health, damage to the
environment and in compliance with State and federal regulations.
5. License Renewal. A renewal license may be granted simply upon payment of
the required fee, provided the applicant agrees to continue to operate in substantially
the same manner as provided in the original application.
6. License Not Transferable. No license authorized by this chapter may be
transferred to another person.
CHAPTER 106 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 541 -
7. Owner May Transport. Nothing herein is to be construed so as to prevent the
owner from transporting solid waste or recyclable materials originating from and
accumulated upon premises owned, occupied and used by such owner, provided such
refuse is disposed of properly in the official Public Sanitary Disposal project, a
licensed recycling center or by other lawful means.
8. Grading or Excavation Excepted. No license or permit is required for the
removal, hauling or disposal of earth and rock material from grading or excavation
activities; however, all such materials shall be conveyed in tight vehicles, trucks or
receptacles so constructed and maintained that none of the material being transported
spills upon any public right-of-way, street, or other public property.
106.08 COLLECTION FEES. The collection and disposal of solid waste as provided by
this chapter are declared to be beneficial to the property served or eligible to be served and
there shall be levied and collected fees therefor in accordance with the following:
(Goreham vs. Des Moines, 1970, 179 NW 2nd, 449)
1. Fees. Monthly fees for residential solid waste collection and disposal shall be
assessed as follows:
A. Fee Established by Contract. A monthly fee established by contract
with the Contract Collector pursuant to Section 106.01 of this chapter.
B. Fee for Bulky Rubbish and Yard Waste. A monthly fee of $2.45 for
collection and disposal of bulky rubbish, pursuant to Section 106.05 of this
chapter, and for the collection and disposal of yard waste.
C. Fee for Administration. A monthly fee of $.45 for administrative
expense.
2. Payment of Bills. All fees are due and payable under the same terms and
conditions provided for payment of a combined service account as contained in
Section 92.03 of this Code of Ordinances. Solid waste collection service may be
discontinued in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 92.04 if the
combined service account becomes delinquent, and the provisions contained in
Section 92.08 relating to lien notices shall also apply in the event of a delinquent
account.
106.09 LIEN FOR NONPAYMENT. Except as provided for in Section 92.07 of this Code
of Ordinances, the owner of the premises served and any lessee or tenant thereof shall be
jointly and severally liable for solid waste collection charges to the premises. Solid waste
collection charges remaining unpaid and delinquent shall constitute a lien upon the premises
served and shall be certified by the Clerk to the County Treasurer for collection in the same
manner as property taxes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 384.84)
CHAPTER 106 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 542 -
[The next page is 555]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 555 -
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 1052, adopting a natural gas franchise for the City, was passed
and adopted on October 19, 2009.
CHAPTER 110
NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
110.01 Grant of Franchise 110.07 Extension of System
110.02 State Code Restrictions and Limitations 110.08 Quantity and Quality
110.03 Excavations 110.09 Police Regulations
110.04 Relocation of Property 110.10 Franchise Tax
110.05 Restoration of Property 110.11 Confidential Information
110.06 Indemnification
110.01 GRANT OF FRANCHISE. There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy
Company, an Iowa corporation, hereinafter called “Company,” and to its successors and
assigns the right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the City a
gas distribution system, to furnish natural gas along, under and upon the streets, avenues,
alleys and public places to serve customers within and without the City and to furnish and sell
natural gas to the City and its inhabitants. For the term of this franchise the Company is
granted the right of eminent domain, the exercise of which is subject to City Council approval
upon application by the Company. This franchise shall be effective for a fifteen (15) year
period from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified by this chapter.†
110.02 STATE CODE RESTRICTIONS AND LIMITATIONS. The rights and
privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and limitations of Chapter 364.2 of the
Code of Iowa or as subsequently amended or changed.
110.03 EXCAVATIONS. Company shall have the right to excavate in any public street for
the purpose of laying, relaying, repairing or extending gas pipes, mains, conduits, and other
facilities provided that the same shall be so placed as not to interfere with the construction of
any water pipes, drain or sewer or the flow of water therefrom, which have been or may
hereafter be located by authority of the City.
110.04 RELOCATION OF PROPERTY. The Company shall, at its cost and expense
locate and relocate its installations in, on, over or under any public street or alley in the City in
such manner as the City may at any time reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating the
construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the street or alley and reasonably
promoting the efficient operation of any such construction, reconstruction, maintenance or
repair. If the City has a reasonable alternative route for the street, alley or public
improvements or an alternative construction method, which would not cause the relocation of
the Company installations, the City shall select said alternative route, or construction method.
If relocation of the Company facilities could be avoided by relocating other franchisee’s or
facility user’s equipment and facilities or by using a different method to perform the street
and/or curbing construction, and said other cost of construction or relocation is less than the
Company’s, the City shall select the route or method that is less expensive. If project funds
from a source other than the City are available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities, the
City shall use its best efforts to secure said funds and provide them to the Company to
compensate the Company for the costs of relocation.
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 556 -
110.05 RESTORATION OF PROPERTY. In making excavations in any streets, avenues,
alleys and public places for the installation of gas pipes, conduits or apparatus, Company shall
not unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets and shall replace the surface, restoring it to the
condition as existed prior to excavation.
110.06 INDEMNIFICATION. Company shall indemnify and save harmless City from any
and all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses on account of injury or damage to any
person or property, caused or occasioned, or allegedly caused or occasioned, in whole or in
part, by Company’s negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation or
maintenance of the gas utilities authorized by this franchise, provided, however, that the
Company shall not be obligated to defend, indemnify and save harmless the City for any costs
or damages arising from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees or agents.
110.07 EXTENSION OF SYSTEM. The Company shall extend its mains and pipes and
operate and maintain the system in accordance with applicable tariffs and the rules and
regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board or its successors and State and federal law.
110.08 QUANTITY AND QUALITY. During the term of this franchise, the Company
shall furnish natural gas in the quantity and quality consistent with applicable tariffs and the
rules and regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board or its successors and State and federal law.
110.09 POLICE REGULATIONS. Reasonable and proper City police power regulations
may be adopted and enforced by the City. The City shall adopt and enforce regulations and
ordinances as needed for the protection of Company facilities in the City.
110.10 FRANCHISE TAX. The City reserves the right to impose a franchise fee pursuant
to Iowa law. The franchise fee shall only be imposed through the adoption of an ordinance
authorizing said franchise fee. The City shall work with the Company to develop a
methodology and timeline to implement the franchise fee. The City shall provide the
Company with written notice no less than 90 days in advance of the effective date of any
franchise fee enacted by the City.
110.11 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Upon reasonable request the Company shall
provide the City, on a project specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location,
relative to boundaries of the right of way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it has
control that is located in City right of way. The Company and City recognize the information
provided will, under current Iowa law, constitute public records, but that nonetheless, some
information provided will be confidential under State or federal law or both. Therefore, the
City shall not release any information with respect to the location or type of equipment which
the Company owns or controls in the right of way which may constitute a trade secret or
which may otherwise be protected from public disclosure by State or federal law.
Furthermore, the City agrees that no documents, maps or information provided to the City by
the Company shall be made available to the public or other entities if such documents or
information are exempt from disclosure under the provisions of the Freedom of Information
Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Critical Energy Infrastructure requirements
pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, and Code of Iowa, Section 22.7 as such statutes and
regulations may be amended from time to time. Any documents, maps, or other information
submitted to the City which the Company regards as exempt or protected from public
disclosure shall be clearly marked as Confidential by the Company. Upon request of the City,
the Company shall provide citation to legal authority supporting this designation. The City
shall inform the Company of any request for disclosure of such confidential documents, and
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 557 -
upon notification from the City of any request or legal action regarding such confidential
information. The Company shall intervene in any legal action brought against the City for
production of such confidential materials in order to maintain confidentiality.
CHAPTER 110 NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 558 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 559 -
† EDITOR’S NOTE: Ordinance No. 1051, adopting an electric franchise for the City, was passed and
adopted on October 19, 2009.
CHAPTER 111
ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
111.01 Grant of Franchise 111.07 Maintenance of Facilities
111.02 State Code Restrictions and Limitations 111.08 Quantity and Quality
111.03 Excavations; Trimming Trees 111.09 Police Regulations
111.04 Relocation of Property 111.10 Franchise Tax
111.05 Restoration of Property 111.11 Confidential Information
111.06 Indemnification
111.01 GRANT OF FRANCHISE. There is hereby granted to MidAmerican Energy
Company, an Iowa corporation, hereinafter called “Company,” and its successors and assigns,
the right and franchise to acquire, construct, erect, maintain and operate in the City a system
for the transmission and distribution of electric energy and communications signals along,
under, over, and upon the streets, avenues, alleys and public places to serve customers within
and without the City, and to furnish and sell electric energy to the City and its inhabitants. For
the term of this franchise the Company is granted the right of eminent domain, the exercise of
which is subject to City Council approval upon application by the Company. This franchise
shall be effective for a fifteen (15) year period from and after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter.†
111.02 STATE CODE RESTRICTIONS AND LIMITATIONS. The rights and
privileges hereby granted are subject to the restrictions and limitations of Chapter 364.2 of the
Code of Iowa or as subsequently amended or changed.
111.03 EXCAVATIONS; TRIMMING TREES. The Company shall have the right to
erect all necessary poles and to place thereon the necessary wires, fixtures and accessories as
well as excavate and bury conductors for the distribution of electric energy and
communications signals in and through the City, but all said conduits and poles shall be placed
as not to interfere with the construction of any water pipes, drain or sewer, or the flow of
water therefrom, which have been or may hereafter be located by authority of the City. The
Company is authorized and empowered to prune or remove at Company expense any tree
extending into any street, alley or public grounds to maintain electric reliability, safety, to
restore utility service and to prevent limbs, branches or trunks from interfering with the wires
and facilities of the Company. The pruning of trees shall be done to current nationally
accepted safety and utility industry standards.
111.04 RELOCATION OF PROPERTY. The Company shall, at its cost and expense
locate and relocate its installations in, on, over, or under any public street or alley in the City
in such manner as the City may at any time reasonably require for the purposes of facilitating
the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the street or alley and reasonably
promoting the efficient operation of any such construction, reconstruction, maintenance or
repair. If the City has a reasonable alternative route for the street, alley or public
improvements or an alternative construction method, which would not cause the relocation of
the Company installations, the City shall select said alternative route or construction method.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 560 -
If relocation of the Company facilities could be avoided by relocating other franchisee’s or
facility user’s equipment and facilities or by using a different method to perform the street
and/or curbing construction, and said other cost of construction or relocation is less than the
Company’s, the City shall select the route or method that is less expensive. If project funds
from a source other than the City are available to pay for the relocation of utility facilities, the
City shall use its best efforts to secure said funds and provide them to the Company to
compensate the Company for the costs of relocation.
111.05 RESTORATION OF PROPERTY. In making excavations in any streets, avenues,
alleys, and public places for the excavation of conduits or the erection of poles and wires or
other appliances, the Company shall not unreasonably obstruct the use of the streets, and shall
replace the surface, restoring it to the condition as existed prior to excavation.
111.06 INDEMNIFICATION. The Company shall indemnify and save harmless the City
from any and all claims, suits, losses, damages, costs or expenses, on account of injury or
damage to any person or property, caused or occasioned in whole or in part, by the Company’s
negligence in construction, reconstruction, excavation, operation or maintenance of the
electric facilities authorized by this franchise; provided, however, that the Company shall not
be obligated to defend, indemnify, and save harmless the City for any costs or damages arising
from the negligence of the City, its officers, employees or agents.
111.07 MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES. The Company shall construct, operate and
maintain its facilities in accordance with applicable tariffs and the rules and regulations of the
Iowa Utilities Board or its successors, and State and federal law.
111.08 QUANTITY AND QUALITY. During the term of this franchise, the Company
shall furnish electric energy in the quantity and quality consistent with applicable tariffs and
the rules and regulations of the Iowa Utilities Board or its successors, and State and federal
law.
111.09 POLICE REGULATIONS. Reasonable and proper City police power regulations
may be adopted and enforced by the City. The City shall adopt and enforce regulations and
ordinances as needed for the protection of Company facilities in the City.
111.10 FRANCHISE TAX. The City reserves the right to impose a franchise fee pursuant
to Iowa Code. The franchise fee shall only be imposed through the adoption of an ordinance
authorizing said franchise fee. The City shall work with the Company to develop a
methodology and timeline to implement the franchise fee. The City shall provide the
Company with written notice no less than 90 days in advance of the effective date of any
franchise fee enacted by the City.
111.11 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Upon reasonable request the Company shall
provide the City, on a project specific basis, information indicating the horizontal location,
relative to boundaries of the right of way, of all equipment which it owns or over which it has
control that is located in City right of way. The Company and City recognize the information
provided will, under current Iowa law, constitute public records, but that nonetheless, some
information provided will be confidential under State or federal law or both. Therefore, the
City shall not release any information with respect to the location or type of equipment which
the Company owns or controls in the right of way which may constitute a trade secret or
which may otherwise be protected from public disclosure by State or federal law.
Furthermore, the City agrees that no documents, maps or information provided to the City by
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 561 -
the Company shall be made available to the public or other entities if such documents or
information are exempt from disclosure under the provisions of the Freedom of Information
Act, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Critical Energy Infrastructure requirements
pursuant to 18 CFR 388.112 and 388.113, and Code of Iowa, Section 22.7 as such statutes and
regulations may be amended from time to time. Any documents, maps, or other information
submitted to the City which the Company regards as exempt or protected from public
disclosure shall be clearly marked as Confidential by the Company. Upon request of the City,
the Company shall provide citation to legal authority supporting this designation. The City
shall inform the Company of any request for disclosure of such confidential documents, and
upon notification from the City of any request or legal action regarding such confidential
information. The Company shall intervene in any legal action brought against the City for
production of such confidential materials in order to maintain confidentiality.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 562 -
[The next page is 575]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 575 -
CHAPTER 112
BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
112.01 Purpose 112.27 Telecommunications Commission
112.02 Definitions 112.28 New Developments
112.03 Compliance with FCC Rules and Regulations 112.29 Employment Practices
112.04 Violations Against Franchise 112.30 Preferential or Discriminatory Practices
112.05 Franchise Required Prohibited
112.06 Election and Costs 112.31 Compliance with Applicable Laws and Regulations
112.07 Renewal 112.32 Liability and Indemnification
112.08 Franchise Fee Payment 112.33 Insurance
112.09 Nature of Nonexclusive Franchise 112.34 Performance Bond
112.10 Franchise Ordinance 112.35 Receivership and Foreclosure
112.11 Acceptance and Effective Date 112.36 Permits and Authorizations
112.12 Reviews 112.37 Transactions Affecting Ownership or Control
112.13 Transfer 112.38 Rights Reserved to the City
112.14 Conditions of Sale 112.39 Grounds for Revocation of Franchise
112.15 Construction Standards 112.40 Procedure Prior to Sanction or Revocation
112.16 Operational Standards 112.41 Restoration of Property
112.17 Customer Service Standards 112.42 Restoration by City; Reimbursement of Costs
112.18 Testing for Compliance 112.43 Extended Operation
112.19 Reports and Maps 112.44 Lesser Sanctions
112.20 Records Required 112.45 Liquidated Damages
112.21 Inspection of Property and Records 112.46 City’s Rights Not Affected
112.22 Resolving Disputes 112.47 Further Agreement and Waiver by Franchisee
112.23 Emergency Alert Override 112.48 Time Is of the Essence
112.24 Interconnection 112.49 Impossibility of Performance
112.25 Required Extensions of Service 112.50 Actions of Parties
112.26 Rate Regulation
112.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate broadband
telecommunications networks in the City which operate pursuant to City Franchise for the
provision of cable television and other services and to ensure that such networks’ use of the
public rights-of-way does not interfere with public health, safety and welfare and to benefit the
citizens of the City through the use of broadband telecommunications networks and
technology.
112.02 DEFINITIONS. The following terms are defined for use in this chapter.
1. “Basic cable rates” means the monthly charges for a subscription to the basic
service tier and the associated equipment.
2. “Basic cable service” means any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
3. “Basic service tier” means a separately available service tier to which
subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including as a
minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels and all domestic
television signals other than superstations.
4. “Benchmark” means a per-channel rate of charge for cable service and
associated equipment which the FCC has determined is reasonable.
5. “Broadband Telecommunications Network (BTN)” means all of the
component, physical, operational, and programming elements of any network of
cables, optical, electrical or electronic equipment, including cable television, used for
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 576 -
the purpose of transmission of electrical impulses of television, radio or data, and
other intelligence, either analog or digital, for sale or use by the inhabitants of the
City.
6. “Cable Act” means, collectively, the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as
amended.
7. “Cable operator” means any person or group of persons:
A. Who provides cable service over a Cable System and directly or
through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a Cable
System; or
B. Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a Cable System.
8. “Cable Service” means (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming, or (ii) other programming service and (iii) subscriber interaction, if
any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other
programming service.
9. “Cable System” means a private facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment
that is designed to provide Cable Service which includes video programming and
which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but which term does
not include (i) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations; (ii) a facility that serves only subscribers in one or
more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management,
unless such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way; (iii) a facility of a
common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of
the Cable Act, except that such facility shall be considered a Cable System other than
for purposes of §621(C) of the Cable Act to the extent such facility is used in the
transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or (iv) any facilities of any
electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
10. “Channel” means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which
is used in a cable service and which is capable of delivering a television signal.
11. “Charles City Broadband Telecommunications Commission (CCBTC)”
means the duly authorized and acting commission appointment by the Council
pursuant to ordinance established for the purpose of administering regulations
pertaining to the existence and operation of broadband telecommunications networks
within the City.
12. “Cost of service showing” means a filing in which the cable operator attempts
to show that the benchmark rate or the price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable
operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier and to continue to
attract capital.
13. “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally
appointed or elected successor.
14. “Franchise” or “Franchise Agreement” means the initial authorization, or
renewal thereof, issued by the City, whether such authorization is designated as a
franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise,
which authorizes construction and operation of the Cable System.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 577 -
15. “Franchisee” means any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter
and under the granting franchise ordinance and such person’s lawful successor,
transferee or assignee.
16. “Franchise fee” means any tax, fee, or assessment of any kind imposed by a
City or other governmental entity on a cable operator or cable subscriber, or both,
solely because of their status as such. The term “franchise fee” does not include (i)
any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee or
assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services but not
including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable
operators or cable subscribers); (ii) in the case of any franchise in effect on the date of
the enactment of this title, payments which are required by the franchise to be made
by the cable operator during the term of such franchise for, or in support of the use of
PEG access facilities; (iii) in the case of any franchise granted after such date of
enactment, capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by the
cable operator for PEG access facilities; (iv) requirements or charges incidental to the
awarding or enforcing the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds,
letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or (v)
any fee imposed under Title XVII, United States Code.
17. “Grantee” means Cablevision VI, Inc., or the lawful successor, transferee or
assignee thereof.
18. “Gross revenues” mean any revenue received by the franchisee from the
operation of the Cable System in the Service Area.
19. “Initial basic cable rates” means the rates that the cable operator is charging
for the basic service tier, including charges for associated equipment, at the time the
City notifies the cable operator of the City’s qualification and intent to regulate basic
cable rates.
20. “Must-carry signal” means the signal of any local broadcast station (except
superstations) which is required to be carried on the basic service tier.
21. “New programming” means programming not previously transmitted over the
Charles City PEG access channel, including live or reproduced programs.
22. “Other programming service” means information that a cable operator makes
available to all subscribers generally.
23. “Person” means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company,
trust, corporation, or governmental entity.
24. “Price cap” means the ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic
cable rates regulated by the City, based on a formula using the GNP fixed weight
price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and changes in
overall inflation.
25. “Public, educational, or governmental access channel (PEG)” means (i)
channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental use; and (ii)
facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
26. “Public school” means any school at any education level operated within the
City by any public, private or parochial school system, but limited to, elementary
school, junior high school and high school.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 578 -
27. “Public way” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any
public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk,
parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public right-of-way, including,
but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-of-way
dedicated for compatible uses and any temporary or permanent fixtures or
improvements located thereon now or hereafter held by the City in the Service Area
which shall entitle the City and the franchisee to the use thereof for the purpose of
installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the Cable System. “Public way” also
means any easement now or hereafter held by the City within the Service Area for the
purpose of public travel, or for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible
uses, and includes other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use
and meaning entitle the City and the franchisee to the use thereof for the purposes of
installing and operating the franchisee’s Cable System over poles, wires, cables,
conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and
other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the Cable System.
28. “Reasonable notice” means written notice addressed to the franchisee at its
principal office of the City or such other office as the franchisee has designated to the
City as the address to which notice should be transmitted to it, which notice shall be
certified and postmarked not less than four (4) days prior to that day on which the
party giving such notice shall commence any action which requires the giving of
notice. In computing said four (4) days, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays recognized
by the City shall be excluded.
29. “Reasonable order” means written order not excessive or extreme as to costs
or time to comply, governed by sound thinking.
30. “Reasonable rate standard” means a per channel rate that is at, or below, the
benchmark or price cap level.
31. “Service area” means the present municipal boundaries of the City, and
includes any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
32. “Service tier” means a category of cable service or other services provided by
a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged by the cable operator.
33. “Subscriber” means a person or user of the Cable System who lawfully
receives communications and other services therefrom with the franchisee’s express
permission.
34. “Superstation” means any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted
by satellite.
35. “Video programming” means programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station.
112.03 COMPLIANCE WITH FCC RULES AND REGULATIONS. This chapter shall
be amended where necessary to conform to all amendments to Part 76 of the Rules and
Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission within twelve (12) months of the
order of such amendments.
112.04 VIOLATIONS AGAINST FRANCHISE. It is unlawful for any person without
the expressed consent of the franchisee to make any connection, extension or division,
whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically, or otherwise with or to any
segment of a franchised BTN for any purpose whatsoever, except as provided for herein. It is
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 579 -
unlawful for any person to willfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct or damage any part,
segment or content of a franchised BTN for any purpose whatsoever.
112.05 FRANCHISE REQUIRED. No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate
on or within any street, any equipment or facilities for the distribution of television signals or
radio signals or data, either analog or digital, over a BTN to any subscriber unless a franchise
authorizing the use of the streets has first been obtained pursuant to the provision of this
chapter and thereafter only while said person is legally operating under the terms and
provisions of said franchise.
112.06 ELECTION AND COSTS. In order for a nonexclusive franchise to be granted
pursuant to this chapter, election must be held and a majority of those voting must vote in
favor of the granting of such franchise. The entire cost of the election together with all
printing and publishing costs relating thereto shall be prepaid by the applicant selected by the
Council to be franchisee, regardless of whether or not the applicant is granted a franchise by
said election. When the actual costs of the election are known, the final payment may be
adjusted accordingly. This section only applies when an election is otherwise required to be
held by State and/or federal law.
112.07 RENEWAL. The City shall have no obligation to renew any franchise granted
hereunder except as may be required by federal or State law. The failure to reissue such a
franchise, however, shall not prohibit the franchisee from applying for a new franchise in
competition with other applicants for a franchise in the event the City decides to consider
proposals from new applicants for the franchise.
112.08 FRANCHISE FEE PAYMENT.
1. The franchisee shall pay to the City a franchise fee equal to five percent (5%)
of gross revenues (as both are defined in Section 112.02 of this chapter) received by
the franchisee from the operation of the Cable System on a quarterly basis. Such
payment shall be in addition to any other payment, charges, or fees owed to the City
by the franchisee and shall not be construed as payment in lieu of personal or real
property taxes levied by State, County or local authorities. For the purpose of this
section, the twelve-month period applicable under the franchise for the computation of
the franchise fee shall be a calendar year, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the
City and the franchisee. The franchise fee payment shall be due and payable sixty
(60) days after the close of the preceding quarterly period. Each payment shall be
accompanied by a detailed report from a representative of the franchisee itemizing the
basis for the computation.
2. The annual franchise fee payment percentage designated in this section may
be amended no more than once every calendar year by the City. Any such
amendment shall be consistent with the applicable rules of the FCC and other
regulatory agencies. No amendment of the franchise fee payment percentage shall be
effective sooner than six (6) months from the date of notice to the franchisee of the
amended percentage amount.
3. In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount is not made on
or before the dates specified herein, the franchisee shall pay as additional
consideration:
A. An interest charge computed from such due date, at the annual rate of
nine percent (9%); plus
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 580 -
B. A sum of money equal to two percent (2%) of the amount due in
order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the City by
reason of the delinquent payment.
4. The period of limitation for recovery of any franchise fee payable hereunder
shall be ten (10) years from the date on which payment by the franchisee is due.
Unless within ten (10) years from and after such payment due date the City initiates a
lawsuit for recovery of such franchise fees in a court of competent jurisdiction, such
recovery shall be barred and the City shall be estopped from asserting any claims
whatsoever against the franchisee relating to any such alleged deficiencies.
5. No acceptance of any payment by the City shall be construed as a release or
as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further or additional
sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other
obligation of the franchisee. In the event of a dispute, the City, if it so requests, shall
be furnished a statement of said payment, by a certified public accountant, reflecting
the total amounts of annual gross revenues for the period(s) covered by the payment.
112.09 NATURE OF NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE. Any franchise granted hereunder
shall not be exclusive and the City reserves the right to grant a similar franchise to any other
person at any time.
112.10 FRANCHISE ORDINANCE. In addition to those matters required to be included
by virtue of this chapter, the franchise ordinance shall contain such further conditions or
provisions as may be included in the franchisee’s proposal negotiated between the City and
the franchisee.
112.11 ACCEPTANCE AND EFFECTIVE DATE. No franchise agreement or renewal
passed by the Council and, when required by law, approved by a vote of the qualified electors,
shall become effective for any purpose unless and until written acceptance thereof shall have
been filed with the Clerk, duly executed by the proper officers of the franchisee. The written
acceptance shall be filed by the franchisee not later than 12:01 p.m. of the sixtieth day
following passage by the Council or, when required by law, the franchise election granting
such franchise, whichever is later. In default of the filing of such written acceptance as herein
required, the franchisee shall be deemed to have rejected and repudiated the franchise.
Thereafter, the acceptance of the franchisee shall not be received by the Clerk. The franchisee
shall have no rights, remedies, or redress unless and until the Council, by resolution, shall
determine that such acceptance be received, and then upon such terms and conditions as the
Council may impose. In addition to the written acceptance and within the same 60-day period,
the franchisee shall:
1. File a certificate of insurance as provided herein; and
2. File a performance bond as provided herein unless such bond requirement has
been waived by the Council; and
3. Advise the City in writing of the franchisee’s address for mail and official
notifications from the City; and
4. Provide information necessary to establish that the franchise election and
adjusted costs have been paid, when required; and
5. Reimburse the City for its franchising expense in an amount as determined by
the City. Said amount, however, shall be reasonable and based on direct costs
incurred by the City.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 581 -
112.12 REVIEWS. On or about the third, sixth, ninth and twelfth anniversaries of the
effective date of the franchise grant or renewal, the City may schedule and hold a public
meeting or meetings with the franchisee to review the performance by the franchisee under the
franchise including future plans of operation and performance. In particular, the City may
inquire whether the franchisee is supplying a level and variety of services equivalent to those
being generally offered at that time in the industry to comparable market situations. The
franchisee shall make available to the City, if requested by the City, such records, documents
and information which are relevant to such meeting and inquiry. Any changes in this chapter
or the franchise ordinance necessitated by modifications to the FCC regulations shall be
incorporated into the franchise ordinance or this chapter within the time limit provided for in
the rules and regulations of the FCC then in force and effect.
112.13 TRANSFER. The franchisee’s right, title, or interest in the franchise shall not be
sold, transferred, assigned, or otherwise encumbered, other than to an entity controlling,
controlled by, or under common control with the franchisee as of the effective date of this
agreement, without the prior consent of the City, such consent not to be unreasonably
withheld. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by
other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title or interest of the franchisee in the
franchise or Cable System in order to secure indebtedness.
112.14 CONDITIONS OF SALE. Except to the extent expressly required by federal or
State law, if a renewal or extension of the franchisee’s franchise is denied or the franchise is
lawfully terminated, and the City either lawfully acquires ownership of the Cable System or
by its actions lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the Cable System to another party,
any such acquisition or transfer shall be at the price determined pursuant to the provisions set
forth in Section 627 of the Cable Act. The franchisee and the City agree that in the case of a
final determination of a lawful revocation of the franchise, at the franchisee’s request, which
shall be made in its sole discretion, the franchisee shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
effectuate a transfer of its Cable System to a qualified third party. The City further agrees that
during such a period of time, it shall authorize the franchisee to continue to operate pursuant to
the terms of its prior franchise; however, in no event shall such authorization exceed a period
of time greater than six (6) months from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of
that time, the franchisee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee of its
Cable System which is reasonably acceptable to the City, the franchisee and the City may
avail themselves of any rights they may have pursuant to federal or State law; it being further
agreed that the franchisee’s continued operation of its Cable System during the six-month
period shall not be deemed to be a waiver, nor an extinguishment of, any rights of either the
City or the franchisee.
112.15 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
1. Compliance with Safety Codes. All construction practices shall be in
accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of
1970 and any amendments thereto as well as all State and local codes where
applicable.
2. Compliance with Electrical Codes. All installation of electronic equipment
shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with the provisions
of the City Electrical Code and applicable industry standards.
3. Antennas and Towers. Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be
designed for the proper loading zone.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 582 -
4. Compliance with Aviation Requirements. Antenna supporting structures
(towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all
applicable rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other
applicable State or local codes and regulations.
5. Construction Standards and Requirements. All of the franchisee’s plant and
equipment, including, but not limited to, the antenna site, head-end and distribution
system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wire, cable, coaxial cable,
fixtures, and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained, and operated in accordance
with good engineering practices, performed by experienced maintenance and
construction personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the
municipality may deem proper to make, or to interfere with any manner with the
rights of any property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on municipal properties.
6. Conditions of Street Occupancy. All transmission and distribution structures,
poles, other lines and equipment installed or erected by the Grantee pursuant to the
terms hereof shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the
property use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners who own property that adjoins any of such public ways.
7. Restoration of Public Ways. If during the course of the Grantee’s
construction, operation or maintenance of the Cable System there occurs a disturbance
of any public way by the Grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and restore such
public way to a condition reasonably comparable to the condition of the public way
existing immediately prior to such disturbance.
8. Relocation at Request of the City. Upon its receipt of ten (10) days’ notice
from the City, the Grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate in the public way, or remove from the public way, any property of
the Grantee when lawfully required by the City by reason of traffic conditions, public
safety, street abandonment, freeway and street construction, change or establishment
of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other type of
structures or improvements by the City; but, the Grantee shall in all cases have the
right to abandon below-ground facilities, provided written notice of such
abandonment is provided within twenty (20) days to the City Engineer. If public
funds are available to any persons using such street, easement, or right of way for the
purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, the City shall make application
for such funds on behalf of the Grantee upon written request by the Grantee which
reasonably identifies the source of public funds believed to be available and the
procedure for applying for such funds together with a statement of commitment to
indemnify the City for all costs incurred in making such application, regardless of
whether or not such grant or application is accepted.
9. Relocation at Request of Third Party. The Grantee shall, on the request of
any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or
lower its wires to permit the moving of such building, provided: (i) the expense of
such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person, including, if
required by the Grantee, making such payment in advance; and (ii) the Grantee is
given not less than ten (10) business days’ advance written notice to arrange for such
temporary wire changes.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 583 -
10. Trimming of Trees and Shrubbery. The Grantee shall have the authority to
trim trees or other natural growth overhanging any of its Cable System in the Service
Area so as to prevent branches from coming in contact with the Grantee’s wires,
cables or other equipment. The Grantee shall reasonably compensate the City for any
damages caused by such trimming or shall, upon mutual agreement with the City, and
at its own cost and expense, replace all trees or shrubs to as near as reasonably
possible, their prior condition, which are damaged as a result of any construction of
the Cable System undertaken by the Grantee. Such replacement shall satisfy any and
all obligations the Grantee may have to the City pursuant to the terms of this section.
11. Aerial and Underground Construction. In those areas of the Service Area
where all of the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities
providing telephone communications and electric services are underground, the
Grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and
distribution facilities underground, provided that such facilities are actually capable of
receiving the franchisee’s cable and other equipment. In those areas of the Service
Area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities
providing telephone communications, and electric services are both aerial and
underground, the Grantee shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate and
maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerial or
underground, however, the Grantee is encouraged by the City to go underground
unless economical and technological reasons would render such undergrounding
impractical or nonfeasible. Nothing contained in this section shall require the Grantee
to construct, operate, and maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances
such as subscriber taps, line extenders, Cable System passive devices (splitters,
directional couplers), amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals, or other related
equipment.
12. Safety and Nuisance Requirements. The franchise shall at all times employ
ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and
devices preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury, or
nuisance to the public.
112.16 OPERATIONAL STANDARDS. Every BTN operating within the City shall
comply, at all times, with the technical and operational standards set forth by the FCC
governing the operations of such systems.
112.17 CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
1. Federal Standards. The Grantee will adhere to the Customer Service
Obligations as set forth in Title 47, CFR, Part 76, Subpart H, §76.309. Nothing herein
shall preclude the City from adopting an ordinance further relating to the enforcement
of such Customer Service Obligations.
2. Office and Phone for Service. The franchisee shall maintain an office in the
City which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a locally listed
telephone, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments
may be received at any time. In addition, the franchisee shall maintain a convenient
office in the City open during normal business hours for the receipt of sums due by its
subscribers shall provide for regular billing of accounts.
3. Notification of Service Procedures. The franchisee shall furnish each
subscriber at the time service is installed written instructions that clearly set forth
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 584 -
procedures for placing a service call, or requesting an adjustment. Said instructions
shall also include the name, address, and telephone number of the City Administrator
or other designated employee and a reminder that the subscriber can call or write the
City Administrator or other designated employee for information regarding terms and
conditions of the franchisee’s franchise if the franchisee fails to respond to the
subscriber’s request for installation, service, or adjustment within a reasonable period
of time.
112.18 TESTING FOR COMPLIANCE. The City may perform technical tests of the
Cable System during reasonable times and in a manner which does not unreasonably interfere
with the normal business operations of the franchisee or the Cable System in order to
determine whether or not the franchisee is in compliance with the terms hereof and applicable
State or federal laws. Except in emergency circumstances, such tests may be undertaken only
after giving the franchisee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than fourteen (14) business
days, and providing a representative of the franchisee an opportunity to be present during such
tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that the franchisee has substantially failed to
comply with a material requirement hereof, the reasonable costs of such tests shall be borne by
the franchisee. In the event that such testing demonstrates that the franchisee has substantially
complied with such material provisions hereof, the cost of such testing shall be borne by the
City. Except in emergency circumstances, the City agrees that such testing shall be
undertaken no more than once a year, and that the results thereof shall be made available to
the franchisee. Upon reasonable request by the City, the franchisee shall make available
copies of any and all technical tests data required to be filed with the FCC by the franchisee.
112.19 REPORTS AND MAPS. Upon reasonable request by the City, the franchisee shall
provide:
1. A “strand map” setting forth the physical miles of plant constructed, rebuilt or
in operation during the fiscal year.
2. The franchisee’s schedule of charges, number of subscribers, contract or
application forms for regular subscriber service, policy regarding the processing of
subscriber complaints, relinquishment subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures
and any other times and conditions adopted as the franchisee’s policy in connection
with its subscribers.
3. All policies of insurance or certified copies thereof and a certificates of
insurance for all coverage required hereunder.
4. The performance bond or certified copy thereof and written evidence of
payment of required premium.
5. All petitions, applications and communications of all types submitted by
franchisee to the FCC, or any other federal or State regulatory commission or agency
having jurisdiction over any matter affecting operation of franchisee’s network shall
be submitted to the City by delivery to the Clerk who shall advise interested City
departments of such filing.
6. A summary list of all complaints and network “down time” received or
experienced during the year.
7. One copy of a report on the network’s technical measurements as set forth
herein. For any Cable System, the FCC CLI report will satisfy this requirement.
112.20 RECORDS REQUIRED. The franchisee shall, at all times, maintain:
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 585 -
1. A record of all complaints received and interruptions or degradation of service
experienced for the preceding two years.
2. A full and complete set of plans, records and “as built” maps showing the
exact location of all BTN equipment installed or in use in the City, exclusive of
subscriber service drops.
112.21 INSPECTION OF PROPERTY AND RECORDS. At all reasonable times,
franchisee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the City
Administrator or City Engineer of all franchise property, together with any appurtenant
property of franchisee situated within or without the City. Franchisee shall also permit any
duly authorized representative of the City to examine and transcribe any strand maps and other
records kept or maintained by franchisee reasonably related to the City’s enforcement of the
franchise.
112.22 RESOLVING DISPUTES. The Council may do all things which are necessary and
proper in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may make a determination
concerning any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted
hereunder. The CCBTC is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise
any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any franchisee either on behalf of the
City, the franchisee, or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public. Either the franchisee
or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the CCBTC may
appeal the matter to the Council for hearing and determination. The Council may accept,
reject, or modify the decision of the CCBTC, and the Council may adjust, settle, or
compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of the
franchisee or from any provision of this chapter. Any decision adverse to the Grantee’s
interest hereunder, may be appealed to an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
112.23 EMERGENCY ALERT OVERRIDE. The franchisee shall incorporate into its
facilities, the capability for an emergency override audio alert whereby a designee of the City,
in times of emergency, may introduce an audio message on all broadband telecommunications
network channels simultaneously. The City shall hold the franchisee, its agents, employees,
officers, and assigns hereunder, harmless from any claims arising out of the emergency use of
its facilities by the City, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.
112.24 INTERCONNECTION. Upon reasonable request by the City, the franchisee shall
so construct, operate and modify the network as to have the capability to interconnect the
same into all BTNs adjacent to or entering the City, provided it is financially and technically
feasible to do so. The City shall hold the franchisee harmless from any cost or liability of said
interconnection in the event the franchisee is unable to charge subscribers reasonable rates to
receive service provided from the interconnected network.
112.25 REQUIRED EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE. Franchisee shall extend the Cable
System and cable service, as defined herein, to all parts of the City which have been platted
and laid out into blocks divided by streets. In the instance of newly platted subdivisions and
newly annexed additions to the corporate boundaries of the City, after the effective date of any
franchise agreement, franchisee shall extend its Cable System and provide service to such new
subdivisions whenever franchisee shall receive a request for service from at least five (5)
subscribers within 1,320 cable-bearing strand feet (¼ cable mile) of its trunk or distribution
cable. The franchisee shall make reasonable efforts to coordinate the extension of its facilities
with the installation of public utilities and services in such new subdivisions and annexed
areas in the same manner and at the same times as required with respect to other public
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 586 -
utilities and services as provided by Chapter 166 and other pertinent chapters of this Code of
Ordinances. The franchisee may extend cable service to subscribers where density is less than
as set forth above; however, franchisee shall not require a capital contribution greater than the
actual cost plus labor of the franchisee in extending said service. The franchisee may require
that payment of such a capital contribution be paid in advance.
112.26 RATE REGULATION. The Council has implemented the regulations and rates of
the FCC. Any further regulations propounded by the Council will be consistent with the
regulations and rates adopted by the FCC.
112.27 TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION. There is hereby created and
established a permanent Commission, as an administrative agency of the City, a sevenmember
Commission to be called the “Charles City Broadband Telecommunications
Commission” (CCBTC).
1. Powers and Duties. The powers and duties of the CCBTC are as follows:
A. To create and maintain an appropriate source of information and
expertise regarding broadband telecommunications technologies, services,
regulation and policy;
B. To monitor the activities of all broadband telecommunications service
providers operating within the City or providing service to any point within
the City;
C. To serve as the initial source of enforcement of all City codes, rules,
or regulations affecting the operation of BTN’s or services within the
community;
D. To annually report to the Council regarding the state of BTN’s and
services within the City and to generally advise the Council of developments
within the field of broadband telecommunications which may be of
importance to the citizens of Charles City and to make such recommendations
as the Commission feels are in order;
E. To promote education and awareness within the City among its
citizens as to the uses and services available through local BTN’s including,
but not limited to, matters relating to consumer protection, customer service,
and access to such networks by citizens and public or private institutions;
F. To receive and respond to citizen input and assist in the resolution of
complaints between local BTN’s or BTN service providers and their local
customers;
G. To carry out a thorough triennial review of any private BTN operating
within the City under a cable television franchise to determine whether the
operator of the BTN is in compliance with all terms and conditions of the
franchise and the degree to which the operator’s performance is deemed to be
satisfactory by the public. Such review should also include recommendations
to the Council and to any such operator setting forth proposed action the
CCBTC finds will promote utility and use of broadband telecommunications
technologies and services within the community;
H. To develop and promulgate such rules for the implementation and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter as, from time to time, the
Commission shall deem necessary and useful; and
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 587 -
I. To implement and carry out such rate regulation as is permitted by
law and as directed by the Council; and
J. To administer and facilitate the development of PEG access facilities
and programming within the City; and
K. To take such further action as the CCBTC believes is appropriate in
administering and fulfilling its duties as set forth herein.
2. Method of Appointment. The members of the CCBTC shall be appointed by
the Mayor with approval of the Council in accordance with such other general
procedures for appointments to administrative agencies as may have been established
by ordinances of the City.
3. Composition of Commission and Qualifications of Members. The
Commission shall consist of five (5) voting members plus at least two (2) ex officio
members who are current members of the Council. The five voting members of the
Commission shall be any adult citizens of the City who do not hold an elected
municipal office. The term of appointment of the five voting members of the
Commission shall be five (5) years beginning on the first of the year in which the
appointment is made, provided, however, that the first members of the Commission
shall, by the drawing of lots, obtain terms of office of one (1) year, two (2) years,
three (3) years, four (4) years, and five (5) years respectively. The ex officio members
of the Commission shall serve at the discretion of the Mayor and for such term as the
Mayor shall determine. If a position becomes vacant before expiration of the term of
office, the Mayor shall appoint a person to serve the balance of the unexpired term in
accordance with established procedures. No person shall be appointed to serve more
than two consecutive full terms. Any member may be removed from the Commission
by a two-thirds (?) majority vote of the City Council without cause and at anytime.
4. Compensation; Meetings and Procedures. All members shall serve without
compensation except that reasonable actual expenses incurred by members in the
performance of their duties may be reimbursed in accordance with the procedures
established by the CCBTC, the Council, or this Code of Ordinances. The CCBTC
shall meet at such time and in such places as the members deem appropriate provided
that at least one meeting is held during each calendar quarter of the year. Minutes of
all such meetings shall be recorded and permanently retained. A quorum of three (3)
voting members is required for members to conduct their business. All such meetings
and proceedings of the Commission shall conform with this Code of Ordinances and
the Code of Iowa with respect to notice to the public, publication of agendas, and
access to meetings. The City Administrator of the City and the Chairperson of the
CCBTC shall jointly determine the regular time and place of each quarterly meeting.
5. Budget and Funding. Each year the CCBTC shall prepare and deliver a
budget request to the Council setting forth the Commission’s requested budget to
finance CCBTC activities during the next budget year. Said budget shall not exceed
sixty percent (60%) of the anticipated revenues to be received from the franchisee(s)
in payment of franchise fees to the City.
112.28 NEW DEVELOPMENTS. The Council and franchisee may mutually agree to
amend this chapter whenever necessary to enable the franchisee to take advantage of any
developments in the field of transmission of communications signals which will afford it an
opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve its customers; provided,
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 588 -
however, that this section shall not be construed to require the City and the franchisee to make
any such amendment.
112.29 EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
1. In carrying out the construction, maintenance, and operation of the BTN, the
franchisee shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment
because of race, creed, age, color, sex, national origin, or disability.
2. The franchisee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are
employed, and that employees are treated during the employment, without regard to
their race, creed, color, sex, age, handicap, or national origin. Such action shall
include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or
transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rates of pay or
other forms of compensation, and selection for training, including apprenticeship.
3. The franchisee shall post in conspicuous places, available to employees and
applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this
nondiscrimination clause.
4. The franchisee shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees place
by or on behalf of the franchisee, state that all qualified applicants will receive
consideration for employment without regard to race, creed, color, sex, national
origin, age, or disability.
5. The franchise shall incorporate the foregoing requirement in all of its
contracts for work relative to construction, maintenance, and operation of the BTN,
other than contacts for standard commercial supplies or raw materials, and shall
require all of its contractors for such work to incorporate such requirements in all
subcontracts for such work.
112.30 PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.
1. Service To Be Equally Available. The franchisee shall not, as to rates,
charges, service, rules, regulations, or in any other respect make or grant any
preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any prejudice or
disadvantage based upon, but not limited to, that person’s race, creed, color, sex, or
national origin. This provision shall not be deemed to prohibit promotional
campaigns to stimulate subscription to the network or other legitimate uses thereof;
nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges
and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such
classifications shall be entitled.
2. Fairness of Accessibility. The entire network of the franchisee shall be
operated in a manner consistent with the principle of fairness and equal accessibility
of its facilities, equipment, channels, studios, and other services to all citizens,
businesses, public agencies, or other entities having a legitimate use for the network;
and no one shall be arbitrarily excluded from its use; allocation of use of said facilities
shall be made according to the rules or decisions of the franchisee and any regulatory
agencies affecting the same.
112.31 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
Franchisee, at its expense, shall comply with all State and federal laws, orders and regulations,
and the lawful exercise of any municipal police powers.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 589 -
112.32 LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION. The franchisee shall indemnify and
hold harmless the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees against and
from all claims, demands, causes of actions, actions, suits, proceedings, damages (including,
but not limited to, damages to City property and damages arising out of copyright
infringements, and damages arising out of any failure by franchisee to secure consents from
the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by franchisee’s
BTN), costs or liabilities (including costs or liabilities of the City with respect to its
employees), of every kind and nature whatsoever, arising out of franchisee’s construction,
operation, and maintenance of the Cable System, including, but not limited to, damages for
injury or death or damage to person or property. Provided, the franchisee shall not be liable
for any such damages, fees or expense where any lawsuit is based on the actions or omissions
of the City but not on any act or omission by the franchisee. City shall give the franchisee
written notice of its obligation to indemnify the City within twenty (20) days of receipt of any
claim or action described in this section. No such notice shall be required where the
franchisee has actual notice of its obligation to indemnify the City, nor shall lack of notice
within 20 days be a defense to any claim for indemnification by the City unless the franchisee
can show actual prejudice occurred as a result of the failure of the City to provide notice
within said 20-day period. Furthermore, if the City determines that it is necessary for it to
employ separate counsel, the costs for such separate counsel shall be the responsibility of the
City unless the need for separate counsel arises due to apparent conflicts of interest between
the City and the franchisee, in which event the franchisee shall remain responsible for all costs
of City’s defense.
112.33 INSURANCE. The franchisee shall maintain and pay all premiums, etc., for a
general comprehensive liability insurance policy naming as an additional insured, the City, its
officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company licensed to do business in
Iowa with a Best rating of A- or above, protecting the City and all persons against liability for
loss or damage for personal injury, death or property damage, occasioned by the operations of
the franchisee under any franchise granted hereunder in the amount of:
1. $500,000.00 for bodily injury or death to any one person, within the limit,
however, of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident.
2. $250,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident.
3. Worker’s compensation insurance in such coverage as may be required by the
worker’s compensation insurance and safety laws of the State and amendments
thereto.
The insurance policies referred to above shall contain an endorsement stating that the policies
are extended to cover the liability assumed by the terms of this chapter and shall contain the
following endorsements: “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the amount of coverage thereof reduced until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
City by registered mail, of written notice of such intent to cancel or reduce the coverage.”
112.34 PERFORMANCE BOND. The franchisee shall maintain throughout the period of
network construction, a faithful performance bond in favor of the City, with a surety approved
by the City in the penal sum total of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) conditioned
upon the faithful performance by the franchisee of its obligations under this chapter and the
franchise. When the network construction is substantially completed as defined herein, the
penal sum total of the performance bond shall be reduced to twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) through the remainder of the term of the franchise, or any renewal or extension
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 590 -
thereof and upon the further condition that in the event the franchisee shall fail to comply with
any law, ordinance or regulation governing the franchise, there shall be recoverable, jointly
and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages of loss suffered by the
City as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of
removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee, plus a reasonable allowance for
attorney fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond. The City, at is sole discretion, may
at any time subsequent to completion of the construction, waive the requirement of the
franchisee to maintain said bond. The bond shall contain the following endorsement: “It is
hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled nor the intention not to
renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the City by registered mail a written
notice of such intent to cancel or not renew.”
112.35 RECEIVERSHIP AND FORECLOSURE. Any franchise granted hereunder shall,
in the case of foreclosure or receivership and at the option of the Council or its designee, cease
and terminate within one hundred twenty (120) days or unless:
1. Such receivers or trustees shall have, within one hundred twenty (120) days
after their election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and provisions of
this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant hereto, and the receivers or trustees
within said one hundred twenty (120) days shall have remedied all defaults under the
franchise; and
2. Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty (120) days
execute an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises,
whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by every term,
provision and limitation of the franchise herein granted.
In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the
franchisee, or any part hereof, including or excluding the franchise, the Council or its designee
may serve notice of termination upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at such sale, in
which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise hereunder shall cease
and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless: (i) the Council shall have
approved the transfer of the franchise, as and in the manner in this chapter provided; and (ii)
the successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the City to assume and be bound
by all terms and conditions of the franchise and this chapter.
112.36 PERMITS AND AUTHORIZATIONS. The franchisee shall diligently apply for
all necessary permits and authorizations required in the conduct of its business, and shall
diligently pursue the acquisition thereof, including necessary pole attachment agreements, and
necessary authorizations from the Federal Aviation Agency to construct such receiving
antenna towers as may be required, and any necessary authorization or waivers from the
Federal Communications Commission. The franchisee shall not apply for any waivers,
exceptions, or declaratory rulings from the Federal Communications Commission or any other
federal or State regulatory agency without reasonable notification to the City Administrator or
such officer’s designee.
112.37 TRANSACTIONS AFFECTING OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL. Express
approval of the Council is required where ownership or control of the right of control of, or
interest in, the franchise is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of
whom already owns the right of control, as “control” is defined by federal statute or FCC
regulation. In the absence of such definition, “control” shall be deemed to mean fifty percent
(50%) of the right of control or interest in the franchise.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 591 -
112.38 RIGHTS RESERVED TO THE CITY.
1. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way,
to any extent, the right of the City to acquire the property of the franchisee, either by
purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, at a fair and just
value, which shall not include any amount for the franchise itself or for any of the
rights or privileges granted, and nothing herein continued shall be construed to
contract away or to modify or abridge, whether for a term or in perpetuity, the City’s
right of eminent domain.
2. There is hereby reserved to the City every right and power which is required
to be herein reserved or provided by any law, and the franchisee, by its acceptance of
the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or
requirements of the City, passed pursuant to the legitimate exercise of its police
power.
3. Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall constitute
a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the City.
4. If the FCC or any other federal or State body or agency shall now or hereafter
exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of any franchise granted
under this chapter, to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the
exercise of like jurisdiction by the City, the jurisdiction of the City shall cease and no
longer exist.
5. Subject to federal law, at the expiration of the term for which a franchise is
granted or upon the termination and cancellation as provided therein, the City reserves
the right to require the franchisee to remove at its own expense any aerial or above
ground portions of the BTN from the public ways within the City.
6. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to be intended to expand or
enlarge the scope of authority of the City to exercise its governmental rights and
powers.
112.39 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE. The City reserves the right
to revoke any franchise granted hereunder and rescind all rights and privileges associated with
the franchise in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default and
breach under this chapter and the franchise ordinance:
1. If the franchisee should default in the performance of any of its material
obligations under this chapter or under the franchise ordinance or under such
documents, contracts, and other terms and provisions entered into by and between the
City and the franchisee.
2. If the franchisee should fail to provide or maintain in full force and effect, the
liability and indemnification coverages or the performance bond as required herein.
3. If any court of competent jurisdiction, the FCC or any State regulatory body,
by rules, decision or other action determines that any material provision of the
franchise documents, including this chapter, is invalid or unenforceable prior to the
commencement of construction of the network by the franchisee.
4. If the franchisee should frequently violate any orders or rulings of any
regulatory body substantially relating to the operation of the BTN in the Service Area
having jurisdiction over the franchisee relative to such franchise.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 592 -
5. If the franchisee fails to receive necessary FCC certification.
112.40 PROCEDURE PRIOR TO SANCTION OR REVOCATION.
1. The City may make written demand that the franchisee do or comply with any
term or condition under this chapter or the franchise ordinance. If the failure, refusal,
or neglect of the franchisee continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such
written demand, the City shall cause to be served upon such franchisee, at least ten
(10) days prior to the date of such Council meeting, a written notice of such officer’s
intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of
which shall be published by the Clerk at least one (1) to ten (10) days before such
meeting in a newspaper of general circulation within the City.
2. The Council shall consider the request of BTC and shall hear any persons
interested therein, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure,
refusal or neglect by the franchisee was with just cause.
3. If such failure, refusal or neglect by the franchisee was with just cause, the
Council shall direct the franchisee to comply within such time and manner and upon
such terms and conditions as are reasonable.
4. If the Council shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by the franchisee
was without just cause, the Council may, by resolution, declare that the franchise of
such franchisee shall be terminated and bond forfeited unless there be compliance by
the franchisee within such periods as the Council may fix.
5. The franchisee may appeal any decision by the Council hereunder, to a court
of competent jurisdiction.
112.41 RESTORATION OF PROPERTY. In removing its plant, structures, and
equipment, the franchisee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by
it and shall leave all public ways and places in reasonably as good a condition as prevailing
prior to the Company’s removal of its equipment and appliances, without affecting the
electrical or telephone cable wires, or attachments. The City shall inspect and approve the
conditions of the public ways and public places, and cables, wires, attachments and poles after
removal. The liability indemnity and insurance as provided herein and the performance bond
provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until
full compliance by the franchisee with the terms and conditions of this section and this
chapter.
112.42 RESTORATION BY CITY; REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS. In the event of a
failure by the franchisee to complete any work required by Section 112.41 above, or any other
work required by City law or ordinance within the time as may be established and to the
satisfaction of the City, the City may cause such work to be done and the franchisee shall
reimburse the City the costs thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of
such costs or the City may recover such costs through the performance bond provided by
franchisee. The City shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the
provisions of this section.
112.43 EXTENDED OPERATION. Upon either the expiration or revocation of a
franchise, the City may require the franchisee to continue to operate the network for an
extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of such expiration or
revocation. The franchisee shall, as trustee for its successor in interest, continue to operate the
BTN under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise and to provide the
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 593 -
regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time.
During such interim period, the franchisee shall not sell any of the system assets, nor shall the
franchisee make any physical, material, administrative or operational change that would tend
to (i) degrade the quality of service to the subscribers, (ii) decrease income, or (iii) materially
increase expenses without the express permission, in writing, of the City or its assignee. The
City shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the provisions of this
section.
112.44 LESSER SANCTIONS. Nothing shall prohibit the City in enforcing its rules and
regulations to impose lesser sanctions or censures for violations of provisions of this chapter
or the franchise ordinance rather than revocation.
112.45 LIQUIDATED DAMAGES. By acceptance of the franchise, franchisee agrees that
failure to comply with the provisions therein and this chapter will result in damage to the City,
and that it will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage; and
franchisee therefore agrees that, in addition to any other damages suffered by the City,
franchisee will pay to the City the following liquidated damages:
1. For failure to timely file required plans or information, per day - $25.00.
2. For failure to comply with reasonable orders of the City, per day - $25.00.
3. For willful or negligent failure to complete construction or commence
operations in accordance with this chapter, per day - $25.00.
4. For willful or negligent failure to provide service in substantial compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, not to exceed $100.00 per day as determined by
the City.
In the event franchisee disagrees with the imposition by the City of any of the above listed
liquidated damages, such damages will continue to accrue but will not be required to be paid
until franchisee has received reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard before the
Council and the Council has determined that payment of such damages is appropriate. The
franchisee may appeal any adverse decision of the Council hereunder to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
112.46 CITY’S RIGHTS NOT AFFECTED. The termination and forfeiture of any
franchise shall in no way affect any of the rights of the City under the franchise or any
provision of law.
112.47 FURTHER AGREEMENT AND WAIVER BY FRANCHISEE. The franchisee
shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this chapter or
the franchise ordinance by and failure of the City, upon any one or more occasions, to insist
upon the franchisee’s performance or to seek franchisee’s compliance with any one or more of
such terms or conditions.
112.48 TIME IS OF THE ESSENCE. Whenever this chapter or the franchise sets forth
any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of the franchisee, such time shall be
deemed of the essence and the franchisee’s failure to perform within the time allotted shall, in
all cases, be sufficient grounds for the City to invoke the remedies available under the terms
and conditions of this chapter and the franchise.
CHAPTER 111 ELECTRIC FRANCHISE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 594 -
112.49 IMPOSSIBILITY OF PERFORMANCE. The franchisee shall not be held in
default for noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise, or suffer any enforcement or
penalty relating thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by strikes,
acts of God, power outages, or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control.
112.50 ACTIONS OF PARTIES. In any action by the City or the franchisee that is
mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall act in a reasonable,
expeditious, and timely manner. Furthermore, in any instance where approval or consent is
required under the terms hereof, such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
[The next page is 643]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 643 -
CHAPTER 120
LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER PERMITS
120.01 License or Permit Required 120.04 Action by Council
120.02 General Prohibition 120.05 Prohibited Sales and Acts
120.03 Investigation 120.06 Amusement Devices
120.01 LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall manufacture for sale,
import, sell, or offer or keep for sale, alcoholic liquor, wine, or beer without first securing a
liquor control license, wine permit or beer permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
123 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.22, 123.122 & 123.171)
120.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION. It is unlawful to manufacture for sale, sell, offer or
keep for sale, possess or transport alcoholic liquor, wine or beer except upon the terms,
conditions, limitations and restrictions enumerated in Chapter 123 of the Code of Iowa, and a
license or permit may be suspended or revoked or a civil penalty may be imposed for a
violation thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.2, 123.39 & 123.50)
120.03 INVESTIGATION. Upon receipt of an application for a liquor license, wine or
beer permit, the Clerk may forward it to the Police Chief, who shall then conduct an
investigation and submit a written report as to the truth of the facts averred in the application.
The Fire Chief may also inspect the premises to determine if they conform to the requirements
of the City. The Council shall not approve an application for a license or permit for any
premises which does not conform to the applicable law and ordinances, resolutions and
regulations of the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.30)
120.04 ACTION BY COUNCIL. The Council shall either approve or disapprove the
issuance of the liquor control license or retail wine or beer permit and shall endorse its
approval or disapproval on the application, and thereafter the application, necessary fee and
bond, if required, shall be forwarded to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the State
Department of Commerce for such further action as is provided by law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.32[2])
120.05 PROHIBITED SALES AND ACTS. A person or club holding a liquor license or
retail wine or beer permit and the person’s or club’s agents or employees shall not do any of
the following:
1. Sell, dispense or give to any intoxicated person, or one simulating
intoxication, any alcoholic liquor, wine or beer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[1])
2. Sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage, wine or beer on the premises covered
by the license or permit, or permit its consumption thereon between the hours of 2:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and
6:00 a.m. on the following Monday; however, a holder of a license or permit granted
the privilege of selling alcoholic liquor, beer or wine on Sunday may sell or dispense
CHAPTER 112 BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 644 -
alcoholic liquor, beer or wine between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00 a.m.
of the following Monday, and further provided that a holder of any class of liquor
control license or the holder of a class “B” beer permit may sell or dispense alcoholic
liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. on Monday when that Monday is New Year’s Day and beer
for consumption off the premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. on Sunday and 2:00
a.m. on the following Monday when that Sunday is the day before New Year’s Day.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2b and 2k] & 123.150)
3. Sell alcoholic beverages, wine or beer to any person on credit, except with a
bona fide credit card. This provision does not apply to sales by a club to its members,
to sales by a hotel or motel to bona fide registered guests or to retail sales by the
managing entity of a convention center, civic center or events center.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2c])
4. Employ a person under eighteen (18) years of age in the sale or serving of
alcoholic liquor, wine or beer for consumption on the premises where sold.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2f])
5. In the case of a retail beer or wine permittee, knowingly allow the mixing or
adding of alcohol or any alcoholic beverage to beer, wine or any other beverage in or
about the permittee’s place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2i])
6. Knowingly permit any gambling, except in accordance with Iowa law, or
knowingly permit any solicitation for immoral purposes, or immoral or disorderly
conduct on the premises covered by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2a])
7. Knowingly permit or engage in any criminal activity on the premises covered
by the license or permit.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2j])
8. Keep on premises covered by a liquor control license any alcoholic liquor in
any container except the original package purchased from the Alcoholic Beverages
Division of the State Department of Commerce and except mixed drinks or cocktails
mixed on the premises for immediate consumption. However, mixed drinks or
cocktails that are mixed on the premises and are not for immediate consumption may
be consumed on the licensed premises, subject to rules adopted by the Alcoholic
Beverages Division.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2d])
9. Reuse for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine any container or receptacle used
originally for packaging alcoholic liquor or wine; or adulterate, by the addition of any
substance, the contents or remaining contents of an original package of an alcoholic
liquor or wine; or knowingly possess any original package which has been reused or
adulterated.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2e])
10. Allow any person other than the licensee, permittee or employees of the
licensee or permittee to use or keep on the licensed premises any alcoholic liquor in
any bottle or other container which is designed for the transporting of such beverages,
except as allowed by State law.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[2g])
CHAPTER 112 BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 645 -
11. Permit or allow any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to remain upon
licensed premises unless over fifty percent (50%) of the dollar volume of the business
establishment comes from the sale and serving of prepared foods. This provision does
not apply to holders of a class “C” beer permit only.
12. Sell, give, possess, or otherwise supply a machine that is used to vaporize an
alcoholic beverage for the purpose of being consumed in a vaporized form.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 123.49[21])
120.06 AMUSEMENT DEVICES. The following provisions pertain to electronic or
mechanical amusement devices, which are allowed only in premises with a liquor control
license or beer permit as specifically authorized in Section 99B.10 of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 99B.10C)
1. As used in this section an “electronic or mechanical amusement device”
means a device that awards a prize redeemable for merchandise on the premises where
the device is located and that is required to be registered with the Iowa Department of
Inspection and Appeals.
2. It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to participate in
the operation of an electrical or mechanical amusement device.
3. It is unlawful for any person owning or leasing an electrical or mechanical
amusement device, or an employee of a person owning or leasing an electrical or
mechanical amusement device, to knowingly allow a person under the age of 21 to
participate in the operation of an electrical or mechanical amusement device.
4. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly participate in the operation of an
electrical or mechanical amusement device with a person under the age of 21.
CHAPTER 112 BROADBAND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 646 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 647 -
CHAPTER 121
CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
121.01 Definitions 121.06 Refunds
121.02 Permit Required 121.07 Persons Under Legal Age
121.03 Application 121.08 Self-Service Sales Prohibited
121.04 Fees 121.09 Permit Revocation
121.05 Issuance and Expiration
121.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.1)
1. “Alternative nicotine product” means a product, not consisting of or
containing tobacco, that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine, whether
by chewing, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing, or by any other
means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not include cigarettes, tobacco products,
or vapor products, or a product that is regulated as a drug or device by the United
States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act.
2. “Cigarette” means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, or
any substitute for tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of tobacco or
any substitute for tobacco being flavored, adulterated or mixed with any other
ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper or any other
material. However, this definition is not to be construed to include cigars.
3. “Place of business” means any place where cigarettes or tobacco products are
sold, stored or kept for the purpose of sale or consumption by a retailer.
4. “Retailer” means every person who sells, distributes or offers for sale for
consumption, or possesses for the purpose of sale for consumption, cigarettes,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products, irrespective of the quantity or amount
or the number of sales, or who engages in the business of selling tobacco, tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products to ultimate consumers.
5. “Self-service display” means any manner of product display, placement, or
storage from which a person purchasing the product may take possession of the
product, prior to purchase, without assistance from the retailer or employee of the
retailer, in removing the product from a restricted access location.
6. “Tobacco products” means the following: cigars; little cigars; cheroots;
stogies; periques; granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed and other smoking
tobacco; snuff; cavendish; plug and twist tobacco; fine-cut and other chewing
tobaccos; shorts or refuse scraps, clippings, cuttings and sweepings of tobacco; and
other kinds and forms of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for
chewing or smoking in a pipe or otherwise, or for both chewing and smoking, but
does not mean cigarettes.
7. “Vapor product” means any noncombustible product, which may or may not
contain nicotine, that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or
other electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can
be used to produce vapor from a solution or other substance. “Vapor product”
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER
PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 648 -
includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe,
or similar product or device, and any cartridge or other container of a solution or other
substance, which may or may not contain nicotine, that is intended to be used with or
in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or
similar product or device. “Vapor product” does not include a product regulated as a
drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V
of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
121.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
1. Retail Cigarette Permits. It is unlawful for any person, other than a holder of
a retail permit, to sell cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, or vapor products at
retail and no retailer shall distribute, sell, or solicit the sale of any cigarettes,
alternative nicotine products, or vapor products within the City without a valid permit
for each place of business. The permit shall, at all times, be publicly displayed at the
place of business so as to be easily seen by the public and the persons authorized to
inspect the place of business.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13)
2. Retail Tobacco Permits. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of a retailer of tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
vapor products at any place of business without first having received a permit as a
retailer for each place of business owned or operated by the retailer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.47A)
A retailer who holds a retail cigarette permit is not required to also obtain a retail tobacco
permit. However, if a retailer only holds a retail cigarette permit and that permit is suspended,
revoked, or expired, the retailer shall not sell any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, or vapor products, during such time.
121.03 APPLICATION. A completed application on forms furnished by the State
Department of Revenue or on forms made available or approved by the Department and
accompanied by the required fee shall be filed with the Clerk. Renewal applications shall be
filed at least five (5) days prior to the last regular meeting of the Council in June. If a renewal
application is not timely filed, and a special Council meeting is called to act on the
application, the costs of such special meeting shall be paid by the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.04 FEES. The fee for a retail cigarette or tobacco permit shall be as follows:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
FOR PERMITS GRANTED DURING: FEE:
July, August or September $ 75.00
October, November or December $ 56.25
January, February or March $ 37.50
April, May or June $ 18.75
121.05 ISSUANCE AND EXPIRATION. Upon proper application and payment of the
required fee, a permit shall be issued. Each permit issued shall describe clearly the place of
business for which it is issued and shall be nonassignable. All permits expire on June 30 of
each year. The Clerk shall submit a duplicate of any application for a permit, and any permit
issued, to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of Commerce within thirty (30)
days of issuance.
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER
PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 649 -
121.06 REFUNDS. A retailer may surrender an unrevoked permit and receive a refund from
the City, except during April, May, or June, in accordance with the schedule of refunds as
provided in Section 453A.13 or 453A.47A of the Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, 453A.13 & 453A.47A)
121.07 PERSONS UNDER LEGAL AGE. No person shall sell, give, or otherwise supply
any tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor products, or cigarettes to
any person under eighteen (18) years of age. The provision of this section includes
prohibiting a minor from purchasing tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
vapor products, and cigarettes from a vending machine. If a retailer or employee of a retailer
violates the provisions of this section, the Council shall, after written notice and hearing, and
in addition to the other penalties fixed for such violation, assess the following:
1. For a first violation, the retailer shall be assessed a civil penalty in the amount
of three hundred dollars ($300.00). Failure to pay the civil penalty as ordered under
this subsection shall result in automatic suspension of the permit for a period of
fourteen (14) days.
2. For a second violation within a period of two years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) or the retailer’s permit shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days.
The retailer may select its preference in the penalty to be applied under this
subsection.
3. For a third violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s permit shall be
suspended for a period of 30 days.
4. For a fourth violation within a period of three years, the retailer shall be
assessed a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 and the retailer’s permit shall be
suspended for a period of sixty (60) days.
5. For a fifth violation within a period of four years, the retailer’s permit shall be
revoked.
The Clerk shall give ten (10) days’ written notice to the retailer by mailing a copy of the
notice to the place of business as it appears on the application for a permit. The notice shall
state the reason for the contemplated action and the time and place at which the retailer may
appear and be heard.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.2, 453A.22 and 453A.36[6])
121.08 SELF-SERVICE SALES PROHIBITED. Except for the sale of cigarettes through
a cigarette vending machine as provided in Section 453A.36[6] of the Code of Iowa, a retailer
shall not sell or offer for sale tobacco, tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, vapor
products, or cigarettes through the use of a self-service display.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.36A)
121.09 PERMIT REVOCATION. Following a written notice and an opportunity for a
hearing, as provided by the Code of Iowa, the Council may also revoke a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter for a violation of Division I of Chapter 453A of the Code of Iowa or
any rule adopted thereunder. If a permit is revoked, a new permit shall not be issued to the
permit holder for any place of business, or to any other person for the place of business at
which the violation occurred, until one year has expired from the date of revocation, unless
good cause to the contrary is shown to the Council. The Clerk shall report the revocation or
CHAPTER 120 LIQUOR LICENSES AND WINE AND BEER
PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 650 -
suspension of a retail permit to the Alcoholic Beverages Division of the Department of
Commerce within thirty (30) days of the revocation or suspension.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 453A.22)
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 651 -
CHAPTER 122
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, MOBILE FOOD VENDORS,
AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
122.01 Purpose 122.11 Parks and Recreation Board
122.02 Definitions 122.12 Revocation of License
122.03 License Required 122.13 Notice
122.04 Application for License 122.14 Hearing
122.05 License Fees 122.15 Record and Determination
122.06 Bond Required 122.16 Appeal
122.07 License Issued 122.17 Effect of Revocation
122.08 Display of License 122.18 License Exemptions
122.09 License Not Transferable 122.19 Charitable and Nonprofit Organizations
122.10 Time Restriction 122.20 Public Safety
122.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect residents of the City against
fraud, unfair competition, and intrusion into the privacy of their homes and enjoyment of
public activities by licensing and regulating peddlers, solicitors, mobile food vendors, and
transient merchants.
122.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Mobile food vendor” means any person who prepares, stores, or sells any
food item in or from a vehicle or unit which is either parked in a permanent location
or which moves from place to place and stops temporarily for such sales.
2. “Peddler” means any person carrying goods or merchandise who sells or
offers for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house to house
or upon the public street.
3. “Solicitor” means any person who solicits or attempts to solicit from house to
house or upon the public street any contribution or donation or any order for goods,
services, subscriptions or merchandise to be delivered at a future date.
4. “Transient merchant” means any person who engages in a temporary or
itinerant merchandising business and in the course of such business hires, leases or
occupies any building or structure whatsoever, or who operates out of a vehicle which
is parked anywhere within the City limits. Temporary association with a local
merchant, dealer, trader or auctioneer, or conduct of such transient business in
connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local merchant, dealer, trader or
auctioneer does not exempt any person from being considered a transient merchant.
122.03 LICENSE REQUIRED. Any person engaging in peddling, soliciting, mobile food
vending, or in the business of a transient merchant in the City without first obtaining a license
as herein provided is in violation of this chapter.
122.04 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. An application in writing shall be filed with the
Clerk for a license under this chapter. Such application shall set forth the applicant’s name,
permanent and local address and business address if any. The application shall also set forth
the applicant’s employer, if any, and the employer’s address, the nature of the applicant’s
business, the last three places of such business and the length of time sought to be covered by
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 652 -
the license. An application fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall be paid at the time of filing such
application to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein.
122.05 LICENSE FEES. The following license fees shall be paid to the Clerk prior to the
issuance of any license.
1. Solicitors. In addition to the application fee for each person actually soliciting
(principal or agent), a fee for the principal of ten dollars ($10.00) per year.
2. Peddlers, Mobile Food Vendors, or Transient Merchants.
A. For one day.................................................$ 25.00
B. For one week.............................................. $ 50.00
C. For one month............................................ $ 100.00
D. For one year................................................$ 250.00
122.06 BOND REQUIRED. Before a license under this chapter is issued to a transient
merchant, an applicant shall provide to the Clerk evidence that the applicant has filed a bond
with the Secretary of State in accordance with Chapter 9C of the Code of Iowa.
122.07 LICENSE ISSUED. The Clerk shall have a period of twenty-four (24) hours in
which to investigate each application and the credentials of each applicant and shall grant each
such license unless it appears that such applicant’s business is illegal or immoral or that the
same will constitute a nuisance or other good cause exists to deny the same.
122.08 DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Each solicitor, mobile food vendor, or peddler shall keep
such license in possession at all times while doing business in the City and shall, upon the
request of prospective customers, exhibit the license as evidence of compliance with all
requirements of this chapter. Each transient merchant shall display publicly such merchant’s
license in the merchant’s place of business.
122.09 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE. Licenses issued under the provisions of this
chapter are not transferable in any situation and are to be applicable only to the person filing
the application.
122.10 TIME RESTRICTION. All peddler’s and solicitor’s licenses shall provide that
said licenses are in force and effect only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. All
mobile food vendor’s licenses shall provide that said licenses are in force and effect only
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. The City Administrator may extend these hours
for special events upon prior application by the license holder.
122.11 PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD. Within City parks and within other City
recreational facilities, the Parks and Recreation Board shall have the power to make
determination of the location(s) wherein peddlers, solicitors, mobile food vendors, and
transient merchants are allowed to operate. The Board may also prescribe other rules for
operation by food vendors within the public parks and may prescribe special rules for
individual events as they deem necessary to protect the public health and safety.
122.12 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. After notice and hearing, the Clerk may revoke
any license issued under this chapter for the following reasons:
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 653 -
1. Fraudulent Statements. The licensee has made fraudulent statements in the
application for the license or in the conduct of the business.
2. Violation of Law. The licensee has violated this chapter or has otherwise
conducted the business in an unlawful manner.
3. Endangered Public Welfare, Health or Safety. The licensee has conducted the
business in such manner as to endanger the public welfare, safety, order or morals.
122.13 NOTICE. The Clerk shall send a notice to the licensee at the licensee’s local
address, not less than ten (10) days before the date set for a hearing on the possible revocation
of a license. Such notice shall contain particulars of the complaints against the licensee, the
ordinance provisions or State statutes allegedly violated, and the date, time and place for
hearing on the matter.
122.14 HEARING. The Clerk shall conduct a hearing at which both the licensee and any
complainants shall be present to determine the truth of the facts alleged in the complaint and
notice. Should the licensee, or authorized representative, fail to appear without good cause,
the Clerk may proceed to a determination of the complaint.
122.15 RECORD AND DETERMINATION. The Clerk shall make and record findings
of fact and conclusions of law, and shall revoke a license only when upon review of the entire
record the Clerk finds clear and convincing evidence of substantial violation of this chapter or
State law.
122.16 APPEAL. If the Clerk revokes or refuses to issue a license, the Clerk shall make a
part of the record the reasons therefor. The licensee, or the applicant, shall have a right to a
hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting. The Council may reverse, modify or
affirm the decision of the Clerk by a majority vote of the Council members present and the
Clerk shall carry out the decision of the Council.
122.17 EFFECT OF REVOCATION. Revocation of any license shall bar the licensee
from being eligible for any license under this chapter for a period of one year from the date of
the revocation.
122.18 LICENSE EXEMPTIONS. The following are excluded from the application of
this chapter.
1. Newspapers. Persons delivering, collecting for or selling subscriptions to
newspapers.
2. Club Members. Members of local civic and service clubs, Boy Scout, Girl
Scout, 4-H Clubs, Future Farmers of America and similar organizations.
3. Local Residents and Farmers. Local residents and farmers who offer for sale
their own products.
4. Students. Students representing the Charles City Community School District
conducting projects sponsored by organizations recognized by the school.
5. Route Sales. Route delivery persons who only incidentally solicit additional
business or make special sales.
6. Resale or Institutional Use. Persons customarily calling on businesses or
institutions for the purposes of selling products for resale or institutional use.
CHAPTER 121 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO PERMITS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 654 -
7. Local Retail Outlets. Solicitations, sale or distributions made by businesses
with a retail outlet located within the City.
122.19 CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS. Authorized
representatives of charitable or nonprofit organizations operating under the provisions of
Chapter 504 of the Code of Iowa desiring to solicit money or to distribute literature are exempt
from the operation of Sections 122.04 and 122.05. All such organizations are required to
submit in writing to the Clerk the name and purpose of the cause for which such activities are
sought, names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization, the period
during which such activities are to be carried on, and whether any commissions, fees or wages
are to be charged by the solicitor and the amount thereof. If the Clerk finds that the
organization is a bona fide charity or nonprofit organization the Clerk shall issue, free of
charge, a license containing the above information to the applicant. In the event the Clerk
denies the exemption, the authorized representatives of the organization may appeal the
decision to the Council, as provided in Section 122.16 of this chapter.
122.20 PUBLIC SAFETY. It shall be the duty of the police of the City to enforce the
provisions of this section against any person found to be violating the same. A public safety
officer of the City may require the removal of mobile food vendors from a particular location
if, in the opinion of the public safety officer, the operation of the vendor’s unit at the location
presents a threat to public health and safety.
[The next page is 657]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 657 -
CHAPTER 123
HOUSE MOVERS
123.01 House Mover Defined 123.07 Permit Issued
123.02 Permit Required 123.08 Public Safety
123.03 Application 123.09 Time Limit
123.04 Bond Required 123.10 Removal by City
123.05 Insurance Required 123.11 Protect Pavement
123.06 Permit Fee 123.12 Overhead Wires
123.01 HOUSE MOVER DEFINED. A “house mover” means any person who undertakes
to move a building or similar structure upon, over or across public streets or property when the
building or structure is of such size that it requires the use of skids, jacks, dollies or any other
specialized moving equipment. The term “house mover” does not apply to a person moving a
small building or structure on a regularly licensed motor vehicle.
123.02 PERMIT REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of
house mover as herein defined without a valid permit from the City for each house, building or
similar structure to be moved.
123.03 APPLICATION. Application for a house mover’s permit shall be made in writing
to the Clerk. The application shall include:
1. Name and Address. The applicant’s full name and address and if a
corporation the names and addresses of its principal officers.
2. Building Location. An accurate description of the present location and future
site of the building or similar structure to be moved.
3. Routing Plan. A routing plan approved by the Police Chief, street
superintendent, and public utility officials. The route approved shall be the shortest
route compatible with the greatest public convenience and safety.
123.04 BOND REQUIRED. The applicant shall post with the Clerk a penal bond in the
minimum sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to
issue such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s payment for any
damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all costs incurred by the City in
the course of moving the building or structure.
123.05 INSURANCE REQUIRED. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance
indicating that the applicant is carrying a single limit of general liability of $1,000,000 and
auto liability of $1,000,000 which is in effect for the duration of the permit. The certificate
shall also name the City as an additional insured.
123.06 PERMIT FEE. A permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be payable at the time of
filing the application with the Clerk. A separate permit shall be required for each house,
building or similar structure to be moved. In the event that a building or similar structure is
moved without first obtaining a permit, the permit fee shall be doubled.
CHAPTER 122 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, MOBILE FOOD
VENDORS,
AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 658 -
123.07 PERMIT ISSUED. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance
certificate, and payment of the required fee, the Clerk shall issue a permit.
123.08 PUBLIC SAFETY. At all times when a building or similar structure is in motion
upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public property, the permittee shall maintain flag persons at
the closest intersections or other possible channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of
the building or structure. At all times when the building or structure is at rest upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or public property the permittee shall maintain adequate warning signs or
lights at the intersections or channels of traffic to the sides, behind and ahead of the building
or structure.
123.09 TIME LIMIT. No house mover shall permit or allow a building or similar structure
to remain upon any street or other public way for a period of more than twelve (12) hours
without having first secured the written approval of the City.
123.10 REMOVAL BY CITY. In the event any building or similar structure is found to be
in violation of Section 123.09, the City is authorized to remove such building or structure and
assess the costs thereof against the permit holder and the surety on the permit holder’s bond.
123.11 PROTECT PAVEMENT. It is unlawful to move any house or building of any kind
over any pavement, unless the wheels or rollers upon which the house or building is moved
are at least one (1) inch in width for each one thousand (1,000) pounds of weight of such
building. If there is any question as to the weight of a house or building, the estimate of the
City as to such weight shall be final.
123.12 OVERHEAD WIRES. The holder of any permit to move a building shall see that
all telephone, cable television and electric wires and poles are removed when necessary and
replaced in good order, and shall be liable for the costs of the same.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 659 -
CHAPTER 124
LICENSING OF TREE TRIMMERS
124.01 Purpose 124.04 Workmanship
124.02 License Required 124.05 Revocation of License
124.03 Financial Responsibility
124.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to assure that those persons engaged in
the conduct of the business of trimming or removal of trees do so in such manner as not to
endanger the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
124.02 LICENSE REQUIRED. Except as otherwise provided herein, a person shall not
trim, cut, or remove any tree limbs or trees from any property within the City of Charles City
without first obtaining a license from the City.
1. Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to City employees performing tree
trimming, tree removal, and cutting of trees in the course of their City employment or
to private property owners trimming, removing, or cutting trees on their own property
or on the publicly owned property or right-of-way abutting the owners’ private
property. (Ord. 1133 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
2. License. An annual license shall be obtained from the City Clerk on or before
April 1st which will then be effective for a period of one year, terminating on the
following April 1st. Each applicant must pay a fee of $25 and show proof of financial
responsibility. Any license issued after April 1st, due to late application or first time
application, shall nonetheless expire on the following April 1st. Renewal of a license
will require a payment of $25 and proof of financial responsibility.
124.03 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. The City shall require, as a condition for the
issuance of any license, that the applicant first file proof of financial responsibility in the form
of a bond or a liability insurance policy showing coverage for injuries to persons and property
during the licensing period in an amount of not less than $1,000,000.
124.04 WORKMANSHIP. All tree trimming, tree removal and cutting of trees shall be
done in a careful and workmanlike manner with due regard for the welfare of pedestrians and
bystanders and the property of residents on which the trees are located. The abutting property
owner may be liable for damages caused by tree trimming, tree removal, and cutting of trees
on or overhanging the publicly owned street and right-of-way abutting the owners’ private
property. (Ord. 1133 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
124.05 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. The City may revoke any license issued pursuant
to this Chapter whenever the licensee violates a provision of this Chapter. The City may also
pursue any criminal or civil actions against the violating licensee as authorized by this Code of
Ordinances.
(Chapter 124 - Ord. 1090 – May 16 Supp.)
CHAPTER 123 HOUSE MOVERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 660 -
[The next page is 679]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 679 -
CHAPTER 135
STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
135.01 Removal of Warning Devices 135.08 Burning Prohibited
135.02 Obstructing or Defacing 135.09 Excavations
135.03 Placing Debris On 135.10 Property Owner’s Responsibility for Maintenance
135.04 Playing In 135.11 Failure to Maintain
135.05 Traveling on Barricaded Street or Alley 135.12 Dumping of Snow
135.06 Use for Business Purposes 135.13 Driveway Culverts
135.07 Washing Vehicles 135.14 Private Irrigation Systems Within Right-of-Ways
135.01 REMOVAL OF WARNING DEVICES. It is unlawful for a person to willfully
remove, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or alley any lamp, obstruction,
guard or other article or things, or extinguish any lamp or other light, erected or placed
thereupon for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places in said street or
alley without the consent of the person in control thereof.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.02 OBSTRUCTING OR DEFACING. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct,
deface, or injure any street or alley in any manner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
135.03 PLACING DEBRIS ON. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit on any
street or alley any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter,
offal, leaves, grass, or any other debris likely to be washed into the storm sewer and clog the
storm sewer, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle. Exception will
be made for annual leaf pickup conducted by the City.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 321.369)
135.04 PLAYING IN. It is unlawful for any person to coast, sled, or play games on streets
or alleys, except in the areas blocked off by the City for such purposes.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2])
135.05 TRAVELING ON BARRICADED STREET OR ALLEY. It is unlawful for any
person to travel or operate any vehicle on any street or alley temporarily closed by barricades,
lights, signs, or flares placed thereon by the authority or permission of any City official, police
officer, or member of the Fire Department.
135.06 USE FOR BUSINESS PURPOSES. It is unlawful to park, store, or place,
temporarily or permanently, any machinery or junk or any other goods, wares, and
merchandise of any kind upon any street or alley for the purpose of storage, exhibition, sale, or
offering same for sale, without permission of the Council.
135.07 WASHING VEHICLES. It is unlawful for any person to use any public sidewalk,
street, or alley for the purpose of washing or cleaning any automobile, truck equipment, or any
vehicle of any kind when such work is done for hire or as a business. This does not prevent
any person from washing or cleaning his or her own vehicle or equipment when it is lawfully
parked in the street or alley.
CHAPTER 124 LICENSING OF TREE TRIMMERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 680 -
135.08 BURNING PROHIBITED. No person shall burn any trash, leaves, rubbish or
other combustible material in any curb and gutter or on any paved or surfaced street or alley.
135.09 EXCAVATIONS. No person shall dig, excavate or in any manner disturb any
street, parking or alley except in accordance with the following:
1. Permit Required. No excavation shall be commenced without first obtaining
a permit therefor. A written application for such permit shall be filed with the City
and shall contain the following:
A. An exact description of the property, by lot and street number, in
front of or along which it is desired to excavate;
B. A statement of the purpose, for whom and by whom the excavation is
to be made; and
C. Date of commencement of the work and estimated completion date.
2. Public Convenience. Streets and alleys shall be opened in the manner which
will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit the uninterrupted passage of
water along the gutter on the street.
3. Barricades, Fencing and Lighting. Adequate barricades, fencing and warning
lights meeting standards specified by the City shall be so placed as to protect the
public from hazard. Any costs incurred by the City in providing or maintaining
adequate barricades, fencing or warning lights shall be paid to the City by the permit
holder/property owner.
4. Bond Required. The applicant shall post with the City a penal bond in the
minimum sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) issued by a surety company
authorized to issue such bonds in the State. The bond shall guarantee the permittee’s
payment for any damage done to the City or to public property, and payment of all
costs incurred by the City in the course of administration of this section. In lieu of a
surety bond, a cash deposit of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) may be filed with the
City. (Ord. 1114 – Nov. 17 Supp.)
5. Insurance Required. Each applicant shall also file a certificate of insurance
indicating that the applicant is carrying public liability insurance in effect for the
duration of the permit covering the applicant and all agents and employees for the
following minimum amounts:
A. General Liability - $1,000,000.00
B. Umbrella - $1,000,000.00
6. Restoration of Public Property. Streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to the condition of the
property prior to the commencement of the work, or in a manner satisfactory to the
City, at the expense of the permit holder/property owner.
7. Observation/Backfill. All work shall be subject to observation by the City.
All excavation work shall be backfilled in six-inch (6") loose lift thicknesses and
mechanically compacted to insure settlement will not occur. The permit holder shall
provide the City with notice at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the time backfill
work will begin.
8. Completion by the City. Should any excavation in any street or alley be
discontinued or left open and unfinished for a period of twenty-four (24) hours after
CHAPTER 124 LICENSING OF TREE TRIMMERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 681 -
† EDITOR’S NOTE: See also Section 136.04 relating to property owner’s responsibility for
maintenance of sidewalks.
the approved completion date, or in the event the work is improperly done, the City
has the right to finish or correct the excavation work and charge any expenses therefor
to the permit holder.
9. Responsibility for Costs. All costs and expenses incident to the excavation
shall be borne by the permit holder and/or property owner. The permit holder and
owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by such excavation.
10. Notification. At least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the commencement of the
excavation, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, the person performing the
excavation shall contact the Statewide Notification Center and provide the center with
the information required under Section 480.4 of the Code of Iowa.
11. Permit Fee. A permit fee in an amount established by resolution of the
Council shall be payable at the time of filing the application with the City. In the
event that work has commenced without first obtaining a permit, the permit fee shall
be doubled. A separate permit shall be required for each excavation.
12. Permit Issued. Upon approval of the application, filing of bond and insurance
certificate, and payment of any required fees, a permit shall be issued.
135.10 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE. The
abutting property owner shall maintain all property outside the lot and property lines and
inside the curb lines upon public streets and shall keep such area in a safe condition, free from
nuisances, obstructions, and hazards. In the absence of a curb, such property shall extend
from the property line to that portion of the public street used or improved for vehicular
purposes. The abutting property owner shall not be required to remove diseased trees or dead
wood on the publicly owned property or right-of-way. Maintenance includes, but is not
limited to, timely mowing, trimming trees and shrubs, and picking up litter and debris. The
abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to maintain the publicly
owned property or right-of-way.†
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c])
135.11 FAILURE TO MAINTAIN. If the abutting property owner does not perform an
action required under the above section within a reasonable time, the City may perform the
required action and assess the cost against the abutting property for collection in the same
manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2e])
135.12 DUMPING OF SNOW. It is unlawful for any person to throw, push, or place or
cause to be thrown, pushed or placed, any ice or snow from private property, sidewalks, or
driveways onto the traveled way of a street or alley so as to obstruct gutters, or impede the
passage of vehicles upon the street or alley or to create a hazardous condition therein; except
where, in the cleaning of large commercial drives in the business district it is absolutely
necessary to move the snow onto the street or alley temporarily, such accumulation shall be
removed promptly by the property owner or agent. Arrangements for the prompt removal of
such accumulations shall be made prior to moving the snow.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
CHAPTER 124 LICENSING OF TREE TRIMMERS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 682 -
135.13 DRIVEWAY CULVERTS. The property owner shall, at the owner’s expense,
install any culvert deemed necessary under any driveway or any other access to the owner’s
property, and before installing a culvert, permission must first be obtained from the City. In
the event repairs are needed at any time with respect to culverts, it shall be the responsibility
of the property owner to make such repairs, and, in the event the owner fails to do so, the City
shall have the right to make the repairs. If the property owner fails to reimburse the City for
the cost of said repairs, the cost shall be certified to the County Treasurer and specially
assessed against the property as by law provided.
135.14 PRIVATE IRRIGATION SYSTEMS WITHIN RIGHT-OF-WAYS. An
abutting property owner may install an irrigation system within the right-of-way between the
curb lines and property lines for the purpose of maintaining the vegetation in this area, but
only after submitting installation plans to the City for its approval and obtaining a permit.
Installation within the right-of-way must be performed by a person licensed or certified to
install such systems. In addition, any connection(s) to the City’s water main(s) must be
performed by a licensed plumber. The issuance of the permit and installation of the irrigation
system within the public right-of-way shall not create or confer any property interest within
the right-of-way benefiting the abutting owner and the City shall retain the right, at its sole
discretion, to order removal of the irrigation system or to order cessation of its use at any time.
Neither the City nor the holder of a franchise, license or easement granted under Chapter 143
of this Code of Ordinances shall have liability for damage caused to the irrigation system
arising from work performed within the right-of-way.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 683 -
CHAPTER 136
SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
136.01 Purpose 136.13 Subgrade Encroachments
136.02 Definitions 136.14 Awnings
136.03 Removal of Snow, Ice and Accumulations 136.15 Encroaching Steps
136.04 Property Owner’s Responsibility for Maintenance 136.16 Openings and Enclosures
136.05 Ordering Improvements and Maintenance; 136.17 Fires or Fuel on Sidewalks
Collection of Costs 136.18 Defacing
136.06 Permit Required 136.19 Debris on Sidewalks
136.07 Failure to Obtain Permit; Remedies 136.20 Merchandise Display
136.08 Inspection and Approval 136.21 Sales Stands
136.09 Sidewalk Construction Specifications and Standards 136.22 Use of Toy Vehicles Prohibited
136.10 Barricades and Warning Lights 136.23 Blocking Sidewalks
136.11 Failure to Repair or Barricade 136.24 Washing Vehicles
136.12 Interference with Sidewalk Improvements
136.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to enhance safe passage by citizens on
sidewalks, to place the responsibility for the maintenance, repair, replacement or
reconstruction of sidewalks upon the abutting property owner and to minimize the liability of
the City.
136.02 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
1. “Broom finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by sweeping the
sidewalk when it is hardening.
2. “Business District” means the same as defined in Section 60.02(1) of this
Code of Ordinances.
3. “Defective sidewalk” means any public sidewalk exhibiting one or more of
the following characteristics:
A. Vertical separations equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more.
B. Horizontal separations equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more.
C. Holes or depressions equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or more and at
least four (4) inches in diameter.
D. Spalling over fifty percent (50%) of a single square of the sidewalk
with one or more depressions equal to one-half (½) inch or more.
E. Spalling over less than fifty percent (50%) of a single square of the
sidewalk with one or more depressions equal to three-fourths (¾) inch or
more.
F. A single square of sidewalk cracked in such a manner that no part
thereof has a piece greater than one square foot.
G. A sidewalk with any part thereof missing to the full depth.
H. A change from the design or construction grade equal to or greater
than three-fourths (¾) inch per foot.
4. “Established grade” means that grade established by the City for the particular
area in which a sidewalk is to be constructed.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 684 -
5. “One-course construction” means that the full thickness of the concrete is
placed at one time, using the same mixture throughout.
6. “Owner” means the person owning the fee title to property abutting any
sidewalk and includes any contract purchaser for purposes of notification required
herein. For all other purposes, “owner” includes the lessee, if any.
7. “Portland cement” means any type of cement except bituminous cement.
8. “Sidewalk” means all permanent public walks in business, residential or
suburban areas.
9. “Sidewalk improvements” means the construction, reconstruction, repair,
replacement or removal, of a public sidewalk and/or the excavating, filling or
depositing of material in the public right-of-way in connection therewith. Only
Portland Cement Concrete (PCC) shall be allowed for the construction of public
sidewalk improvements. (Ord. 1132 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
10. “Wood float finish” means a sidewalk finish that is made by smoothing the
surface of the sidewalk with a wooden trowel.
136.03 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE, AND ACCUMULATIONS. The abutting property
owner shall remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from sidewalks. If a property
owner does not remove snow, ice, or accumulations within twenty-four (24) hours, the City
may do so and assess the costs against the property owner for collection in the same manner as
a property tax. The abutting property owner may be liable for damages caused by failure to
remove snow, ice, and accumulations promptly from the sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2b & e])
136.04 PROPERTY OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE. The
abutting property owner shall repair, replace, or reconstruct, or cause to be repaired, replaced,
or reconstructed, all broken or defective sidewalks and maintain in a safe and hazard-free
condition any sidewalk outside the lot and property lines and inside the curb lines or, in the
absence of a curb, any sidewalk between the property line and that portion of the public street
used or improved for vehicular purposes. The abutting property owner may be liable for
damages caused by failure to maintain the sidewalk.
The abutting property owner may file an application with the City Council to remove the
sidewalk if the following conditions exist:
1. No major pedestrian generation exists at any residence as determined by the
City Administrator; and
2. Less than 50% linear footage of the sidewalk exists within a block, or other
special circumstances exist and the City Administrator recommends the removal.
If the City Council approves this application, the property owner will be required, upon
removal of the sidewalk, to bring the lawn to grade and properly seed the area. The City
Council reserves the right to require replacement of the sidewalk at a future date at its
discretion.
(Ord. 1096 – Dec. 16 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2c])
136.05 ORDERING IMPROVEMENTS AND MAINTENANCE; COLLECTION OF
COSTS.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 685 -
1. Ordering Sidewalk Improvements. The City Engineer may order the
reconstruction, repair, or replacement of permanent sidewalks upon any street or
court. Notice of this order shall be sent to the owner by certified mail. The notice
shall include the fact that the owner may request a hearing by the Council within
fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice.
2. Repairing Defective Sidewalks. It is the duty of the abutting property owner
at any time, or upon receipt of thirty (30) days’ notice from the City, to repair, replace
or reconstruct all broken or defective sidewalks in the street right-of-way abutting said
owner’s property. If, after the expiration of the 30 days, the required work has not
been done or is not in the process of completion, the City Engineer shall proceed to
repair, replace or reconstruct the sidewalk. Upon completion of the work, the City
Engineer shall submit to the Council an itemized and verified statement of
expenditures for material and labor and the legal description of the property abutting
the sidewalk on which work has been performed. These costs shall be assessed to the
property as taxes.
3. Notice of Assessment for Repair or Cleaning Costs. When the City Engineer
submits a bill for sidewalk improvements or for removal of the accumulations of snow
or ice, the Clerk shall send a notice of such facts to the owner of the abutting property.
The notice may be given either by personal service or by certified mail to the last
known address of the owner. The notice shall contain a statement of the work
performed, the cost of the work that is being assessed, a description of the property
affected and the fact that the person may pay the amount assessed by a certain date
without interest or penalty. The notice also shall indicate that the person may object
to such assessment and give the place and time at which the Council will hear such
objections. The time set for hearing shall be at least fifteen (15) days after the service
or mailing of the notice.
4. Hearing and Assessment. At the time and place designated in the notice, the
Council shall consider all objections to the assessment, correct all errors or omissions
and adopt a corrected list of the amounts to be assessed against the property.
5. Billing and Certifying to County. Thirty days after the Council’s decision, the
Clerk shall certify any unpaid amounts to the County Treasurer. The unpaid
assessments shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be collected by the
County Treasurer in the same manner as other taxes. Any assessment that exceeds
five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be paid in installments as set by the Council, not
exceeding ten, in the same manner and at the same interest rates as special
assessments under Chapter 384 of the Code of Iowa. No interest shall be charged for
assessments, or parts thereof, paid within 30 days of the time the Council determined
the final amounts.
136.06 PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall make any sidewalk improvements unless
such person obtains a permit from the City Engineer. The permit shall state the person will
comply with the ordinances of the City and with the specifications for sidewalks adopted by
the City. The permit also shall state that the work will be done under the direction and
approval of the City Engineer. All such permits shall be issued in conformance with Chapter
137 of this Code of Ordinances. All permits for sidewalk improvements not ordered by
resolution of the Council shall be issued in compliance with this chapter. Each permit shall
expire six (6) months after the date of issuance, whether or not the work has been completed.
(Ord. 1132 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 686 -
136.07 FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT; REMEDIES. Whenever any sidewalk
improvements are made that do not conform to the provisions of this chapter and with the
specifications or when any sidewalk improvements are made without a permit, the City
Engineer shall serve notice to obtain a permit upon the property owner and upon the contractor
doing the work. If the sidewalk is in the course of construction, the notice shall order the
work to stop until a permit is obtained and the work is corrected to comply with the
specifications. If the sidewalk work has been completed, the owner shall obtain a permit
immediately and perform any needed corrections within five (5) days from receipt of the
permit. If the owner fails to comply with this notice, the Engineer shall have the work
completed and the costs assessed to the property owner as provided in this chapter.
136.08 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL. Upon final completion, the City Engineer shall
inspect the work and may order corrections if the work does not meet specifications. When
the work does meet all requirements of this chapter, the specifications and the permit, the City
Engineer shall indicate this on both copies of the permit.
136.09 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS. All
sidewalk improvements in public property, whether performed by the owner of the abutting
property or by the City, shall be performed under the supervision and inspection of the City
Engineer and in accordance with Chapter 12 of the Statewide Urban Design and Specification
(SUDAS).
136.10 BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS. Whenever any material of any kind
is deposited on any street, avenue, highway, passageway, or alley when sidewalk
improvements are being made or when any sidewalk is in a dangerous condition, it is the duty
of all persons having an interest therein, either as the contractor or the owner, agent, or lessee
of the property in front of or along which such material may be deposited, or such dangerous
condition exists, to put in conspicuous places at each end of such sidewalk and at each end of
any pile of material deposited in the street, a sufficient number of approved warning lights or
flares, and to keep them lighted during the entire night and to erect sufficient barricades both
at night and in the daytime to secure the same. The party or parties using the street for any of
the purposes specified in this chapter are liable for all injuries or damage to persons or
property arising from any wrongful act or negligence of the party or parties, or their agents or
employees or for any misuse of the privileges conferred by this chapter or of any failure to
comply with provisions hereof.
136.11 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR BARRICADE. It is the duty of the owner of the
property abutting the sidewalk, or the owner’s contractor or agent, to notify the City
immediately in the event of failure or inability to make necessary sidewalk improvements or
to install or erect necessary barricades as required by this chapter.
136.12 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS. No person shall
knowingly or willfully drive any vehicle upon any portion of any sidewalk or approach thereto
while in the process of being improved or upon any portion of any completed sidewalk or
approach thereto, or shall remove or destroy any part or all of any sidewalk or approach
thereto, or shall remove, destroy, mar, or deface any sidewalk at any time or destroy, mar,
remove, or deface any notice provided by this chapter.
136.13 SUBGRADE ENCROACHMENTS. The Council may authorize, but only by
written permit, the construction of areas for purposes of lighting vaults and coal or boiler
rooms, beneath the surface of sidewalks, streets and alleys, such areas to be covered with
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 687 -
sufficient illuminated pavement, and such vaults or coal or boiler rooms to be covered
likewise with illuminated or ordinary pavement, said vaults, areas and coal and boiler rooms
to be constructed and operated according to proposed plans complete in detail, filed with the
Council and approved by the Council. No such area, vault or coal or boiler room shall extend
into a street beyond the centerline thereof, or into any alley beyond the centerline thereof.
Whenever such permit is issued as herein provided, such permit shall be in writing signed by
the Mayor upon order of the Council. Said permit shall contain the name of the person
procuring the same, the date issued, the location and number and size of the areas, vaults or
boiler rooms, authorized thereby, together with an agreement, which shall be signed by the
person procuring the same, to pay the rentals for the maintenance thereof, as hereinafter
provided.
1. Existing Areas. Areas, vaults and boiler rooms or coal rooms already existing
below the surface of sidewalks, streets and alleys already existing may be suffered to
continue, but only upon compliance with this chapter. The City Engineer shall have
the authority to order any vault, boiler room or coal room already existing which is in
a deteriorated or dilapidated condition to be immediately abandoned and filled with
sand and other building material in order to insure that there will be no cave-in or
injury to the sidewalk over said area, vault or underground boiler room. In the event
that the owner or occupant of the vault, boiler room or coal room fails to comply with
the directions of the City Engineer, the City shall immediately proceed to make the
necessary changes in the underground room or to fill the same in order to protect the
traveling public.
2. Nuisance. This section shall not be construed as authorizing the creation or
maintenance of a nuisance.
3. Liability. Any damage occurring in consequence of the creation or
maintenance of any of the encroachments described in this section, or by reason of
any defect therein, shall be borne and paid by the person maintaining such
encroachment and acceptance of a permit shall be deemed an agreement to indemnify
and to pay to the City any sum it becomes legally liable to pay by reason thereof.
4. Inspection. The City Engineer is authorized to inspect at any time the
different private encroachments mentioned in this section, and to place in any area,
vault or boiler room or coal room, so as to least obstruct the use thereof, pipes or
conduits for carrying electric wires and to alter, extend or repair the same, or to enter
the said area, vaults or boiler room for any other purposes connected with legitimate
street and alley uses.
5. Revocation. The Council make revoke any permit for said encroachments at
any time without cause.
136.14 AWNINGS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any awning over any
sidewalk unless all parts of the awning are elevated at least eight (8) feet above the surface of
the sidewalk and the roof or covering is made of duck, canvas or other suitable material
supported by iron frames or brackets securely fastened to the building, without any posts or
other device that will obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the free passage of
pedestrians.
136.15 ENCROACHING STEPS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or maintain any
stairs or steps to any building upon any part of any sidewalk without permission by resolution
of the Council.
CHAPTER 135 STREET USE AND MAINTENANCE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 688 -
136.16 OPENINGS AND ENCLOSURES. It is unlawful for a person to:
1. Stairs and Railings. Construct or build a stairway or passageway to any cellar
or basement by occupying any part of the sidewalk, or to enclose any portion of a
sidewalk with a railing without permission by resolution of the Council.
2. Openings. Keep open any cellar door, grating or cover to any vault on any
sidewalk except while in actual use with adequate guards to protect the public.
3. Protect Openings. Neglect to properly protect or barricade all openings on or
within six (6) feet of any sidewalk.
136.17 FIRES OR FUEL ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to make a fire of
any kind on any sidewalk or to place or allow any fuel to remain upon any sidewalk.
136.18 DEFACING. It is unlawful for a person to scatter or place any paste, paint or
writing on any sidewalk.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 716.1)
136.19 DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful for a person to throw or deposit on any
sidewalk any glass, nails, glass bottle, tacks, wire, cans, trash, garbage, rubbish, litter, offal, or
any other debris, or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12 [2])
136.20 MERCHANDISE DISPLAY. It is unlawful for a person to place upon or above
any sidewalk, any goods or merchandise for sale or for display in such a manner as to interfere
with the free and uninterrupted passage of pedestrians on the sidewalk; in no case shall more
than two (2) feet of the sidewalk next to the building be occupied for such purposes. Any
person wishing to establish any such display permanently must obtain permission from the
Council.
136.21 SALES STANDS. It is unlawful for a person to erect or keep any vending machine
or stand for the sale of fruit, vegetables or other substances or commodities on any sidewalk
without first obtaining a written permit from the Council.
136.22 USE OF TOY VEHICLES PROHIBITED. It is unlawful for a person to coast or
slide upon any sidewalk by means of any sled, coaster wagon or similar vehicle.
136.23 BLOCKING SIDEWALKS. It is unlawful to obstruct or block, temporarily or
permanently, the public sidewalk without first obtaining the permission of the Council, except
in the case of an emergency.
136.24 WASHING VEHICLES. It is unlawful for any person to wash or otherwise clean
any automobile, truck or vehicle of any kind, in such manner that water, grease, dirt or oil
therefrom flows on, over or across any public sidewalk.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 689 -
CHAPTER 137
CONSTRUCTION PERMITS AND
CONTRACTORS’ LICENSES FOR
CURBING, PAVING, DRIVEWAYS AND SIDEWALKS
137.01 Purpose 137.04 License Application
137.02 License Required 137.05 Bond
137.03 Permit Required 137.06 Revocation of License
137.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the construction of curbing,
paving, driveways and sidewalks on public right-of-ways.
137.02 LICENSE REQUIRED. It is unlawful for any person to do any work in connection
with the construction of curbing, paving, or driveways on public right-of-ways without a
contractor’s license and permit as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1132 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
137.03 PERMIT REQUIRED. All persons desiring to do construction work for curbing,
paving, driveways and sidewalks on public right-of-ways shall make an application for a
permit to do such work with the City and pay a fee in an amount established by resolution of
the Council for said permit to the City. Said permit shall be valid for each project. No permit
shall be required for any work performed on privately owned real estate. In the event that
work has commenced without first obtaining a permit, the permit fee shall be doubled.
137.04 LICENSE APPLICATION. Any person desiring a contractor’s license shall file
with the Clerk an application in writing, giving the applicant’s name and that of each member
of said person’s firm, if any, and place of residence and asking for a license to do such work,
stating a willingness to be covered in all respects by the rules and regulations of the Council
respecting such work in force or hereafter to be adopted. With said application, the said
person shall pay to the City a fee in an amount established by resolution of the Council, which
shall entitle said person to the contractor’s license, which shall be valid until December 31 of
the year of issuance.
137.05 BOND. Before receiving such license as required by this chapter, the applicant shall
file in the office of the Clerk an indemnifying bond to be approved by the Council in the sum
of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned that said person will indemnify and keep
harmless the City from all liability for any accident and damages arising from any negligence
in doing or protecting the work. While engaged at such work said person will do the same in
such manner as to cause the least possible obstruction to public travel, and after finishing any
work will restore the public right-of-way to as good a condition as it was found, and will
remove any surplus dirt or any excavations from doing such work, so as to leave the right-ofway
in as good a state and condition as it was found, to the satisfaction of the Council, and
will keep all materials to be used and excavations made while employed at such work properly
enclosed and guarded and every precaution taken to prevent injury to any person or property
during such work. (Ord. 1132 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
137.06 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. Any person doing such work who is guilty of any
violation of any of the rules and regulations adopted by the Council for the manner of
CHAPTER 136 SIDEWALK REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 690 -
constructing any curbing, paving, street crossings and sidewalks as to the manner of doing
such work and materials to be used therefor, shall have his or her license revoked at the option
of the Council and such forfeiture shall be held to apply to the employees of said person,
unless otherwise ordered by the Council.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 691 -
CHAPTER 138
DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
138.01 Definitions 138.04 Sidewalks
138.02 License and Permit Required 138.05 Revocation of Permit
138.03 Driveway Requirements 138.06 Inspection and Approval
138.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Driveway” means that part of any approach for motor vehicles to private
property that lies between the property line and roadway of the public street, except
for such part used for permanent public walks. (Ord. 1132 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
2. “Paving” means hard surfacing consisting of Portland cement concrete.
“Paving” does not include surfacing with hot mix asphalt, oil, gravel, oil and gravel or
chloride.
138.02 LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIRED. No person shall make driveway
improvements unless such person is a contractor licensed by the City and obtains a permit for
construction of the improvements from the City Engineer. The permit shall state the person
will comply with the ordinances of the City and with the specifications as adopted by the City.
The permit also shall state that the work will be done under the direction and approval of the
City Engineer. All such licenses and permits shall be issued in conformance with Chapter 137
of the Code of Ordinances. Each permit shall expire six (6) months after the date of issuance,
whether or not the work has been completed.
138.03 DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS. In addition to Section XXII.F (Design
Standards) of the Charles City Zoning Ordinance, all driveways shall be of paving of a depth
of not less than six inches (6") and shall be at least ten feet (10') in width. The driveway may
be placed directly on compact and well-drained soil. Where soil is not well drained, a six-inch
(6") subbase of compact, clean, coarse crushed rock shall be laid. The driveway shall slope
not more than two inches (2") per foot toward the roadway and the sidewalk section within the
driveway shall not have a cross slope greater than three-sixteenths of an inch (3/16") per foot.
The maximum driveway width at the curb line shall be 40 feet (40') and 30 feet (30') wide at
the property line except for commercial driveways when consent of the City Engineer is
received.
138.04 SIDEWALKS. The grade of any sidewalk shall not be altered by the work done.
The driveway shall be at the same level as any existing sidewalk.
138.05 REVOCATION OF PERMIT. The City Engineer may at any time revoke the
permit for any violation of this chapter and may require that the work be stopped.
138.06 INSPECTION AND APPROVAL. The driveway must be inspected and approved
by the City Project Engineer within thirty (30) days after completion of the work. If the work
is not approved, it must be corrected immediately so it will meet with the City Engineer’s
approval. If the work has been done improperly, the City Engineer shall have the right to
finish or correct the work, and the Council shall assess the cost to the property owner. Such
assessment shall be collected with the general property taxes and in the same manner.
CHAPTER 137 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS AND
CONTRACTORS’ LICENSES FOR
CURBING, PAVING, DRIVEWAYS AND
SIDEWALKS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 692 -
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 693 -
CHAPTER 139
VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
139.01 Power to Vacate 139.04 Findings Required
139.02 Planning and Zoning Commission 139.05 Disposal of Vacated Streets or Alleys
139.03 Notice of Vacation Hearing 139.06 Disposal by Gift Limited
139.01 POWER TO VACATE. When, in the judgment of the Council, it would be in the
best interest of the City to vacate a street, alley, portion thereof or any public grounds, the
Council may do so by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2a])
139.02 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. Any proposal to vacate a street,
alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds shall be referred by the Council to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for its study and recommendation prior to further consideration by
the Council. The Commission shall submit a written report including recommendations to the
Council within thirty (30) days after the date the proposed vacation is referred to the
Commission.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 392.1)
139.03 NOTICE OF VACATION HEARING. The Council shall cause to be published a
notice of public hearing of the time at which the proposal to vacate shall be considered.
139.04 FINDINGS REQUIRED. No street, alley, portion thereof, or any public grounds
shall be vacated unless the Council finds that:
1. Public Use. The street, alley, portion thereof, or any public ground proposed
to be vacated is not needed for the use of the public, and therefore, its maintenance at
public expense is no longer justified.
2. Abutting Property. The proposed vacation will not deny owners of property
abutting on the street or alley reasonable access to their property.
139.05 DISPOSAL OF VACATED STREETS OR ALLEYS. When in the judgment of
the Council it would be in the best interest of the City to dispose of a vacated street or alley,
portion thereof, or public ground, the Council may do so in accordance with the provisions of
Section 364.7, Code of Iowa.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.7)
139.06 DISPOSAL BY GIFT LIMITED. The City may not dispose of real property by
gift except to a governmental body for a public purpose or to a fair.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 174.15[2] & 364.7[3])
CHAPTER 138 DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 694 -
EDITOR’S NOTE
The following ordinances, not codified herein and specifically saved from repeal, have
been adopted vacating certain streets, alleys and/or public grounds and remain in full
force and effect.
ORDINANCE
NO.
DESCRIPTION DATE ADOPTED
444 Portion of Cross St. between Park and Central Ave. April 5, 1965
451 Lot 10, Block 3 – Mayfield Addition July 6, 1965
452 Portion of alley in Block 48, Lane’s Addition lying between Lots 5 and 6 July 6, 1965
455 Portion of G Street between intersection of 4th Ave. and 5th Ave. October 18, 1965
463 Portion of Hildreth St. and a portion of alley in Block G and H, Truman
Addition
April 18, 1966
468 Amending 463 August 15, 1965
478 Portion of alley in Block H between Lots 5 & 7, 5 & 8 February 6, 1967
510 Portion of 10th St. between the east edge of S. Johnson St. and S. Main –
Mayfield
September 3, 1968
513 End of G St. where intersects 8th Ave. February 3, 1969
516 Portion of 18th Ave. between T St. and Cleveland Ave. May 5, 1969
518 Repealed 516 June 16, 1969
525 Portion of B St. from intersection with 5th & 6th Ave. November 3, 1969
547 Parts of Harwood, Kelly, Milwaukee and Wisconsin Sts. November 16, 1970
552 Part of Blunt St. between intersection of Brantingham and Blunt St. and
Blunt St. and N. Grand
January 18, 1971
564 Riverside Dr. between intersection of Riverside and Milwaukee St. July 26, 1971
566 Alley in Block 66, Kelly & Co. Addition to St. Charles August 16, 1971
574 Alley in Block 10 of Original St. Charles October 18, 1971
575 Alley in Block 22 of Original St. Charles October 18, 1971
578 S. Johnson St. between intersection of S. Johnson St. and Court St. and
intersection of S. Johnson St. & Cedar River
December 6, 1971
584 Burr Oak Drive between intersection of Burr Oak Dr. and Walnut and
intersection of Burr Oak Dr. & Kellogg
March 6, 1972
592 Portion of alley in Block 147 Lanes Addition June 19, 1972
600 Blunt St. between intersection of Blunt St. & Main and intersection of
Blunt St. and Brantingham
October 16, 1972
603 Alley in Block 65 Kelly Addition December 18, 1972
608 Portion of alley in Blk. 148 Lanes Addition March 19, 1973
609 Alley in Black C Kelly & Co. Addition March 19, 1973
615 Portion of Court St. between intersection of Clinton St. and Court St.
and Cedar and Court St.
April 16, 1973
622 Portion of Court St. in Block 27 Kelly & Co. Addition October 1, 1973
623 Alley in Block 29, Kelly & Co. Addition October 15, 1973
630 Part of Court St. December 3, 1973
632 Part of Court St. February 4, 1974
633 Part of Court St. February 4, 1974
634 Part of 18th Ave. March 18, 1974
636 Parts of streets and alleys in Brackett-Grand Addition April 15, 1974
638 Vacating part of E Street July 15, 1974
639 Parts of streets and alleys in the Redevelopment Area August 19, 1974
642 Alley in Block 47, Lanes Addition September 16, 1974
644 Part of Spriggs October 21, 1974
ORDINANCE
NO.
DESCRIPTION DATE ADOPTED
656 An easement Lots 42, 43, 50 and 51, Sunrise Hill June 30, 1975
CHAPTER 138 DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 695 -
659 Part of Clinton St. between Block 26 & Block 27, Kelly Addition March 15, 1976
662 Part of Court which abuts Block 27, Kelly Addition May 3, 1976
665 Alley located in Block 2, Palmers Addition August 16, 1976
672 Alley in Block Q, Town of Freeman May 16, 1977
677 All that part of the 33 feet of Fourth Ave. extended lying in the Jesse C.
Lynch Addition
October 3, 1977
694 Portion of Lions Dr. lying In Lot 7 of the Irregular Survey of the
Southwest Quarter of Section 1, Township 95 North, Range 16 West
of the 5th P.M.
October 16, 1978
713 21st Avenue – From west r.o.w. line of Oak Park Ave. to the west r.o.w.
line of Cherry Ave.; From the east r.o.w. line of Cherry Ave. to the
west r.o.w. line of Kellogg Ave.; and From east r.o.w. line of
Kellogg Ave. to the west property line extended of Lot 6, Block 7,
Oak Park Addition
20th Avenue – From the east r.o.w. line of Cherry Ave. to the west r.o.w.
line of Kellogg Ave.; From the east r.o.w. line of Kellogg Ave. to the
west property line extended of Lot 15, Block 7, Oak Park Addition
l9th Avenue – From the east r.o.w. line of Oak Park Ave. to the west
r.o.w. line of Cherry Ave.
Maywood Avenue – From the east r.o.w. line of Oak Park Ave. to the
west r.o.w. line of Kellogg Ave.; and From the east r.o.w. line of
Kellogg Ave. to the west r.o.w. line of Kenwood Ave.
Elm Avenue – From the east r.o.w. line of Walnut Ave. to the west
r.o.w. line of Kellogg Ave.; From the east r.o.w. line of Kellogg Ave.
to the west r.o.w. line of Kenwood Avenue
Oak Park Avenue – From the south r.o.w. line of 21st Ave. to junction
with Maywood Avenue
Cherry Avenue – From the north r.o.w. line of Maywood Ave. to the
south r.o.w. line of 19th Avenue
Woodland Drive – From the north r.o.w. line of 19th Ave. to the south
r.o.w. line of 21st Avenue
Ashland Avenue – From the north property line of Outlot 2 to the south
r.o.w. line of 19th Ave.; From the north r.o.w. line of 19th Avenue to
the south r.o.w. line of 21st Avenue
Walnut Avenue – From the south r.o.w. line of Elm Ave. to the south
r.o.w. line of 19th Avenue; From the north r.o.w. line of 19th Ave. to
the south r.o.w. line of 21st Avenue
Hawthorne Avenue – From the south property line of Factory Lots 1 & 2
to the south r.o.w. line of 19th Ave.; From the north r.o.w. line of 19th
Ave. to the south r.o.w. line of 21st Ave.
Kenwood Avenue – From the south r.o.w. line of Elm Ave. to the south
r.o.w. line of 19th Avenue
Riverside Avenue – From a point 590’ Nwly of the north r.o.w. line of
16th Ave. to the south r.o.w. line of 19th Ave.; and
All alleys in Blocks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31, 36, 37, 38 and 39 and the west ½ of the alleys in Block 7 and
18, all in Oak Park Addition
September 17, 1979
768 Portion of Burr Oak Drive May 21, 1984
769 That part of “J” St. lying in Jesse C. Lynch subdivision May 21, 1984
775 Alley and Smith Ave. abutting Lots 7 through 12, and the alley abutting
Lots 19 through 21, and Lots 7 through 11, Block 16, College
Addition
February 19, 1985
792 Portion of Kelly Street September 15, 1986
795 Portion of Jackson Street October 23, 1986
796 Portion of Clark Street November 20, 1986
ORDINANCE
NO.
DESCRIPTION DATE ADOPTED
806 August 28, 1987
809 January 4, 1988
831 Portion of 13th Street November 6, 1989
CHAPTER 138 DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 696 -
832 Alley in College Addition November 20, 1989
842 Portion of 4th St. and portion of S. Grand Ave. June 18, 1990
882 Portion of Floyd Street November 1, 1993
884 Portion of 21st Avenue January 3, 1994
890 Portion of South John Street May 16, 1994
892 All of Kneisel Circle, all of Greenless Circle and Court Street
Southeasterly of Cedar Street
August 15, 1994
895
A portion of Riverside Avenue from a point 50 feet south of the
centerline of the Soo Line Railroad tracks to a point 33 feet north of
said tracks, distance measured along the centerline of Riverside
Avenue
A portion of Howard Street from a point 35 feet southwesterly of the
centerline of the Soo Line Railroad tracks to a point 45 feet
northeasterly of said tracks, distance measured along the centerline of
Howard Street
A portion of Illinois Street from a point 35 feet southwesterly of the
centerline of the Soo Line Railroad tracks to a point 45 feet
northeasterly of said tracks, distance measured along the centerline of
Illinois Street
A portion of Richings Street from a point 50 feet southeasterly of the
centerline of the Soo Line Railroad tracks to a point 65 feet
northwesterly of said tracks, distance measured along the centerline
of Richings Street
A portion of Joslin Street from a point 35 feet southwesterly from the
centerline of the Soo Line Railroad tracks to a point 45 feet
northeasterly of said tracks, distance measured along the centerline of
Joslin Street
November 25, 1994
899 A portion of Riverside Avenue from the north right-of-way line of the
Soo Line Railroad to the south right-of-way line of Hart Street all
located in the City of Charles City, Floyd County, Iowa
February 20, 1995
907 Westerly 100 feet of Waller Street March 9, 1995
914 The alley in Block 33, Kelly & Co. Addition October 20, 1995
925 A portion of Grove Street described as the northeasterly 16 feet of the
southeasterly feet of Grove Street adjacent to Lot Five (5), Block 88,
Kelly & Co. Add.
August 15, 1996
927 A portion of Riverside Drive adjacent to Lots Three (3) and Four (4),
Block 20
October 23, 1996
932 All that portion of Jackson Street from the north right-of-way line of
Lane Street to the south line of Floyd Street
November 12, 1997
948 The easterly 9 ft. of Allison St. adjacent to Lots 6, 7 & 8 of Block Q,
Freeman Addition to Charles City, Floyd County, Iowa
July 22, 1998
963 The alley contained within Block 143 of Lane’s Addition to St. Charles,
now incorporated as part of Charles City, Floyd County, Iowa
October 15, 1999
964 That portion of Smith Avenue adjacent to Lot 6, Block 10, College
Addition to Charles City, Floyd County, Iowa
October 15, 1999
967 That portion of Kelly Street from the Southeasterly right-of-way line on
St. Mary’s Street to the Westerly right-of-way line of Grand Avenue
all located in the City of Charles City, Floyd County, Iowa
April 3, 2000
969 That portion of Floyd Street from the easterly right-of-way line of North
Iowa Street to the westerly right-of-way line of North Johnson Street,
all streets being adjacent to Block 147 of Lane’s Addition to St.
Charles, now incorporated in the City of Charles City, Floyd County,
Iowa.
April 3, 2000
ORDINANCE
NO.
DESCRIPTION DATE ADOPTED
980 That portion of St. Mary Street adjacent to Block 156 of Lane’s Addition
to St. Charles, now incorporated in the City of Charles City, Floyd
County, Iowa
July 27,. 2001
CHAPTER 138 DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 697 -
984 That portion of 8th Street lying between Lot 3, Block 2, Bonner’s Second
Addition to Charles City, Iowa, and Lot 1, Block 3, Bonner’s Second
Addition to Charles City, Iowa
April 19, 2002
985 That portion of Corporate Drive adjacent to Lots 1, 2 & 3 Block 1 and
Lots 1 & 2 Block 2 of the Southwest Development Park, Second
Subdivision to the City of Charles City, Floyd County, Iowa
April 19, 2002
989 That portion of Smith Avenue adjacent to Lot 12, Block 10, College
Addition to Charles City, Floyd County, Iowa
July 1, 2002
995 The Southeasterly 55.00 feet of Lot 4, Block 42 of Kelly and Company’s
Addition to St. Charles, now incorporated as part of Charles City,
Iowa
That part of Block 157 of Lane’s Addition to S. Charles and that part of
Brantingham Street, Charles City, Iowa described as follows:
Commencing at the northeast corner of Section 12, Township 95 North,
Range 16 West of the 5th P.M., Charles City, Floyd County, Iowa;
Thence North 89 degrees 49 minutes 05 seconds West (assumed
bearing) 33.00 feet to the east line of said Block 157; Thence North
00 degrees 10 minutes 55 seconds East along said east line 33.00 feet
to the point of beginning; Thence continuing North 00 degrees 10
minutes 55 seconds East along said east line and extension thereof
53.42 feet to the southwesterly line of Ferguson Street; Thence North
56 degrees 30 minutes 00 seconds West along said southwesterly line
52.82 feet to the southeasterly line of Block 42 of Kelly and
Company’s Addition to St., Charles, Charles City, Iowa; Thence
South 33 degrees 30 minutes 00 seconds West along said
southeasterly line 98.65 feet; Thence South 89 degrees 49 minutes 05
seconds East 98.33 feet to the point of beginning, containing 5232
square feet more of less, and is subject to recorded and unrecorded
easements, restrictions and servitudes, if any.
November 4, 2002
996 That portion of Lane Street described as Parcel B adjacent to Block 143,
Lane’s Addition to the City of Charles City, Floyd County, Iowa, and
more particularly described as: Commencing at the Northwest
Corner of Block 143 of said Lane’s Addition; thence North 33º 30’
00” East 6.00 feet; thence South 56º 34’ 02” East 141.02 feet; thence
South 33º 30’ 00” West 6.00 feet to the Northwest Corner of Lot 1
and the Northerly Line of said Block 143; thence North 56º 34’ 02”
West 141.02 feet along said Northerly Line to the Point of
Beginning, containing 846 square feet (0.019 acre), subject to
easements of record (see plat attached to this original survey
description.) Note: The Easterly Line of Block 143 is recorded as
bearing North 33º 30’ 00” East.
November 7, 2002
1001 That portion of Brantingham Street located between U.S. Highway 18
and Blunt Street as shown in the Plat of Survey dated September 4,
2002, and filed as Record 2002-3192 on October 2, 2002, in the
office of the Floyd County Recorder
September 18, 2003
1002 All of West Corporate Drive and all east/west utility easements in Lots
1, 2, 5 and 6 in Southwest Development Park, First Subdivision,
Charles City, Iowa
October 24, 2003
1011 The alley in Block 145 Lane’s Addition between Lots 2 and 9 south of
the railroad right-of-way and between Lots 3 and 8, Charles City,
Iowa
September 7, 2004
1016 The alley in Block 11, Oak Park Addition between Lots 5 and 6 and
between the south half of Lot 4 and the south half of Lot 7, Charles
City, Iowa
January 17, 2005
1023 (Repealed by Ordinance 1032 – Jan. 08 Supp.) February 6, 2006
ORDINANCE
NO.
DESCRIPTION DATE ADOPTED
1031 The Utility Easement 20 feet in width running north and south on either
side of the boundary between Lots 14 and 15, Block 1, Siems Sunset
Acres Addition to Charles City, Iowa
November 6, 2006
CHAPTER 138 DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 698 -
1032 That portion of the alley described as Parcel J in Block A of the Original
Plat of the Town of Freeman, located in Section 12, Township 95
North, Range 16 West of the 5th P.M., Charles City, Floyd County,
Iowa and as shown in the Plat of Survey recorded as Document No.
2006-0757 in the office of the Floyd County Recorder
December 4, 2006
1039 That portion of the alley described as Parcel J in Block A of the Original
Plat of the Town of Freeman, located in Section 12, Township 95
North, Range 16 West of the 5th P.M., Charles City, Floyd County,
Iowa, and more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the Northeast Corner of Lot 12 in said Block A;
Thence South 89°46’54” East (Record Bearing), 20.00 feet to the
Northwest Corner of Lot 1 in said Block A;
Thence South 00°20’02” East, 50.00 feet along the West Line of said
Lot 1 to the Southwest Corner of said Lot 1;
Thence South 49°16’32” West, 26.26 feet to the East Line of Lot 11 in
said Block A;
Thence North 00°20’02” West, 67.20 feet along said East Line and the
Northerly Extension thereof the Point of Beginning.
Containing 1,172 square feet (0.027 acres), subject to easements of
record.
August 20, 2007
1048 The alley lying between 9th Avenue and 8th Avenue and between I Street
and Vacated G Street, also described as:
Commencing at the northeast corner of Lot 10, Block 4, Bartz Addition,
the point of beginning, thence west along the north property lines of
Bartz and Greggs Additions to the northeast corner of Lot 17, Block
53, Greggs Addition, then north to the southwest corner of Lot 1,
McMain’s Addition, then along the south property lines of McMains
and 1st Hart-Parr Addition to the southeast corner of Lot 6, Block 42,
First Hart-Parr Addition, thence south to the point of beginning.
August 17, 2009
CHAPTER 138 DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 699 -
ORDINANCE
NO.
DESCRIPTION DATE ADOPTED
1055 That portion of the public right-of-way of Floyd Street in Charles City,
Iowa, is not needed for use of the public except only for the location
of municipal utilities, and accordingly its maintenance as a street at
public expense is no longer justified; and that the vacation of this
right-of-way will not deny the owners of property abutting on the
street access to their properties:
All that portion of Floyd Street lying northwesterly of the
northwest right of way boundary of Main Street and east of
the westerly right of way line extended of vacated Jackson
Street and the south boundary line of the Iowa, Chicago
and Eastern Railroad right of way; EXCEPT the
southwesterly 15 feet of Floyd Street abutting Lot 10 in
Block 149 of Lane’s Addition to St. Charles, now
incorporated as the City of Charles City, Floyd County,
Iowa; and, EXCEPT that portion of Floyd Street described
as beginning at a point which is the intersection of the
northeast line of Floyd Street and the north line extended
west of lot No. 11 in Block 139 of Lane’s addition to St.
Charles, Now incorporated as Charles City, Iowa, running
thence southeast along the southwest boundary line of Lot
No. 9 in Block No. 151 of said Lane’s addition to the
southeast corner of the said lot No. 9 thence southeast
perpendicular to the line of Floyd Street and parallel to the
line of Main Street 6 feet, thence northwest parallel to the
southwest boundary line of said lot No. 9 to an intersection
with the north line, extended west, of the said lot No. 11, to
the place of beginning.
May 3, 2010
1067 That portion of Kelly Street described as:
The Southwesterly 4 feet of Kelly St. adjoining Lot 1 of the Irregular
Survey of Block 16 of the Original Plat of St. Charles, now a part of
the Incorporated City of Charles City, Iowa, from the Easterly line of
the alley in said Block 16 to a point 104 feet Southeasterly thereof.
February 4, 2013
CHAPTER 138 DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 700 -
ORDINANCE
NO.
DESCRIPTION DATE ADOPTED
1070 The Public Alley adjoining Block 13 of Gilbert’s Addition to Charles
City, Iowa, on the West, and bounded on the North by the South line of
the Northeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of Section 12, Township
95 North, Range 16 West of the 5th P.M. And bounded on the South by
the South line of Lot 4, of Block 13, Gilbert’s Addition to Charles City,
Iowa, extended West to the Easterly line of the Southwest Quarter of the
Northwest Quarter Section 12, Township 95 North, Range 16 West of
the 5th P.M.
Also described as:
Beginning at the Northeast Corner of the SW ¼ of the NW ¼ of Section
12, Township 95 North, Range 16 West of the 5th P.M., Floyd County,
Iowa; thence East along the South line of the NE ¼ of the NW ¼ of said
Section 12 to the Northwest corner of Lot 1, Block 13, Gilbert’s
Addition to Charles City, Iowa; thence South along the West boundary
lines of Lot 1 through Lot 4 of said Block 13; thence South 89° 35’ 30”
West 17.68 feet to the East line of the SW ¼ of the NW ¼ of said
Section 12, and North along said line to the point of beginning.
AND
That part of the public alley lying West of blocks 13 and 14 in Gilbert’s
Addition to Charles City, Iowa, described as follows:
Beginning at the Southwest corner of Lot 4 in Block 13 of Gilbert’s
Addition; Thence South 89°35’30” West 17.68 feet to the East line of
the Southwest ¼ of the Northwest ¼ of Section 12, Township 95 North,
Range 16 West of the 5th P.M., Floyd County, Iowa; Thence South
0°57’45” West 2.00 feet; Thence North 89°35’30” East 17.69 feet to the
West line of Block 13 of Gilbert’s Addition extended to the South;
Thence North 0°43’05” East 2.00 feet to the point of beginning. Said
parcel contains 35.37 square feet. NOTE: The East Line of the
Southwest ¼ of the Northwest ¼ of Section 12 was assumed to bear
South 0°57’45” West for this description.
March 18, 2013
1119 That portion of Grove Street lying Northwesterly of the northwestern
boundary line of S. Illinois Street extended, Block 97, Lane’s Addition
to Charles City, Iowa.
August 6, 2018
1125 That portion of South Jackson Street right-of-way lying Northeasterly of
the northeastern right-of-way of Gilbert Street and Southwesterly of the
southwestern right-of-way of Court Street, and lying between Block 29
and Block 28 of Kelly and Company’s Addition to St. Charles, now
incorporated as a part of Charles City, Floyd County, Iowa.
February 4, 2019
CHAPTER 138 DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 701 -
ORDINANCE
NO.
DESCRIPTION DATE ADOPTED
1127 All of the Alley in Block Four (4) of Charles City Addition to Charles
City, Iowa
AND
All that portion of Vacated Sixth Avenue and all that portion of the
Alley between Lots Four (4) and Five (5) in Block Three (3), Charles
City Addition to Charles City, Iowa, lying within the following
described property:
Beginning at the Southwest Corner of Lot 4, Block 4, Charles City
Addition to Charles City, Floyd County, Iowa;
Thence North 00°35’09” West, 415.72 feet along the East right-of-way
line of North Grand Avenue to the Southerly right-of-way line of
relocated 6th Avenue, as recorded July 3, 1940, T.L.D. Book 40, Page
612, on file in the Floyd County Recorder’s office, Charles City,
Iowa;
Thence South 79°36’46” East, 179.60 feet;
Thence South 44°14’45” East, 126.00 feet;
Thence South 00°35’09” East, 13.90 feet to the Northeast Corner of Lot
8, Block 4, of said Charles City Addition;
Thence North 89°24’51” East, 391.00 feet all along said Southerly rightof-
way line to the West right-of-way line of C Street;
Thence South 00°35’09” East, 272.40 feet along said West right-of-way
line to the North right-of-way line of 5th Avenue;
Thence South 89°03’24” West, 654.32 feet along said North right-ofway
line to the point of beginning.
March 4, 2019
CHAPTER 138 DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 702 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 703 -
CHAPTER 140
STREET GRADES
140.01 Established Grades 140.03 Record of Grades
140.02 Establishment of New Grades 140.04 Ordinances Establishing Grades
140.01 ESTABLISHED GRADES. The grades of all streets and sidewalks which have
been heretofore open for public use and which have been improved and graded and for which
grades have heretofore been established by ordinance are hereby confirmed, ratified and
established as official grades.
140.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW GRADES. The City Engineer is hereby directed to
recommend grades on new streets and to provide for the grading of any streets and sidewalks,
subject to the approval of the Council, by appropriate action as required by law.
140.03 RECORD OF GRADES. There shall be prepared a book in which shall be
recorded the grades of all the streets and sidewalks within the City and said book or books
shall be kept current and up to date. The book shall be kept in the office of the Clerk, where
the same will be available to interested parties, and the City shall furnish information
concerning grades to any person making a request therefor.
140.04 ORDINANCES ESTABLISHING GRADES. All ordinances heretofore adopted
by the Council establishing sidewalk and street grades are hereby ratified, confirmed, saved
from repeal and by this reference declared to be a part of this Code of Ordinances.
CHAPTER 139 VACATION AND DISPOSAL OF STREETS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 704 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 705 -
CHAPTER 141
NAMING OF STREETS
141.01 Naming New Streets 141.04 Official Street Name Map
141.02 Changing Name of Street 141.05 Revision of Street Name Map
141.03 Recording Street Names
141.01 NAMING NEW STREETS. New streets shall be assigned names in accordance
with the following:
1. Extension of Existing Street. Streets added to the City that are natural
extensions of existing streets shall be assigned the name of the existing street.
2. Resolution. All street names, except streets named as a part of a subdivision
or platting procedure, shall be named by resolution.
3. Planning and Zoning Commission. Proposed street names shall be referred to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and recommendation.
141.02 CHANGING NAME OF STREET. The Council may, by resolution, change the
name of a street.
141.03 RECORDING STREET NAMES. Following official action naming or changing
the name of a street, the Clerk shall file a copy thereof with the County Recorder, County
Auditor and County Assessor.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 354.26)
141.04 OFFICIAL STREET NAME MAP. Streets within the City are named as shown
on the Official Street Name Map which is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this chapter. The Official Street Name Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor, and bearing the seal of the City under the following words: “This is to certify that this
is the Official Street Name Map referred to in Section 141.04 of the Code of Ordinances of
Charles City, Iowa.”
141.05 REVISION OF STREET NAME MAP. If in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, changes are made in street names, such changes shall be entered on the Official
Street Name Map promptly after the change has been approved by the Council with an entry
on the Official Street Name Map as follows: “On (date), by official action of the City
Council, the following changes were made in the Official Street Name Map: (brief
description),” which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Clerk.
CHAPTER 140 STREET GRADES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 706 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 707 -
CHAPTER 142
CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
142.01 Exercise of Police Power 142.04 Unlawful Use of Controlled Access Facility
142.02 Definition 142.05 Access Control Ordinances
142.03 Right of Access Limited 142.06 Parking Restricted
142.01 EXERCISE OF POLICE POWER. This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of
the police power of the City under Chapter 306A, Code of Iowa, for the preservation of the
public peace, health, safety and for the promotion of the general welfare.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.1)
142.02 DEFINITION. The term “controlled access facility” means a highway or street
especially designed for through traffic, and over, from or to which owners or occupants of
abutting land or other persons have no right or easement or only a controlled right or easement
of access, light, air or view by reason of the fact that their property abuts upon such controlled
access facility or for any other reason.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.2)
142.03 RIGHT OF ACCESS LIMITED. No person has any right of ingress or egress to
or from abutting lands onto or across any controlled access facility, except at such designated
points at which access is permitted.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.4)
142.04 UNLAWFUL USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITY. It is unlawful for
any person to:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 306A.3 and 321.366)
1. Cross Dividing Line. Drive a vehicle over, upon or across any curb, central
dividing section, or other separation or dividing line on such controlled access
facilities.
2. Turns. Make a left turn or a semicircular or U-turn except through an opening
provided for that purpose in the dividing curb section, separation or line.
3. Use of Lanes. Drive any vehicle except in the proper lane provided for that
purpose and in the proper direction and to the right of the central dividing curb,
separation, section or line.
4. Enter Facility. Drive any vehicle into the controlled access facility from a
local service road except through an opening provided for that purpose in the dividing
curb or dividing section or dividing line which separates such service road from the
controlled access facility property.
142.05 ACCESS CONTROL ORDINANCES. There shall be maintained in the office of
the Clerk a file of the following controlled access ordinances adopted by the Council, and the
said ordinances are hereby ratified and confirmed and saved from repeal and by this reference
incorporated into this Code of Ordinances as though set forth verbatim herein:
1. U.S. No. 18, Project No. F-41 (12), Ordinances No. 302, 312 and 351.
CHAPTER 141 NAMING OF STREETS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 708 -
2. U.S. No. 218, Project No. FN-279, Ordinances No. 323 and 331.
3. U.S. No. 18, Project No. UN-14-8(2)-41-34, Ordinance No. 491.
4. Iowa No. 14, Project No. UN-14-8(2)-41-34, Ordinance No. 492.
5. U.S. No. 18 and U.S. No. 218, Project No. UN-218-9(10)-41-34, Ordinance
No. 514.
142.06 PARKING RESTRICTED. The parking of vehicles on or along controlled access
facilities is restricted as follows:
1. Minor Street Approaches. Parking shall be prohibited on all minor street
approaches for a distance of 35 feet in advance of the stop sign.
2. Minor Street Exits. Parking shall be prohibited on the exit side of a minor
street for a distance of 35 feet beyond the crosswalk of any unsignalized controlled
access facility intersection.
3. Intersection. Parking shall be prohibited at signalized intersections of minor
streets with a controlled access facility for a distance of 250 feet on the exit side back
of the traffic signal.
[The next page is 713]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 713 -
CHAPTER 143
CONTROL AND USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY
143.01 Purpose and Rule of Interpretation 143.09 City Construction and Paving
143.02 Franchise, License or Easement Required 143.10 Design Notice to City
143.03 Fee Required 143.11 Assignment
143.04 Limit on Term 143.12 Forfeiture
143.05 Placement of Facilities 143.13 Application
143.06 Indemnification 143.14 Home Rule
143.07 Regulation by the City 143.15 New Technologies
143.08 Construction and Excavation by Holders
of Franchises, Licenses or Easements
143.01 PURPOSE AND RULE OF INTERPRETATION. The purpose of this chapter is
to establish uniform rules and controls to ensure public safety and provide efficient delivery of
services by the City and others wishing to utilize streets and other public property for the
delivery of utility or other services, in order to protect public and private investment, ensure
orderly use of public property and ensure the health, safety and welfare of the population, to
provide for the regulation and administration of the public streets and other public property
and secure the rights of the City to a return on its investment in public property. This chapter
is to be interpreted in light of these findings for the benefit of the public and users of the
streets and other public property.
143.02 FRANCHISE, LICENSE OR EASEMENT REQUIRED. No person or other
entity shall use the public right-of-way or other public property without first obtaining a
franchise, license or easement from the City. The City shall not enter into or issue any
franchise, license or easement which grants exclusive rights. If any person uses the public
right-of-way or other public property without first obtaining a franchise, license or easement
from the City, then the City may demand that such user comply with the terms and conditions
of this chapter, and the City reserves to itself all rights and remedies that it may have at law, in
equity, or otherwise to enforce compliance with this chapter, including but not limited to the
right to seek ejection of the violator from public property and public right-of-way.
143.03 FEE REQUIRED. No franchise, license or easement for the use of public right-ofway
or other public property shall be granted without requiring the grantee thereof to pay a
reasonable and competitively neutral fee for the use of public right-of-way or other public
property.
143.04 LIMIT ON TERM. No license or easement for the use of the public right of way or
other public property shall be granted for a term of more than 25 years unless the Council
finds:
1. That the proposed use under the terms of a license or easement confers a
substantial benefit upon the public; and
2. The use will not cause interference with all other public use of the surface and
subsurface of the right of way or public property; and
CHAPTER 142 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 714 -
3. That limitation of term to 25 years for the proposed use would preclude the
proposed use and thereby deny a substantial benefit to the public.
Then, upon making the foregoing findings, the City Council may extend the term of a license
or easement within the public right of way or other public property beyond 25 years to a date
or to an event determined by giving consideration to the period of time over which the
proposed use will confer benefit to the public.
(Ord. 1085 – Jan. 16 Supp.)
143.05 PLACEMENT OF FACILITIES. The facilities, fixtures and equipment of the
distribution, transmission or sale of any utility services, or services provided under license or
easement, shall be placed and maintained so as not to unnecessarily or unreasonably interfere
with the travel on the streets, highways, avenues, alleys, bridges and public places in the City,
nor shall such facilities, fixtures and equipment unnecessarily or unreasonably interfere with
the proper use of the same, including, but not limited to, ordinary drainage, or the functioning
of the sewers, underground pipe or other property of the City. In the event that facilities,
fixtures and equipment of any person located within a public right-of-way must be relocated
because of paving, road construction or road reconstruction, sewer construction or sewer
reconstruction or the construction or reconstruction of public drainage systems or similar
public works or the construction or reconstruction of the facilities of any City-owned utility,
such relocation, at the written request of the City, shall be completed by the owner of such
facilities at the owner’s cost. The City shall upon request of any person holding a franchise,
license or easement, review any plans for the construction of facilities, fixtures and equipment
within the public right-of-way and advise the person of any conflict such construction may
have with planned or anticipated public improvements, but failure of the City to so advise
such person will not relieve the owner of such facilities of its obligations under this chapter.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Engineer may require placement of equipment or
facilities belonging to any holder of a franchise, license or easement be limited to locations
designated by the City Engineer if such limitation is deemed by the City Engineer to be
necessary to protect the integrity of use for present and future users of the public right-of-way
or other public property.
143.06 INDEMNIFICATION. The holder of any franchise, license or easement shall
indemnify and hold the City harmless at all times during the term of the franchise, license or
easement from and against all claims for injury or damage to any person or property caused by
the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of its facilities, fixtures or equipment, or
the negligence of its contractors or its employees. In case of any suit or action at law being
commenced against the City, upon any claim for damage arising out of any loss, injury or
damage claimed to have been caused by any installation, improvement, obstruction or
excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk or public place in the City, and which installation,
improvement, obstruction or excavation was made or left in, under or upon such street,
sidewalk, alley or public place by the holder of a franchise, license or easement, its agents,
contractors or employees, upon being notified in writing by the City of such action or
proceeding, the holder of said franchise, license or easement shall appear and make proper
defense thereto at the expense of the holder of the franchise, license or easement; and if any
judgment or decree shall in any such case be rendered against the City therein, the holder of
said franchise, license or easement shall assume, pay and satisfy such judgment or decree,
with the costs thereof.
CHAPTER 142 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 715 -
143.07 REGULATION BY THE CITY. The City reserves to itself the right to make
reasonable general regulations for the use of streets and other public property which unless
otherwise specifically provided shall apply to any holder of a franchise, license or easement.
143.08 CONSTRUCTION AND EXCAVATION BY HOLDERS OF FRANCHISES,
LICENSES OR EASEMENTS. A written permit will be obtained from the City Engineer
whenever it becomes necessary for the holder of any franchise, license or easement to
excavate in streets or public grounds of the City. Such permits shall state a particular part or
point of the street where the excavation is to be made and the length of time in which such
permit shall authorize the work to be done. An exception to a requirement for a permit shall
be made in cases of emergency involving public safety, in which case a permit will be
obtained at the earliest opportunity after the work has started. In making excavations in the
streets, the holder of any franchise, license or easement shall proceed with such work as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. The holder of any franchise, license or
easement shall properly protect, according to safety standards generally accepted at the time of
placement as may be determined from time to time by the City Engineer, all excavations and
obstructions by proper placement of shoring, surface plates, barricades, warning lights and
such other or additional devices as circumstances may warrant. If in the opinion of the City
Engineer such excavation or obstruction is not properly and safely protected, the City
Engineer shall notify such holder of a franchise, license or easement, who shall immediately
comply with such reasonable instructions. Immediately after use, any trenches for excavations
which the holder of a franchise, license or easement has opened shall be filled. However, no
trench or excavation in the streets shall be filled or covered without giving the City the right to
inspect the same. All backfilling in streets will be according to City specifications. Temporary
street surfacing will be placed in such excavations as soon as the same has been backfilled.
Pavements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or other portions of streets and public places opened,
disturbed or damaged shall be promptly restored and replaced with like materials at the
expense of the holder of a franchise, license or easement and left in as good condition as
before the opening, disturbance or damage occurred. In the event like replacement materials
are not available, the holder of the franchise, license or easement shall notify the City
Engineer, who must approve the use of any alternate materials. In the event that the holder of
a franchise, license or easement fails to comply with the provision of this section, after having
been given reasonable notice, the City may do such work as may be needed to properly repair
such pavements, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or other portions of streets and public places and
the cost thereof shall be repaired to the City by the holder of the franchise, license or
easement. In cases where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of street paving or
sidewalks, but which causes disturbance to an area extending beyond the area cut, the holder
of a franchise, license or easement shall then replace the entire disturbed but in no event shall
this exceed the panel or panels disturbed.
143.09 CITY CONSTRUCTION AND PAVING. Whenever the City shall pave or repave
any street or shall change the grade line of any street or public place or shall construct or
reconstruct any conduit, water main service or water connection, sewer or other City-owned
public works or City-owned utility, it shall be the duty of the holder of any franchise, license
or easement, when so ordered by the City, to relocate its service lines and other property in the
streets or other public places at its own expense so as to conform to the established grade or
line of such street or public place and so as not to interfere with the public improvements so
constructed or reconstructed. In the case of other public improvements, including but not
limited to urban renewal projects, the City may require the holder of a franchise, license or
easement to relocate its poles, service lines and appurtenances in the streets at the owner’s
expense. The City may at its discretion assign personnel for inspection of excavation and
CHAPTER 142 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 716 -
related work being performed by the holder of a franchise, license or easement. Should the
holder of the franchise, license or easement fail or refuse to do and perform the things
provided in this section, the City may, after reasonable notice, perform the work and charge
the expense thereof to the holder of the franchise, license or easement and the holder of the
franchise, license or easement shall promptly pay said charges.
143.10 DESIGN NOTICE TO CITY. The holder of a franchise, license or easement shall
promptly, upon request, furnish the City Engineer a detailed map or maps of its distribution
system both within the City limits and the area immediately surrounding the City. The holder
of a franchise, license or easement shall thereafter update the map or maps upon request, but
not more often than every year, showing all subsequent additions or deletions to the
distribution system. Prior to any excavation by the City or its agents, a representative must
contact the holder of any franchise, license or easement regarding current information on the
location of underground lines or facilities in the area concerned. The obligation to contact the
holder of a franchise, license or easement under this section shall be satisfied if contact is
made with the corporation organized pursuant to Code of Iowa Chapter 480 or an entity with a
similar function utilized by both the City and the Company, currently the Iowa One Call
System.
143.11 ASSIGNMENT. No sale, assignment or lease of any franchise, license or easement
for the use of the public right-of-way or other public property shall be effective until it is
approved by the Council and until the holder thereof has filed in the office of the Clerk written
notice of the proposed sale, transfer, disposition or assignment, such notice to clearly
summarize the proposed procedure and the terms and conditions thereof. Such approval by
the City shall not be unreasonably withheld. The proposed vendee, assignee or lessee shall
similarly file an instrument, duly executed, reciting such proposal, accepting the terms of the
franchise, license or easement and agreeing to perform all of the conditions thereof.
143.12 FORFEITURE. The violation of any material portion of a franchise, license or
easement by the holder thereof or its successors or assigns or its failure promptly to perform
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be cause for forfeiture of said franchise, license or
easement and the termination of all rights thereunder. Such forfeiture shall be accomplished
by ordinance of the City after written notice to the holder thereof and a continuation of the
violation, failure or default specified on the notice for at least thirty (30) days from the date
the notice was served.
143.13 APPLICATION. This chapter shall apply to all franchises, licenses and easements
granted by the City, including all existing franchises, licenses and easements.
143.14 HOME RULE. This chapter is intended to be and shall be construed as consistent
with the reservation of local authority contained in the 25th Amendment to the Iowa
Constitution granting cities Home Rule powers. To such end, any limitation on the power of
the City contained herein is to be strictly construed and the City reserves to itself the right to
exercise all power and authority to regulate and control its local affairs and all ordinances and
regulations of the City shall be enforceable against the holder of any franchise, license or
easement.
143.15 NEW TECHNOLOGIES. Should, within the term of any franchise, license or
easement, developments within the field for which the grant was made offer to the holder
thereof the opportunity to effectively, efficiently and economically serve its customers through
use of a substance or material other than those for which the grant was originally made, then
CHAPTER 142 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 717 -
the holder of the franchise, license or easement may petition the Council, which, with such
requirements or limitation as it deems necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare,
may allow the use of such substances under the terms and conditions of the franchise, license
or easement.
CHAPTER 142 CONTROLLED ACCESS FACILITIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 718 -
[The next page is 737]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 737 -
CHAPTER 145
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
145.01 Enforcement Officer 145.05 Enforcement
145.02 General Definition of Unsafe 145.06 Criminal Citation
145.03 Unsafe Building 145.07 Posting of Signs
145.04 Nuisance Prohibited
145.01 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Building Official is responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter.
145.02 GENERAL DEFINITION OF UNSAFE. All buildings or structures which are
structurally unsafe or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or
are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard
to safety or health, or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation,
obsolescence, or abandonment, are, for the purpose of this chapter, unsafe buildings. All such
unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this
chapter.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 657A.1 & 364.12[3a])
145.03 UNSAFE BUILDING. “Unsafe building” means any structure or mobile home
meeting any or all of the following criteria:
1. Various Inadequacies. Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, because of: (i) dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; (ii) faulty construction;
(iii) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for
the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of
its foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse.
2. Manifestly Unsafe. Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or
any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
3. Inadequate Maintenance. Whenever a building or structure, used or intended
to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty
construction, or otherwise, is determined by any health officer to be unsanitary, unfit
for human habitation or in such condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease.
4. Fire Hazard. Whenever any building or structure, because of dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, is determined by the Fire Marshal or
Fire Chief to be a fire hazard.
5. Abandoned. Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a
site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any
building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so as to
constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the
public.
145.04 NUISANCE PROHIBITED. Any person causing or maintaining a nuisance arising
from the ownership of a dangerous building and who shall fail or refuse to abate or remove the
CHAPTER 143 CONTROL AND USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 738 -
same within the reasonable time required and specified in a notice to abate is in violation of
this Code of Ordinances.
145.05 ENFORCEMENT. The Building Official shall take action to abate the nuisance
arising from the condition of a dangerous building in the manner provided by Chapter 50 of
this Code of Ordinances and to collect the costs incurred in the same manner as provided by
Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances.
145.06 CRIMINAL CITATION. In addition to the civil remedies available to the City for
violation of this chapter, the City may file a criminal citation against any person causing or
maintaining a nuisance for each violation of this chapter and with a separate offense being
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
145.07 POSTING OF SIGNS. The Building Official shall cause to be posted at each
entrance to any dangerous building a notice to read: “DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO
OCCUPY. CITY OF CHARLES CITY, IOWA.” Such notice shall remain posted until the
required repairs, demolition or removal are completed. Such notice shall not be removed
without written permission of the building official and no person shall enter the building
except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the building.
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 739 -
CHAPTER 146
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
146.01 Definitions 146.03 Mobile Home Park Requirements
146.02 Conversion to Real Property
146.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter the following terms are defined:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.1)
1. “Manufactured home” means a factory-built structure built under the authority
of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403 which was constructed on or after June 15, 1976, and is
required by federal law to display a seal from the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
2. “Manufactured home community” means any site, lot, field, or tract of land
under common ownership upon which ten or more occupied manufactured homes are
harbored, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any building,
structure or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the equipment of the
manufactured home community.
3. “Mobile home” means any vehicle without motive power used or so
manufactured or constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the
public streets and highways and so designed, constructed or reconstructed as will
permit the vehicle to be used as a place for human habitation by one or more persons;
but also includes any such vehicle with motive power not registered as a motor
vehicle in Iowa. A mobile home means any such vehicle built before June 15, 1976,
which was not built to a mandatory building code and which contains no State or
federal seals.
4. “Mobile home park” means any site, lot, field or tract of land upon which
three (3) or more mobile homes or manufactured homes, or a combination of any of
these homes, are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit enterprise
with water, sewer or septic, and electrical services available.
The term “manufactured home community” or “mobile home park” is not to be construed to
include manufactured or mobile homes, buildings, tents, or other structures temporarily
maintained by any individual, educational institution, or company on its own premises and
used exclusively to house said entity’s own labor or students. The manufactured home
community or mobile home park shall meet the requirements of any zoning regulations that
are in effect.
146.02 CONVERSION TO REAL PROPERTY. A mobile home or manufactured home
that is located outside a manufactured home community or mobile home park shall be
converted to real estate by being placed on a permanent foundation and shall be assessed for
real estate taxes except in the following cases:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 435.26 & Sec. 435.35)
1. Retailer’s Stock. Mobile homes or manufactured homes on private property
as part of a retailer’s or a manufacturer’s stock not used as a place for human
habitation.
CHAPTER 145 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 740 -
2. Existing Homes. A taxable mobile home or manufactured home that is
located outside of a manufactured home community or mobile home park as of
January 1, 1995, shall be assessed and taxed as real estate, but is exempt from the
permanent foundation requirement of this chapter until the home is relocated.
146.03 MOBILE HOME PARK REQUIREMENTS. Mobile home parks shall be
operated and maintained in accordance with the following:
1. Water and Sanitary Sewer Service. The mobile home park shall be connected
to the public water and sanitary sewer systems.
2. Refuse Disposal. Refuse containers shall be located no farther than one
hundred fifty (150) feet from any mobile home space. The type of container used, the
amount of refuse container space for each mobile home space, and the frequency in
which refuse must be collected shall be in accordance with Chapter 105 and 106 of
this Code of Ordinances.
3. Insect and Rodent Control. Insect and rodent control measures to safeguard
public health shall be applied in all mobile home parks.
4. Fire Protection. Fire hydrants shall be installed according to the
recommendations of the Fire Department, and there shall also be a portable fire
extinguisher approved by the Fire Department in each community building. Where
the water distribution system is not intended or provided for fire protection,
extinguishers shall be provided at other suitable locations, so that there is at least one
extinguisher for every ten (10) mobile homes or fraction thereof.
5. Speed Limit. The maximum speed limit for any vehicle in any mobile home
park is ten (10) miles per hour.
6. Fuel For Mobile Homes. Cylinders containing liquefied petroleum, gas or oil
to be used as fuel by mobile home occupants shall be connected to the stoves or
heaters of mobile homes by copper or other metallic tubing, to provide leakproof
connections. The cylinder shall be securely fastened in place and may not be closer
than five (5) feet from any mobile home exit.
[The next page is 757]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 757 -
CHAPTER 150
BUILDING NUMBERING
150.01 Definitions 150.03 Building Numbering Plan
150.02 Owner Requirements
150.01 DEFINITIONS. For use in this chapter, the following terms are defined:
1. “Owner” means the owner of the principal building.
2. “Principal building” means the main building on any lot or subdivision
thereof.
150.02 OWNER REQUIREMENTS. Every owner shall comply with the following
numbering requirements:
1. Obtain Building Number. The owner shall obtain the assigned number to the
principal building from the City Engineer.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
2. Display Building Number. The owner shall place or cause to be installed and
maintained on the principal building the assigned number in a conspicuous place to
the street in figures not less than four (4) inches in height and of a contrasting color
with their background.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3d])
3. Failure to Comply. If an owner refuses to number a building as herein
provided, or fails to do so for a period of ten (10) days after being notified in writing
by the City to do so, the City may proceed to place the assigned number on the
principal building and assess the costs against the property for collection in the same
manner as a property tax.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3h])
150.03 BUILDING NUMBERING PLAN. Building numbers shall be assigned in
accordance with the building numbering plan on file in the office of the City Engineer.
CHAPTER 146 MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 758 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 759 -
CHAPTER 151
TREES
151.01 Definition 151.04 Trimming Trees for Safety
151.02 Planting Restrictions 151.05 Disease Control
151.03 Duty to Trim Trees 151.06 Inspection and Removal
151.01 DEFINITION. For use in this chapter, “parking” means that part of the street,
avenue, or highway in the City not covered by sidewalk and lying between the lot line and the
curb line; or, on unpaved streets, that part of the street, avenue, or highway lying between the
lot line and that portion of the street usually traveled by vehicular traffic.
151.02 PLANTING RESTRICTIONS. No tree shall be planted in any parking or street
except in accordance with the following:
1. Alignment. All trees planted in any street shall be planted in the parking
midway between the outer line of the sidewalk and the curb. In the event a curb line
is not established, trees shall be planted on a line nine (9) feet from the property line.
2. Spacing. Trees shall not be planted on any parking which is less than nine (9)
feet in width, or contains less than eighty-one (81) square feet of exposed soil surface
per tree. Trees shall not be planted closer than thirty (30) feet from street intersections
(property lines extended) and ten (10) feet from driveways. If it is at all possible,
trees should be planted inside the property lines and not between the sidewalk and the
curb.
3. Prohibited Trees. No person shall plant in any street any fruit-bearing tree or
any tree of the kinds commonly known as cottonwood, poplar, box elder, Chinese
elm, evergreen, willow, black walnut, or ash.
151.03 DUTY TO TRIM TREES. The owner or agent of the abutting property shall keep
trimmed the trees on, or overhanging the street, so that all branches will be at least fifteen (15)
feet above the surface of the street and eight (8) feet above the sidewalks. If the abutting
property owner fails to trim the trees, the City may serve notice on the abutting property
owner requiring that such action be taken within five (5) days. If such action is not taken
within that time, the City may perform the required action and assess the costs against the
abutting property for collection in the same manner as a property tax.
Except as allowed in Chapter 124 and in this section, it is unlawful for any person to trim or
cut any tree in a street or public place unless the work is done under the supervision of the
City. (Ord. 1133 – Jun. 19 Supp.)
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[2c, d & e])
151.04 TRIMMING TREES FOR SAFETY. The City may trim any tree or other
vegetation located on the parking if the tree or other vegetation is creating a public hazard.
151.05 DISEASE CONTROL. Any dead, diseased, or damaged tree or shrub which may
harbor serious insect or disease pests or disease injurious to other trees is hereby declared to
be a nuisance.
CHAPTER 150 BUILDING NUMBERING
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 760 -
151.06 INSPECTION AND REMOVAL. The Council shall inspect or cause to be
inspected any trees or shrubs in the City reported or suspected to be dead, diseased or
damaged, and such trees and shrubs shall be subject to the following:
1. City Property. If it is determined that any such condition exists on any public
property, including the strip between the curb and the lot line of private property, the
Council may cause such condition to be corrected by treatment or removal. The
Council may also order the removal of any trees on the streets of the City which
interfere with the making of improvements or with travel thereon.
2. Private Property. If it is determined with reasonable certainty that any such
condition exists on private property and that danger to other trees or to adjoining
property or passing motorists or pedestrians is imminent, the Council shall notify by
certified mail the owner, occupant or person in charge of such property to correct such
condition by treatment or removal within fourteen (14) days of said notification. If
such owner, occupant or person in charge of said property fails to comply within 14
days of receipt of notice, the Council may cause the condition to be corrected and the
cost assessed against the property.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 364.12[3b & h])
[The next page is 773]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 773 -
CHAPTER 155
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
155.01 Purpose 155.03 Copy of File
155.02 Adoption of Fire Code
155.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion.
155.02 ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE. Pursuant to published notice and public hearing,
there is hereby adopted that certain code known as the International Fire Code, 2009 edition.
155.03 COPY OF FILE. An official copy of the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, is
on file in the office of the Building Official.
CHAPTER 151 TREES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 774 -
° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° ° °
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 775 -
CHAPTER 157
BUILDING CODE
157.01 Short Title 157.19 Fees for Permits
157.02 Purpose 157.20 Inspection Required
157.03 Adoption of Building Codes 157.21 Lot Survey
157.04 Copies Filed 157.22 Concealed Work
157.05 Building Official 157.23 Approvals Required
157.06 Board of Appeals 157.24 Required Inspections
157.07 Permits Required 157.25 Maintenance
157.08 Emergency Work 157.26 Special Inspections
157.09 Permit Applications 157.27 Special Inspector
157.10 Plans and Specifications 157.28 Approved Fabricators
157.11 Plan Review 157.29 Request for Inspection
157.12 Plan Approval 157.30 Access
157.13 Partial Plans 157.31 Power, Fuel and Water Supply Connections
157.14 Retention of Plans 157.32 Certificate of Occupancy
157.15 Issuance of Permits 157.33 Regulations for Temporary Membrane Structures
157.16 Validity 157.34 Temporary Storage Containers
157.17 Expiration of Permit 157.35 Violations
157.18 Suspension or Revocation 157.36 Special Penalty
157.01 SHORT TITLE. This chapter shall be known as the Charles City, Iowa, Building
Code, and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this chapter.”
157.02 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health, property, welfare
and safety by establishing reasonable minimum requirements for the construction, repair,
moving, demolition and use of buildings, structures and related equipment, fixtures and
systems.
157.03 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODES. Pursuant to published notice and public
hearing, as required by Section 380.10 of the Code of Iowa, the following code is adopted by
reference: State Building Code.
157.04 COPIES FILED. Official copies of the standard codes adopted herein and a
certified copy of this chapter are on file in the office of the Building Official. Certified copies
of this chapter are also on file in the office of the State Building Code Commissioner and in
the office of the Secretary of State.
157.05 BUILDING OFFICIAL. The City Administrator shall appoint the Building
Official, who is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter.
The Building Official shall have the following powers and duties:
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 372.13[4])
1. Records. The Building Official shall keep a permanent, accurate account of
all fees and other moneys collected and received under this chapter, the names of the
persons upon whose account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof,
together with the location of the building or premises to which they relate.
2. Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of
the provisions of this chapter or whenever the Building Official has reasonable cause
to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises, any condition which
CHAPTER 155 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 776 -
makes such building or premises unsafe as defined in this chapter, the Building
Official or authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the
Building Official by this chapter; provided that if such building or premises be
unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and
demand entry. If such entry is refused, the Building Official or authorized
representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any
building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper demand is made as herein
provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Building Official or authorized
representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter.
Any person violating this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor.
3. Stop Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of
this chapter, the Building Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing
served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any
such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building Official
to proceed with the work.
4. Occupancy Violations. Whenever any structure is being used contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, the Building Official may order such use discontinued and
the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such
use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within ten (10) days after
receipt of such notice or make the structure, or portion thereof, comply with the
requirements of this chapter; provided, however, that in the event of an unsafe
building the procedures for the abatement of a nuisance shall apply.
5. Authority to Condemn Equipment. Whenever the Building Official learns or
ascertains that any equipment, as defined in this chapter, has become hazardous to
life, health, or property, the Building Official shall order, in writing, that such
equipment be restored to a condition of safety or be dismantled or removed from its
present location. The written notice shall fix a time limit for compliance with such
order. No person shall use or maintain the defective equipment after receiving such
notice.
6. Liability. The Building Official or any employee charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, acting in good faith and without malice for the City in the
discharge of duties, shall not thereby become liable personally and is hereby relieved
from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a
result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of
duties. Any suit brought against the Building Official or employees, because of such
act or omission performed by them in the enforcement of any provisions of this
chapter, shall be defended by the City until final termination of the proceedings.
7. Cooperation of Other Officials. The Building Official may request, and shall
receive so far as may be necessary in the discharge of any duties, the assistance and
cooperation of other officials of the City.
157.06 BOARD OF APPEALS. In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials
and methods of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of
this chapter, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals, consisting of six (6)
members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to
CHAPTER 155 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 777 -
building construction. The Building Official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as
Secretary of the Board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to
Council approval, for two-year terms. The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations
for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the
Building Official with a copy to the appellant and a copy to the State Building Code
Commissioner.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.13; IAC 630-5.3[5])
157.07 PERMITS REQUIRED. Permits shall be required as follows:
1. Building. No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, move, remove, convert, or
demolish any building, structure, driveway, or parking areas in the City without first
obtaining a separate building permit for each such building, structure, driveway, or
parking area from the Building Official.
2. Mechanical. No person shall install or reconstruct any heating, ventilating,
cooling, or refrigeration equipment unless a permit therefor has been obtained from
the Building Official except as otherwise provided in this chapter. A permit shall be
obtained for all heating, ventilating, cooling, or refrigeration equipment, moved with,
or installed in, any relocated building. A separate permit shall be obtained for the
equipment installed in each separate building or structure. A permit shall not be
required for the following:
A. Any portable heating appliance.
B. Any portable ventilating equipment.
C. Any portable cooling unit.
3. Plumbing. No person shall install, alter, reconstruct or repair any plumbing or
drainage system or part thereof as defined in the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by
this chapter unless a permit therefor has been obtained from the Building Official.
4. Electrical. No person shall install, alter, reconstruct or repair any electrical
conductor or equipment subject to the provisions of the National Electrical Code
adopted by this chapter unless a permit therefor has been obtained from the Building
Official.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.19[6])
157.08 EMERGENCY WORK. In emergency situations, work may be initiated without
first submitting a permit application and receiving a permit therefor. However, a permit
application must be submitted within a reasonable time after the passage of the critical period.
With this one exception all emergency work must be done in accordance with this chapter.
157.09 PERMIT APPLICATIONS. Application for permit shall be made as follows:
1. Building Permit. To obtain a building permit the applicant shall first file an
application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such
application shall:
A. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which
application is made;
B. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot,
block, tract, and house and street address, or similar description that will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work;
CHAPTER 155 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 778 -
C. Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed work is
intended;
D. Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required in 157.10 of
this chapter;
E. State the valuation of the proposed work;
F. Be signed by the permittee, or an authorized agent, who may be
required to submit evidence to indicate such authority;
G. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Building Official.
2. Mechanical Permit. To obtain a mechanical permit, the applicant shall file an
application on forms furnished for that purpose. The application shall contain all
information necessary to the lawful enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
3. Plumbing Permit. To obtain a plumbing permit, the applicant shall file an
application on forms furnished for that purpose. The application shall contain all
information necessary to the lawful enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
4. Electrical Permit. To obtain an electrical permit, the applicant shall first file
an application therefor in writing on a form provided for that purpose. The
application shall include the name and business address of the person, firm,
corporation or other association that is to do the work, a description of the property
where the work is to be done, the name of the owner of the property, the name of the
occupant, and a general description of the materials to be used, and shall specify the
particular part or parts of the work that must be inspected as required by this chapter.
157.10 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS. When required by the Building Official for
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, two sets of plans and specifications shall be
submitted. The Building Official may require such plans and specifications to be prepared and
designed by an engineer or architect licensed by the State of Iowa to practice as such. Plans
and specifications when required shall be of sufficient detail and clarity to show that the
proposed work will conform to the provisions of this chapter and of all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules, regulations and orders.
157.11 PLAN REVIEW. Required plans and specifications shall be checked by the
Building Official. Such plans may be reviewed by other City departments or personnel to
check compliance with the laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction.
157.12 PLAN APPROVAL. If the plans and specifications as filed appear to conform to
the requirements of this chapter and other laws and ordinances the Building Official shall
endorse in writing or stamp on all sets of plans and specifications “APPROVED.” Such
CHAPTER 155 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 779 -
approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified, or altered without
authorization from the Building Official, and all work shall be done in accordance with the
approved plans.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.19[1])
157.13 PARTIAL PLANS. The Building Official may issue a permit for the construction
of part of a building or structure before the entire plans and specifications for the whole
building or structure have been submitted or approved provided adequate information and
detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of this chapter.
The holder of such permit shall proceed at the holder’s own risk without assurance that the
permit for the entire building or structure will be granted.
157.14 RETENTION OF PLANS. One set of approved plans, specifications, and
computations shall be retained by the Building Official for a period of not less than ninety (90)
days from date of completion of the work covered therein, and one set of approved plans and
specifications shall be returned to the applicant, which set shall be kept on such building or
work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress.
157.15 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS. When the Building Official is satisfied that the work
described in an application for a permit and the plans and specifications filed therewith, if
required, conform to the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent laws and ordinances
including any applicable soil erosion control plans, and that the fees as specified have been
paid in full, the Building Official shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.19[4])
157.16 VALIDITY. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and
specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel
the provisions of this chapter shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it
authorizes is lawful. The issuance of a permit based upon plans and specifications shall not
prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans
and specifications or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in
violation of this chapter or of any other chapter of this Code of Ordinances or of any other
ordinance of the City.
157.17 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT. Every permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issue, unless the application is
accompanied by a construction schedule of specific longer duration, in which instance the
permit may be issued for the term of the construction schedule, with approval of the Building
Official. If the work has not been completed by the expiration date of the permit, no further
work shall be done until the permit shall have been renewed by the owner or his or her agent
and by payment of the renewal fee as established by resolution of the City Council, and
provided no changes have been made in plans or location. Upon approval, permits may be
extended for no more than two periods not exceeding 180 days each.
157.18 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION. The Building Official may, in writing,
suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is
issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any
ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this chapter.
CHAPTER 155 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 780 -
157.19 FEES FOR PERMITS. Fees shall be established by resolution of the Council. A
fee for each building permit shall be paid to the Building Official. The determination of value
or valuation under any of the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the Building Official.
The valuation to be used in computing the permit and plan checking fees shall be the total
value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work,
roofing, elevators, and any other permanent work or permanent equipment. The Building
Official will use as a guide to determine the valuation the latest Building Valuation Data, and
the Regional Modifiers, as published by the International Code Council, unless the applicant
can show that the actual cost will be less. In the event that work has commenced without first
obtaining a permit, the permit fee shall be doubled.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.19[5])
157.20 INSPECTION REQUIRED. All construction or work for which a permit is required
shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official, and certain types of construction shall
have continuous inspection by special inspectors, as specified in Section 157.26.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.19[1])
157.21 LOT SURVEY. A survey of the lot may be required by the Building Official to
verify compliance of the structure with approved plans.
157.22 CONCEALED WORK. That portion of any work or equipment intended to be
concealed by any permanent portion of the building shall not be concealed until inspected and
approved.
157.23 APPROVALS REQUIRED. No work shall be done on any part of the building or
structure beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the
written approval of the Building Official. Such written approval shall be given only after an
inspection shall have been made of each successive step in the construction as indicated by
each of the inspections required in Section 157.24. There shall be a final inspection and
approval of all buildings and work when ready for occupancy and/or completed.
157.24 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS. The Building Official, upon notification from the
permit holder or agent, shall make the following applicable inspections and shall either
approve that portion of the work as completed or shall notify the permit holder or agent
wherein the same fails to comply with this chapter.
1. Reinforcing Steel or Structural Framework. Reinforcing steel or structural
framework of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed
without first obtaining the approval of the Building Official.
2. Foundation Inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms
erected and when all materials for the foundation are delivered on the job. Where
concrete from a central mixing plant (commonly termed “transit mixed”) is to be used,
materials need not be on the job.
3. Frame Inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking, and
bracing are in place and all pipes, chimneys, and vents are complete.
4. Mechanical Inspection. To be made before concealment or use.
5. Plumbing Inspection. To be made before concealment or use.
6. Electrical Inspection. To be made before concealment or use.
7. Insulation Inspection. To be made before concealment or use.
CHAPTER 155 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 781 -
8. Lath and/or Wallboard Inspection. To be made after all lathing and/or
wallboard, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or
before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished.
9. Other Inspections. In addition to the required inspections specified above, the
Building Official may make or require any other inspections of any construction or
work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other laws which
are enforced by the Building Official.
10. Final Inspection. To be made after work is completed and/or the building
ready for occupancy.
157.25 MAINTENANCE. All buildings or structures both existing and new, and all parts
thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which
are required by this chapter in a building or structure when erected, altered, or repaired, shall
be maintained in good working order. The owner or designated agent shall be responsible for
the maintenance of buildings and structures. For the purpose of determining compliance with
this section the Building Official may cause any structure to be reinspected.
157.26 SPECIAL INSPECTIONS. In addition to the inspections to be made as specified
in Section 157.20, the owner or agent shall employ a special inspector who shall be present at
all times during construction on the following types of work:
1. Concrete. On concrete work when the structural design is based on
compressive strength of concrete in excess of 2,000 psi.
2. Masonry. Masonry work shall have special inspection when required in the
International Building Code.
3. Welding. On all structural welding.
4. Reinforced Gypsum Concrete. When cast-in-place Class B reinforced
gypsum concrete is being mixed or deposited.
5. Special Cases. On special construction or work involving unusual hazards or
requiring constant inspection.
6. Exception. The Building Official may waive the requirement for the
employment of a special inspector if the Building Official finds that the construction
or work is such that no unusual hazard exists.
157.27 SPECIAL INSPECTOR. The special inspector shall be a qualified person
approved by the Building Official. The special inspector shall furnish continuous inspection
on the construction and work requiring the special inspector’s employment. The special
inspector shall report to the Building Official in writing, noting all ordinance violations and
other information as required.
157.28 APPROVED FABRICATORS. Special inspections required by Section 157.26
and elsewhere in this chapter shall not be required where the work is done on the premises of a
fabricator approved by the Building Official to perform such work without special inspection.
The certificate of approval shall be subject to revocation by the Building Official if it is found
that any work done pursuant to the approval is in violation of this chapter.
CHAPTER 155 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 782 -
157.29 REQUEST FOR INSPECTION. The Building Official may require that every
request for inspection be filed at least one day before such inspection is desired. Such request
may be in writing or by telephone at the option of the Building Official.
157.30 ACCESS. It shall be the duty of the person requesting inspection to provide access
to and means for proper inspection. The Building Official shall not be liable for any expense
entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow the inspection.
157.31 POWER, FUEL AND WATER SUPPLY CONNECTIONS. Systems and/or
equipment regulated by this chapter shall not be connected to the power, fuel or water supply
until authorized by the Building Official, except that this section shall not be considered to
prohibit the operation of any equipment installed to replace existing equipment serving an
occupied portion of a building in the event a request for inspection of such equipment has
been filed with the Building Official not more than forty-eight (48) hours after such
replacement work is completed and before any portion of such equipment is concealed by any
permanent portion of the building.
157.32 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. No building or structure for which a
certificate of occupancy is required by the Iowa State Building Code Administration Section
shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building
or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the Building Official has issued a certificate
of occupancy therefor as provided herein.
(Code of Iowa, Sec. 103A.19[4])
1. Change in Use. Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be
made except as specified in the International Building Code adopted by this chapter.
2. Certificate Issued. After final inspection when it is found that the building or
structure complies with the provisions of this chapter, the Building Official shall issue
a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following:
A. The building permit number.
B. The address of the building.
C. The name and address of the owner.
D. A description of that portion of the building for which the certificate
is issued.
E. A statement that the described portion of the building complies with
the requirements of this chapter for group and division of occupancy and the
use for which the proposed occupancy is classified.
F. The name of the Building Official.
3. Temporary Certificate. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued
by the Building Official for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure
prior to the completion of the entire building or structure.
157.33 REGULATIONS FOR TEMPORARY MEMBRANE STRUCTURES. Regulations
for Temporary Membrane Structures are as follows:
1. No temporary membrane structure may be erected without first obtaining a
permit from the Building Official. A permit fee and a plan checking fee, as prescribed
CHAPTER 155 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 783 -
by Council resolution, must be paid before the permit is issued. In the event that work
has commenced without first obtaining a permit, the permit fee shall be doubled.
2. Temporary membrane structures, tents, or canopies are only allowed at a
location for a cumulative period not to exceed 120 days in each calendar year, and are
not allowed during the period from October 1 through April 15 in any year unless
such structure, tent, or canopy has a snow load design approved by the Building
Official.
3. Temporary membrane structures, tents, or canopies shall have a maximum
square footage of 1,400 feet.
4. Temporary membrane structures, tents, or canopies shall have a minimum of
two exits and all exits shall open in the direction of egress.
5. Temporary membrane structures, tents, or canopies shall be adequately braced
and anchored to resist wind from overturning and/or collapsing the structure.
6. All materials used in temporary membrane structures shall be flame retardant.
Upon request of the Building Official, the applicant requesting a permit for a
temporary membrane structure, tent, or canopy shall provide the following
information:
A. Identification of Temporary Membrane Structure, size, and fabric or
material type.
B. For flame resistant materials, the necessary information to determine
compliance with National Fire Protection Association (N.F.P.A.) Standard
701.
C. For flame-retardant-treated materials, the date Temporary Membrane
Structure was last treated with an approved flame retardant.
D. Trade name and type of flame retardant utilized in the flame-retardant
treatment.
E. The name of the person or firm that applied the flame retardant.
7. Smoking shall not be permitted in temporary membrane structures, tents, or
canopies, or in adjacent areas where hay, straw, sawdust, or other combustible
materials are stored or used. “NO SMOKING” signs shall be conspicuously posted.
8. Open flames and devices capable of igniting combustible materials shall not
be used in or adjacent to a temporary membrane structure, tent, or canopy, unless
otherwise approved by the Building Official.
9. Cooking and heating equipment, fuel storage tanks, piping, hoses, fittings,
valves, tubing, and/or other related components shall be approved or be in accordance
with the edition of the International Mechanical Code or International Fire Code that
has been adopted at the time of permit application.
EXCEPTION: Operations such as warming foods, cooking demonstrations, and
similar operations, which do not present an ignition hazard.
10. Tents where cooking is performed shall be separated from temporary
membrane structures, tents, or canopies by a minimum of 20 feet.
11. Outdoor cooking that produces sparks or grease-laden vapors shall not be
performed within 20 feet from temporary membrane structures, tents, or canopies.
CHAPTER 155 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 784 -
12. Generators and other internal combustion power sources shall be separated
from temporary membrane structures, tents, or canopies by a minimum of 20 feet and
be isolated from contact with the public by fencing, enclosures, or other approved
means.
13. Fire apparatus access shall be provided.
14. Temporary membranes structures shall not be located within 20 feet of
property lines, buildings, other temporary membrane structures, tents, or canopies,
except that when such structure, tent, or canopy is not used for cooking then the
minimum distance shall be reduced to 10 feet.
157.34 TEMPORARY STORAGE CONTAINERS.
1. Except as otherwise expressly provided in subsection 2 or subsection 3 of this
section, temporary storage containers, including, but not limited to, truck trailers,
storage box shipping containers, storage moving “pods” or any other similar portable
storage containers, whether with or without wheels, and whether with or without a
chassis, may only be placed upon a property for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days
in any consecutive twelve (12) month period. No more than one (1) such temporary
container can be placed on a property during any 12-month period. The owner or
tenant in possession of the property must first obtain a temporary land use permit from
the Zoning Administrator prior to the placement of any such temporary portable
storage container on the property. The provisions of this subsection shall be
applicable in all zoning districts in the City except as otherwise expressly provided for
in subsection 3 of this section. This section shall not apply to pre-fabricated garden
sheds or similar structures specifically designed and intended for use on properties for
storage purposes and which comply with all City ordinances applicable to detached
accessory structures.
2. The Building Official shall have the discretion to permit the placement of
temporary storage containers on a property for a period longer than sixty (60) days in
any consecutive twelve (12) month period if the placement of such temporary storage
container on the property is reasonably required in order to accommodate the storage
of construction equipment during a construction or reconstruction project on the
property. The owner of the property and the owner’s contractor, if any, shall apply for
the land use permit for the temporary storage container as part of the application for a
building permit for the construction or reconstruction project. The land use permit for
the temporary storage container shall only be allowed for such period as is reasonably
necessary for, and only with demonstrated progress towards, completion of such
construction or reconstruction project, all as determined in the discretion of the City
Building Official, and in any event, shall expire no later than the time the building
permit for the construction or reconstruction project expires. Such temporary portable
storage containers shall meet all location and setback requirements for detached
accessory structures as described by the City Zoning Ordinance.
3. The owner or tenant in possession of property located in a commercial or
industrial zoning district upon which is located the principal permitted use of a
trucking business or a similar transportation or warehousing business, may place
temporary storage containers, including, but not limited to, truck trailers, storage box
shipping containers, storage moving “pods” or any other similar portable storage
containers, whether with or without wheels, and whether with or without a chassis, on
such property for periods of longer than sixty (60) days and without obtaining a land
CHAPTER 155 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 785 -
use permit as otherwise provided for in subsection 1 of this section. For all other
properties located in commercial or industrial zoning districts, the placement of such
temporary storage containers on any property is expressly prohibited except as
provided for in subsection 1 of this section.
4. Any temporary storage container existing on any property in the City on April
11, 2014, shall either be removed from such property, or brought into compliance with
the provisions of this section, within sixty (60) days of April 11, 2014.
157.35 VIOLATIONS. It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any
building or structure in the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter.
157.36 SPECIAL PENALTY. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted.
CHAPTER 155 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 786 -
[The next page is 803]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 803 -
CHAPTER 158
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
158.01 Findings and Declaration of Policy 158.09 Landscaping
158.02 Purpose 158.10 Reconstructed Walls and Sidings
158.03 Definitions 158.11 General Maintenance
158.04 Applicability 158.12 Structural and General Maintenance
158.05 Higher Standard To Prevail 158.13 Removal of Garbage
158.06 Compliance With Other Ordinances 158.14 Janitorial Service
158.07 Adoption of Uniform Code Provisions by 158.15 Enforcement
Reference 158.16 Additional Powers of the Building Official
158.08 Storage of Commercial and Industrial Material 158.17 Criminal Citation
158.01 FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY. It is hereby found and declared
that there exist in the City structures used for residential and nonresidential use which are, or
may become in the future, substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance, or
further that such conditions, including, but not limited to structural deterioration, lack of
maintenance and appearance of exterior of premises, infestation, lack of essential heating,
plumbing, storage or refrigeration equipment, lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential
utilities and facilities, existence of fire hazards, inadequate provisions for light and air,
unsanitary conditions and overcrowding, constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals,
welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the City. It is further found
and declared that by reason or lack of maintenance and because of progressive deterioration,
certain properties have the further effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums,
and that if the same are not curtailed and removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and
spread and will necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct
and eliminate the same, and that by reason of timely regulations and restrictions as herein
contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and the neighborhood and
property values thereby maintained, the desirability and amenities of residential and
nonresidential uses and neighborhoods enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare
protected and fostered.
158.02 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
morals, and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance, condition and occupancy of residential and nonresidential premises, to establish
minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and other physical components and
conditions essential to make the aforesaid facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and
use; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owner and operators, and distinct and
separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to authorize and establish procedures for
inspection of residential and nonresidential premises and to provide for the repair, demolition
or vacation of premises unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use.
158.03 DEFINITIONS. The following terms wherever used herein or referred to in this
chapter shall have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different meaning clearly
appears from the context; all definitions of the International Building Code, hereinafter
referred to as the “Code,” are hereby included by reference.
1. “Deterioration” means the condition of a building or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, peeling, rusting or other evidence of
physical decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or excessive use.
CHAPTER 157 BUILDING CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 804 -
2. “Exposed to public view” means any premises, or any part thereof, or any
building, or any part thereof, which may be lawfully viewed by the public.
3. “Exterior of the premises” means open space on the premises outside of any
building thereon.
4. “Extermination” means the control and elimination of insects, rodents and
vermin.
5. “Garbage” means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. (See also “refuse” and
“rubbish.”)
6. “Habitable rooms” means rooms used or designed for use by one or more
persons for living or sleeping or cooking and eating, but not including bathrooms,
laundries, serving and storage pantries. Corridors, foyers, vestibules, cellars, heater
rooms, boiler rooms, utility rooms, and other rooms or spaces that are not used
frequently or for an extended period of time or that have less than fifty (50) square
feet of superficial floor area are not considered as habitable rooms.
7. “Infestation” means the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on
the premises which constitute a health hazard.
8. “Mixed occupancy” means any building containing one or more dwelling
units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to non-dwelling uses
or used as a hotel.
9. “Nuisance” means:
A. Any public nuisance as defined by statute or ordinance.
B. Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of children whether in a building, on the premises of a building or upon
an occupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to: abandoned wells, shafts,
basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, motor vehicles,
any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris, or
vegetation such as poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac which may prove
hazardous for inquisitive minors.
C. Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health
of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist.
D. Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this chapter.
E. Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation of
this chapter.
F. Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or
dangerous to health, in violation of this chapter.
G. Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to
the health of human beings.
H. Fire hazards.
10. “Operator” means any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling or
premises or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the
owner.
CHAPTER 157 BUILDING CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 805 -
11. “Owner” means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others,
shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling units
as owner or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver, or
guardian of the estate, or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of how much
possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any
part or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the
lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or
assigned by said lessee.
12. “Parties in interest” means all individuals, associations and corporations who
have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual possession thereof.
13. “Premises” means a lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
14. “Public authority” means any officer who is in charge of any department or
branch of the government of the City, County or State relating to health, fire, building
regulations or to other activities concerning buildings in the City.
15. “Refuse” means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid waste (except body
wastes), including but not limited to: garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes. (See also
“garbage” and “rubbish.”)
16. “Rubbish” means non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans,
yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. (See
also “garbage” and “refuse.”)
158.04 APPLICABILITY. Every residential, nonresidential or mixed occupancy building
and the land on which it is situated, used or intended to be used for dwelling, commercial,
business, or industrial occupancy shall comply with the provisions of this chapter, whether or
not such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment
of this chapter, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the
use or occupancy of the building or premises for the construction or repair of the building, or
for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this chapter.
This chapter shall also apply to mobile home parks.
158.05 HIGHER STANDARD TO PREVAIL. In any case where the provisions of this
chapter impose a higher standard than set forth in any other local ordinance, or under the laws
of the State, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this
chapter impose a lower standard than any other local ordinances or of the laws of the State,
then the higher standard contained in any such other ordinances or law shall prevail.
158.06 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES. No license or permit or other
certification of compliance with this chapter shall constitute a defense against any violation of
any other local ordinance applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision
herein relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any such other provision,
nor any official of the City from enforcing any such other provision.
158.07 ADOPTION OF UNIFORM CODE PROVISIONS BY REFERENCE. The
provisions of Section 301, Section 302, Section 303 and Section 304 of the International
Property Maintenance Code, 2012, is hereby adopted by this reference and shall govern the
CHAPTER 157 BUILDING CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 806 -
maintenance of all building exteriors within the corporate limits of the City of Charles City,
Iowa, but with the following amendments to these sections:
1. 302.4 Weeds. By inserting the words “six (6) inches” where inserted
language is required.
2. 304.14 By inserting the dates of April 1 to November 30 in this section.
The definitions of Chapter 2 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, are
hereby adopted and applicable for all defined words or phrases that appear in Section 302,
Section 303 and Section 304 which have been adopted herein by reference.
158.08 STORAGE OF COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL MATERIAL. There shall
not be stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk, street or other public areas
equipment and materials relating to commercial or industrial use unless permitted under the
Zoning Ordinance for the premises.
158.09 LANDSCAPING. Premises with landscaping and lawns, hedges and bush shall be
kept trimmed and from becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view and
where the same constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining property.
158.10 RECONSTRUCTED WALLS AND SIDINGS. Reconstructed walls and sidings
on nonresidential structures shall be of standard quality and appearance commensurate with
the character of the properties in the same block and on both sides of the street on which the
premises front, such that the materials used will not be of a kind that by their appearance
under prevailing appraisal practices and standards will depreciate the values of the
neighboring and adjoining premises as aforesaid.
158.11 GENERAL MAINTENANCE. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure (including fences) shall be maintained in good repair. The same shall be maintained
free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other
conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the property
itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated, and adjoining properties protected
from blighting influences.
158.12 STRUCTURAL AND GENERAL MAINTENANCE. The outside building walls
shall not have any holes, loose boards, or any broken, cracked or damaged finish which admits
rain, cold air, dampness, rodents, insects or vermin. Every dwelling shall be so maintained as
to be weather and watertight. Basements, cellar and crawl spaces shall be free of moisture
resulting from seepage, dampness and shall be paved with stone or concrete not less than four
(4) inches thick and maintained at all times in a condition so as to be smooth, clean, free from
cracks, breaks and other hazards. All parts of the premises shall be maintained so as to
prevent infestation. All parts of the dwelling shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition,
free of nuisance, and free from health, safety and fire hazards. All boards and wood, including
floorboards, subfloors, joists, bridging and all other boards in any interior or exterior floor,
wall, roof or other part of the structure, shall be maintained to be free of cracks, termite
damage or rot. Any damaged members shall be replaced.
158.13 REMOVAL OF GARBAGE. The owner or operator shall have the duty and
responsibility of removing garbage. All accumulation of trash and debris shall be removed
weekly from collection areas and trash chutes.
CHAPTER 157 BUILDING CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 807 -
158.14 JANITORIAL SERVICE. In every building containing two (2) or more dwelling
units or rooming units, or combination thereof, the owner shall insure that the premises is free
from filthy garbage, refuse and rubbish.
158.15 ENFORCEMENT. The Building Official shall abate the nuisance arising from the
building conditions that are in violation of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances in the same
manner as provided in Chapter 50 of this Code of Ordinances, and shall collect the costs
incurred in the same manner as provided by Chapter 50 in this Code of Ordinances.
158.16 ADDITIONAL POWERS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building
Official shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purpose and provisions of this chapter, including the following powers in
addition to others herein granted:
1. To investigate the building conditions in the City in order to determine which
buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use.
2. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination; provided, that
such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience
to the persons in possession and provided that any entrance without the permission of
the occupant shall be consistent with the rights of the owners and occupants. Where
appropriate, a court order may be sought to permit entry.
158.17 CRIMINAL CITATION. In addition to the civil remedies available to the City of
Charles City for violation of this chapter, the City may file a criminal citation against any
person violating a provision of this chapter, with a separate offense being committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
CHAPTER 157 BUILDING CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 808 -
[The next page is 811]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 811 -
CHAPTER 159
LICENSING AND INSPECTION OF RENTAL
PROPERTIES
159.01 Purpose 159.08 Inspection Upon Complaint
159.02 Definitions 159.09 Required Abatement of Nonconforming Condition
159.03 Registration of Rental Properties 159.10 Property Standards
159.04 Rental Permit Required 159.11 Fees
159.05 Consent to Inspection 159.12 Appeal
159.06 Inspection of Rental Property 159.13 Implementation of Chapter
159.07 Revocation of Permit 159.14 Violations
159.01 PURPOSE. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the inspection of
residential rental properties within the corporate limits of the City of Charles City, Iowa, in
order to ensure that such properties conform to minimum standards deemed necessary for the
protection of the health and safety of the occupants thereof and the occupants of surrounding
properties, and to inhibit the spread of urban blight.
159.02 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
1. “Dwelling” means any house, building or mobile home, or portion thereof,
occupied or intended to be occupied as the place of habitation of human beings, either
permanently or transiently.
2. “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms within a dwelling intended to be
occupied by human beings for living purposes. If a common area and facilities for
cooking and eating are provided in a dwelling for the use of the occupants of units
therein, such common area and facilities shall constitute a part of each dwelling unit
for the purpose of inspection and compliance with this chapter, notwithstanding the
fact that cooking is not allowed in individual units.
3. “Manager” means a person or entity designated by the owner as the owner’s
agent in supervising the operation and leasing of the owner’s rental property and
authorized to act on behalf of the owner with the City concerning compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
4. “Owner” means any person, persons, entity or entities that have legal title,
individually or collectively, to rental property.
5. “Rental permit” means the permit issued by the City of Charles City
authorizing occupancy of a rental property.
6. “Rental property” means any dwelling or dwelling unit which is being held
out or being offered for rent or is currently being let for rent and/or occupied by any
person who is not the owner of the premises, except that the following properties shall
not be regarded as rental properties:
A. Dwelling units owned by the United States of America, the State of
Iowa, or the City of Charles City, Iowa.
CHAPTER 158 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 812 -
B. Hotels and Bed and Breakfast Inns as defined by Chapter 137 of the
Iowa Code.
C. All facilities that are licensed or certified by the Iowa Department of
Inspections and Appeals.
159.03 REGISTRATION OF RENTAL PROPERTIES. The owner of a rental property
is required to register the owner’s rental property with the City by filing a completed
registration form (as provided by the City) with the City Clerk on or before October 31,
accompanied by a fee for each dwelling or dwelling unit described in the registration form and
in an amount as established from time to time by the City Council by appropriate resolution.
Each owner must thereafter renew its registration by filing a completed registration form (as
provided by the City) with the City Clerk on or before October 31, accompanied by payment
of the fee as described above. Registration forms shall be available at the office of the City
Clerk during regular business hours. Upon receipt of the completed registration form and
registration fee, a rental permit will be issued to the owner. All rental permits shall be
effective from November 1 whether registration precedes that date or is delinquent.
159.04 RENTAL PERMIT REQUIRED. Except as otherwise provided herein, no owner
shall rent or offer for rent any dwelling or dwelling unit for use in whole or in part for human
habitation unless a rental permit has been issued for each dwelling unit. No person shall
occupy a dwelling unit unless a valid rental permit has been issued for the dwelling unit.
159.05 CONSENT TO INSPECTION. By filing a registration form with the City, the
owner is granting its consent to an inspection of the rental property by the City for the purpose
of determining compliance with the property standards set forth in this chapter.
159.06 INSPECTION OF RENTAL PROPERTY.
1. Inspection. Upon receiving a registration form and registration fee, the City
Administrator will arrange to inspect such dwelling unit described in the registration
form by contacting the owner or the manager to arrange for inspection within a
reasonable period of time, not to exceed two weeks from the date of the City request
for an inspection. The owner or manager shall be present at the time set for inspection
and shall accompany the inspector during each inspection. The owner shall advise the
occupant of these arrangements and of the occupant’s right to also be present during
the inspection.
2. Findings. If the City inspector finds that the dwelling unit substantially
conforms to the minimum standards as set forth in this chapter, then the owner shall
be advised of the finding of compliance. If the inspection determines that the
dwelling unit does not substantially conform with the standards, then the City will
notify the owner of the specific findings of nonconformity and of the date by which
abatement of these nonconforming conditions must be completed. The City will reinspect
the property following expiration of the abatement deadline to confirm
compliance with the property standards.
3. Inspection Renewal. Rental units that remain continuously registered with the
City shall be inspected on a three-year cycle, except as follows:
A. Inspection shall be made upon complaint as provided by §159.08.
B. When a previously registered dwelling unit is no longer a rental
property and has not been registered as a rental unit for any period of time,
CHAPTER 158 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 813 -
then at such time that the property again becomes a rental property and is
registered as such, an inspection shall be made within the year following the
date of registration and the three-year cycle of inspection shall begin from the
date of such registration.
4. Transfer of Ownership. Upon transfer of ownership of the property for which
the rental permit has been issued, the new owner or manager of the property shall
apply for a transfer of the rental permit within 30 days after the date of transfer of
ownership of the residential rental property. If application for transfer is timely made,
then the rental permit will be transferred to the new owner or operator without charge
or without further inspection and the rental permit will expire on the expiration date of
the previous rental permit. If the application for transfer is not timely filed, then the
City may cancel the rental permit and require registration of the unit and inspection
before a rental permit is issued.
5. Registration of New Rental Units. Newly constructed rental properties and
existing dwelling units that become rental properties during the year shall, upon
registration, be issued a permit that is effective from the date of registration until the
following November 1, on which date the permit will expire unless the property is
again registered as a rental property as provided by this chapter. Owners of such
newly constructed rental properties and dwelling units that are converted to rental
properties during the year will be charged a prorated fee for the period from the date
of registration until the following November 1 expiration date.
159.07 REVOCATION OF PERMIT. A rental permit will be subject to revocation upon
the following occurrences:
1. Failure to timely file a registration form or timely pay the required fee and
failure to cure this default within 10 days following receipt of the notice of
noncompliance by the owner or manager.
2. Discovery of nonconforming conditions on the property and which are not
abated within the time period prescribed for abatement by the City in its notification
to the owner or manager of nonconforming conditions.
3. Conviction or judgment by a judge or judicial magistrate of the Iowa District
Court finding a violation of any provision of this chapter.
In the event that the City Code Enforcement Officer determines that the conditions of the
rental property present an immediate threat to the health and safety of the occupants thereof or
of neighboring properties, then the rental permit may be revoked immediately without prior
notice to the owner or manager.
159.08 INSPECTION UPON COMPLAINT. In addition to the inspections conducted by
the City in conjunction with the issuance or renewal of rental permits, the City is authorized to
inspect any rental property for compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter upon
receiving a complaint from an occupant of the rental property concerning conditions on the
property. The complaint shall be filed with the City Clerk on a form provided by the City.
This form shall include a provision requiring the complainant to certify that he or she has
registered a complaint with the landlord or manager at least fourteen (14) days prior to filing
the complaint with the City and without receiving a satisfactory response from the owner or
manager.
CHAPTER 158 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 814 -
159.09 REQUIRED ABATEMENT OF NONCONFORMING CONDITION. Any
owner who fails to abate nonconforming conditions, after receiving notice of noncompliance
and within the time period prescribed by the City for abatement of these nonconforming
conditions, is in violation of this Code of Ordinances.
159.10 PROPERTY STANDARDS. All rental properties must substantially conform to
the following provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 as published
by the International Code Council, Inc., the provisions of which are by this reference adopted
and made part of this chapter:
1. Definitions of Chapter 2
2. Section 302.5 pertaining to Rodent Harborage
3. Section 304.1.1 pertaining to Unsafe Conditions, Exterior Structure
4. Section 304.3 pertaining to Premises Identification
5. Section 304.13 pertaining to Window, Skylight and Door Frames
6. Section 304.14 pertaining to Screens for the period from April 1 – November
1 in each year
7. Section 304.15 pertaining to Doors
8. Section 304.18 pertaining to Building Security
9. Section 305 pertaining to Unsafe Conditions, Interior Structure
10. Section 306 pertaining to Unsafe Conditions, Component Serviceability
11. Section 307 pertaining to Handrails and Guardrails (but amended by requiring
a handrail on exterior and interior flight of stairway having more than three rather than
more than four risers)
12. Section 402.2 pertaining to Common Halls and Stairways
13. Section 403.2 pertaining to Bathrooms and Toilet Rooms
14. Section 403.5 pertaining to Clothes Dryer Exhaust
15. Section 504 pertaining to Plumbing Systems and Fixtures
16. Section 505 pertaining to Water Supply
17. Section 506.1 pertaining to Sanitary Drainage System
18. Section 506.2 pertaining to Maintenance
19. Section 602 pertaining to Heating Facilities (dates for heat being November 1
through April 1, inclusive)
20. Section 603 pertaining to Mechanical Equipment
21. Section 604 pertaining to Electrical Facilities
22. Section 605 pertaining to Electrical Equipment
23. Section 606.2 pertaining to Elevators
24. Section 702.1 pertaining to Means of Egress, General
25. Section 702.3 pertaining to Means of Egress, Locked Doors
CHAPTER 158 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 815 -
26. Section 704 pertaining to Fire Protection Systems
159.11 FEES. The following fees will be assessed to and paid by rental property owners in
an amount as established from time to time by the City Council by appropriate resolution:
1. Registration Fee. Due upon filing initial and subsequent annual registration
of rental properties with the City Clerk.
2. Additional Inspection Fee. Due and payable for each inspection of a dwelling
or dwelling unit that is in addition to an inspection required by this chapter and one
follow-up inspection.
3. Complaint Inspection Fee. Due and payable for each inspection conducted by
the City pursuant to a complaint filed with the City Clerk.
4. Failure to Appear Fee. Due and payable upon failure of the owner or manager
to appear at a scheduled inspection of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
5. Delinquent Registration Fee. Due and payable upon failure of the owner to
timely register a rental unit.
Permits will not be issued nor inspections made until the fees required by this section have
been received by the City Clerk.
159.12 APPEAL. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City in its administration of
this chapter may file a request with the City Clerk, on a form provided by the City Clerk, and
directed to the City Administrator for reconsideration of the contested decision. The City
Administrator will notify the applicant, in writing, within five days after its receipt by the City
Clerk, of his/her decision. If the aggrieved party is not satisfied with the response of the City
Administrator, the aggrieved party may, within 10 days following the date of the
Administrator’s response, file a written appeal to the City Council, on a form provided by the
City Clerk, requesting reconsideration of the contested decision. This written appeal shall be
filed with the City Clerk. The City Clerk will thereupon notify the aggrieved party of the date,
time and place of hearing before the City Council and at such hearing the aggrieved party may
present testimony and evidence in support of his/her position. The City Council will render an
opinion on this appeal within 10 days following the date of hearing.
159.13 IMPLEMENTATION OF CHAPTER. The City may implement the registration
and inspection of rental properties in stages in order to facilitate an orderly inspection of all
rental properties requiring rental permits.
159.14 VIOLATIONS. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
violation of the Charles City Code of Ordinances and subjecting the violator to the following
penalties:
1. Criminal Penalties. Any owner who violates provision of this chapter shall be
guilty of a simple misdemeanor.
2. Civil Penalties. Any violation of this Chapter or failure to perform any act or
duty or requirement of this chapter shall constitute a municipal infraction under
Chapter 4 of this Code of Ordinances.
3. Other Code Provisions. The foregoing provisions concerning enforcement of
this chapter are not exclusive but are cumulative to any other remedies available under
State law or local ordinance.
CHAPTER 158 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 816 -
[The next page is 825]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 825 -
CHAPTER 165
ZONING REGULATIONS
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 1013 entitled An Ordinance Establishing Comprehensive Zoning Regulations for
the City of Charles City, Iowa and Providing for the Administration, Enforcement, and
Amendment Thereof, in Accordance with the Provisions of Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, and for
the Repeal of Zoning Ordinance No. 548 and All Amendments Thereto, adopted January 3, 2005,
and amendments thereto are contained in a separate volume of this Code of Ordinances but have
been specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect. The following ordinances
have been adopted amending Ordinance No. 1013.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED ORDINANCE ADOPTED
1022 February 6, 2006 1116 April 2, 2018
1038 September 17, 2007 1118 July 16, 2018
1040 January 7, 2008 1120 October 15, 2018
1046 April 6, 2009 1121 October 15, 2018
1049 September 8, 2009 1122 October 15, 2018
1050 September 8, 2009 1123 January 7, 2019
1057 September 6, 2011 1124 February 4, 2019
1066 November 5, 2012 1130 June 3, 2019
1068 February 19, 2013
1069 February 19, 2013
1071 April 1, 2013
1072 April 1, 2013
1075 November 18, 2013
1076 March 17, 2014
1079 December 1, 2014
1080 April 6, 2015
1081 April 6, 2015
1083 July 20, 2015
1084 August 3, 2015
1086 September 21, 2015
1088 January 18, 2016
1091 June 20, 2016
1092 June 20, 2016
1107 August 7, 2017
1109 November 20, 2017
1112 November 20, 2017
1115 April 2, 2018
CHAPTER 159 LICENSING AND INSPECTION OF RENTAL
PROPERTIES
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 826 -
[The next page is 829]
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 829 -
CHAPTER 166
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
EDITOR’S NOTE
Ordinance No. 1014 entitled An Ordinance Providing Rules and Regulations for the Approval of
Plats, Subdivisions, Re-Subdivisions or Dedications in Charles City and Within Two Miles of the
Unincorporated Areas of Floyd County, Prescribing Minimum Standards for the Design Layout
and Development Thereof; Providing for the Preliminary and Final Approval or Disapproval
Thereof; Providing for the Enforcement and Penalties for the Violation Thereof, All for the
Purpose of Promoting the Adequacy, Safety and Efficiency of the Street and Road System; and
for the Purpose of Improving the Health, Safety and General Welfare of the Citizens; and
Repealing the Existing Ordinance and All Amendments Thereto, adopted January 3, 2005, and
amendments thereto are contained in a separate volume of this Code of Ordinances but have been
specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect. The following ordinances have
been adopted amending Ordinance No. 1014.
ORDINANCE ADOPTED ORDINANCE ADOPTED
1033 January 2, 2007
1074 October 7, 2013
1097 November 21, 2016
CHAPTER 165 ZONING REGULATIONS
CODE OF ORDINANCES, CHARLES CITY, IOWA
- 830 -

ZONING ORDINANCE
CHARLES CITY, IOWA
I
Approved by:
Planning and Zoning Commission
City Council
Effective:
11/01/04
1/03/05
1/18/05

ZONING ORDINANCE
CHARLES CITY, IOWA
2005
CITY COUNCIL
James A. Erb, Mayor
Dean Andrews
Andy Cerio
Jerry Joerger
Dennis Sanvig
Arvin Tibbitts
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Marilee Monroe
Ed Duroe
Norm Gerdes
Betty Held
Tom Keiser
Chuck LeMaster
Mike Schear
CITY STAFF
Don Lorsung, City Administrator
Jody Meyer, City Clerk
Ralph Smith, City Attorney
Tracy Meise, Project and Planning Coordinator
Dave Boehmer, Assistant Building Official
Roy Schwickerath, Fire Chief/Building Official
Dennis Willemssen, Project Engineer
Prepared by
VEENSTRA & KIMM, INC.
West Des Moines, Iowa
Mason City, Iowa

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION SUBJECT PAGE
PREAMBLE P-1
I TITLE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...................................................•....... 1-1
II INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS .................................................... 2-1
A. INTERPRETATION .....................................•............................•.. 2-1
B. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE .............................................................. 2-1
Ill RULES ANO DEFINITIONS ................................•......•............•............. 3-1
IV GENERAL PROVISIONS ....................................................................... 4-1
A. BUILDING ON LOT ............................................ ; ..........•.......... 4-1
B. ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS ..........•............•.•.. 4-1
C. PROHIBITED USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS ............................ 4-1
D. CONTROL OVER USE ............................................................... 4-1
E. CONTROL OVER BULK .............•............................................... 4-2
F. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES ........................................ 4-2
G. SPECIAL USES ....................••...................................................... 4-3
H. PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS - YARDS ..................................... 4-3
I. YARDS, GENERAL ...........................................................•......... 4-4
J. CONVERSION OF DWELLINGS ................................................ 4-5
K. STREET FRONTAGE, MINIMUM REQUIREMENT ...................... 4-5
L. VALIDITY OF EXISTING BUILDING PERMITS ..........•................. 4-6
M. HOME OCCUPATIONS .....•..•..........•.....•........................•.........• 4-6
N. PROHIBITED STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES ...•.................... 4-8
0. WATER AND SEWER REQUIREMENTS ...................................... 4-8
V NON-CONFORMING BUILDING STRUCTURES ANO USES ............... 5-1
A. USE OF BUILDING ...................................................................• 5-1
B. USE OF LAND ........................................................................... 5-1
C. USE OF EXISTING LOTS OF RECORD ....................................... 5-2
VI ZONING DISTRICTS ............................................................................ 6-1
A. EST AB LISH ME NT OF DISTRICTS ...............................•............... 6-1
B. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP ........................•..............................•... 6-1
C. BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS .................................................... 6-2
D. ANNEXED TERRITORY ............................................•................. 6-2
E. EXEMPTIONS ............................................................................. 6-3
VII UA - URBAN AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT ............................................ 7-1
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT ...............•................•.......................... 7-1
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES ..................................................•. 7-1
C. SPECIAL USES .......•.....................•....................•..•...................... 7-1
D. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES .............•................................... 7-2
E. BULK REGULATIONS ................................................................ 7-2
-1-
vm COS- CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT .......•................ 8-1
A. ST A TEMENT OF INTENT ........................................................... 8-1
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITIED USES ....................•......•........................ 8-1
C. SPECIAL USES .................................•.......................................... 8-1
D. PERMITIED ACCESSORY USES ................................................. 8-1
E. BULK REGULATIONS ................................................................ 8-1
IX R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT ......................................... 9-1
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT ........................................................... 9-1
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITIED USES ...........................•........................ 9-1
C. SPECIAL USES ............................................................................ 9-2
D. PERMITIED ACCESSORY USES ................................................. 9-3
E. BULK REGULATIONS ...................................•............................ 9-3
X R-2 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT ................................................. 10-1
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT ......................................................... 10-1
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITIED USES ....................•............................. 10-1
C. SPECIAL USES ................................................•......................... 10-1
D. PERMITIED ACCESSORY USES ...................•........................... 10-1
E. BULK REGULATIONS .............................................................. 10-2
XI R-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT ........................................ 11-1
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT .........................•...•.•...•.............•....... 11-1
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITIED USES .....................•............................ 11-1
C. SPECIAL USES ..........•..............................................................• 11-1
D. PERMITIED ACCESSORY USES ............•....•......••......•.............. 11-1
E. BULK REGULATIONS .......•................................•.................... 11-2
XII R-4 MOBILE HOME PARK RESIDENCE DISTRICT .............................. 12-1
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT .................•.............•......................... 12-1
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITIED USES AND STRUCTURES •................. 12-1
C. ACCESSORY USES ................................•.................................. 12-1
D. LOT AREA, LOT FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS ..... 12-2
E. PARKING .............................•................................................... 12-2
F. STREETS .........................................................•......................... 12-3
G. SKIRTING •...............•..................................•...........................• 12-3
H. TIE-DOWNS ....•.....................•.................................................. 12-3
I. FOUNDATION ........................................................................ 12-3
J. UTILITIES ..................................................................•.............. 12-3
K. PLAN REQUIRED .......................................•............................. 12-4
XIII R-5 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) RESIDENCE DISTRICT .. 13-1
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT ...•...................•................................. 13-1
B. PROCEDURE ........•.......•...............................•.............•............ 13-1
C. FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN ......•....•.........•............................ 13-1
D. PERMITIED PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY USES •................... 13-3
E. DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL. .................•....................... 13-4
-2-
XIV B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS ...................................................... 14-1
A. ST A TEMENT OF INTENT ................................•........................ 14-1
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITIED USES ..........................................•....... 14-1
C. SPECIAL USES .......................................................................... 14-2
D. PERMITIED ACCESSORY USES ..•............................................ 14-2
E. BULK REGULATIONS .............................................................. 14-3
XV B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT ................................................... 15-1
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT ......................................................... 15-1
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITIED USES .................................................. 15-1
C. SPECIAL USES ...•...................................................................... 15-4
D. PERMITIED ACCESSORY USES ............................................... 15-5
E. BULK REGULATIONS .............................................................. 15-5-
XVI B-3 SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT ...............................•..................... 16-1
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT ......................................................... 16-1
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITIED USES ...............•.....................•............ 16-1
C. SPECIAL USES ...........•.............................................................. 16-3
D. PERMITIED ACCESSORY USES ..............•...........•.................... 16-3
E. BULK REGULATIONS .............................................................. 16-4
XVII B-4 HIGHWAY SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT ................................... 17-1
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT ......................................................... 17-1
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITIED USES .................................................. 17-1
C. SPECIAL USES ..........................•............................................... 17-1
D. PERMITIED ACCESSORY USES ..•............................................ 17-1
E. BULK REGULATIONS .............................................................. 17-1
XVIII M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICT ..•..................................... 18-1
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT ......................................................... 18-1
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITIED USES .................................................. 18-1
C. SPECIAL USES .................................................•........................ 18-3
D. PERMITIED ACCESSORY USES ............................................... 18-4
E. BULK REGULATIONS .............................................................. 18-4
F. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS ........................................................ 18-5
XIX M-2 GENERAL MANUFACTURING DISTRICT ................................... 19-1
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT ......................................................... 19-1
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITIED USES .................................................. 19-1
C. SPECIAL USES ...............•.......................................................... 19-2
D. PERMITIED ACCESSORY USES ..............................•................ 19-3
E. BULK REGULATIONS .............................................................. 19-3
F. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS ........................................................ 19-4
XX F-1 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT (OVERLAY) DISTRICT .............•... 20-1
A. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF
FACT AND PURPOSE .............................................•..........•..... 20-1
B. GENERAL PROVISIONS ........................................................... 20-2
C. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS .............................. 20-4
D. FLOODWAY DISTRICT ............................................................ 20-4
E. FLOODWAY FRINGE DISTRICT .....................................•........ 20-6
F. ADMINISTRATION .........................................•...................... 20-10
G. NONCONFORMING USES ..........•..........•.............................. 20-17
-3-
H. DEFINITIONS ..........................................•.............................. 20-17
XXI EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS .............. 21-1
A. HEIGHT LIMITATIONS ............................................................ 21-1
B. COMMUNICATION TOWERS ................................................. 21-1
C. SATELLITE DISH AND ANTENNA ............................................ 21-7
D. WIND GENERATORS .............................................................. 21-8
E. WALLS AND FENCES - HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS .................... 21-12
XXll OFF-STREET LOADING AND PARKING ............................................ 22-1
A. PURPOSE AND SCOPE ..•......................................................... 22-1
B. JURISDICTION ......................................................................... 22-1
C. APPLICABILITY ........................................................................ 22-1
D. OFF-STREET PARKING ............................................................. 22-1
E. HANDICAPPED PARKING REGULATIONS .............................. 22-3
F. DESIGN STANDARDS ...........•.................•............................... 22-3
G. PROVISIONS FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL USES ............ 22-8
H. NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED ............................ 22-8
I. OFF-STREET LOADING REGULATIONS ................................ 22-10
J. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS ...................•............................ 22-11
xxm ADVERTISING AND SIGNS •.............................................................. 23-1
A. ST A TEMENT OF INTENT ..............•..................•....................... 23-1
B. GENERAL PROVISIONS .............................................•............. 23-1
C. GENERAL REGULATIONS .................................................•..... 23-3
D. DEFINITIONS .......................•.............................•..................... 23-4
E. PROHIBITED SIGNS ..............................•.•....................••......... 23-5
F. SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS ..................................... 23-6
G. OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS •......... 23-12
XXIV ADMINISTRATION .........•.................................................................. 24-1
A. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR .................................................... 24-1
B. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ...................................................... 24-4
XXV AMENDMENTS .................................................................................. 25-1
A. DISTRICT CHANGES AND ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS ....... 25-1
B. HEARING .................................................•............................... 25-1
C. PETITION .................•............................................................... 25-2
D. NOTICE ................................................................................... 25-2
E. WRITTEN PROTEST ................................................................. 25-2
F. NOTIFICATIONS ......................................................•.............. 25-3
G. FEES ...................•...........................•...........•............................. 25-3
H. DENIAL OF PETITION ...................................................•......... 25-3
XXVI SCHEDULE OF FEES ....................•...................................................... 26-1
ATTACHMENTS - ILLUSTRATIONS ..........................................................................• A-1
ZONING MAP .............•.....•.......................................................................... In Envelope
-4-
ORDINANCE NO. 1013
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING COMPREHENSIVE ZONING REGULATIONS FOR
THE CITY OF CHARLES CITY, IOWA AND PROVIDING FOR THE ADMINISTRATION,
ENFORCEMENT, AND AMENDMENT THEREOF, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER 414, CODE OF IOWA, AND FOR THE REPEAL OF ZONING
ORDINANCE NO. 548 AND All AMENDMENTS THERETO
WHEREAS, Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, empowers the City of Charles City to enact a zoning ordinance and to
provide for its administration, enforcement, and amendment, and
WHEREAS, the City Council deems it necessary for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, and general
welfare of the City of Charles City to enact such an ordinance, and
WHEREAS, the-City Council, pursuant.to" the provisions of Chapter 414, Code of Jowa, has appointed a
Planning and-Zonjng Commission to recommend the boundarieS of various zoning districts and appropriate
regulations to be enforced therein, and
WHEREAS, the Planning and Zoning Commission· has divided the Oty into districts and has prepared
regulations pertaining to such districts in accordance with an approved comprehensive plan, designed to preserve
the availability of agricultural land; to consider the protection of soil from wind and water erosion; to encourage
efficient urban development patterns; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic, and
other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the
overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to promote the conservation of energy
resources; to promote reasonable access to solar energy; and to establish adequate provisions for transportation,
water, sanitation, schools, paiks, and other pUblic requirements, and
WHEREAS, the Planning and Zoning Commission has given reasonable consideration to, among other things,
the charaaer of the districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, with a view to conserving the value
of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the municipality, and
WHEREAS, the Planning and Zonin& Commission has made a preliminary report and held a public hearing
thereon, and submitted its final report to the City Council, and
WHEREAS, the City Council has given due public notice of hearing relating to zoning districts, regulations,
and restrictions, and has held such public hearing, and
WHEREAS, all requirements of Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, with regard to the preparation of the report of the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the subsequent action of the City Council have been met;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE QTY COUNCIL OF THE QTY OF CHARLES QTY, IOWA;
SECTION 1. The Code of Ordinances of the Qty of Charles Qty, Iowa, as amended, is hereby amended by
repealing Zoning Ordinance No. 548 and all amendments thereto.
SECTION 2. The Code of Ordinances of the Qty of Charles Qty, Iowa is hereby amended by enacting in lieu
of the preceding, this Zoning Ordinance to include the following amendment ~ Ordinance No. 1015:
SECTION 3. That Section R·2 General Residence District is hereby amended by the addition of the following
Special Use:
1 O. Fitness Centers.
SECTION 4. After the adoption and publicaion of this Ordinance as provided by law, the Qty Oerk shall
record a copy of the ordinance in the Office of the Floyd County Recorder, Charles City, Iowa, and shall pay the
fees for the said recordings.
SECTION 5. REPEALER. All Ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict With the provisions of this ordinance
are hereby repealed.
SECTION 6. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision or part of this ordinance shall be adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional, such adjUdication shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any
section, provision or part thereof not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 7. WHEN EFFECTIVE. This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its final passage, approval
and publication as provided by law.
Passed and approved this 3rd day of January, 2005.
James A. Erb, Mayor
ATTEST:
Jody J. Meyer, Qty Clerk
CERTIFICATE
!, Jody J. Meyer, City Oerk of the City of Charles City, Iowa do hereby certify that the above and
foregoing Ordinance No. W13 was duly published In the Charles City Press, a newspaper published dally
In the City of Charles City, Iowa on the 1.§lb. day of ]anualY . 2005.
Jody J. Meyer, City Oerk

SECTION I
TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the "Zoning
Ordinance" of the City of Charles City, Iowa, and shall be referred to herein as "this
Ordinance".
1-1

SECTION II
INTERPRETATION OF STANDARDS
A. INTERPRETATION
1. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals and welfare.
2. Where the conditions imposed, by any provision of this Ordinance upon the
use of land or buildings or upon the bulk of buildings, are either more
restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other
provisions of this Ordinance, or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule
or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive or which
impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
3. This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other
private agreement, provided, that where the regulations of this Ordinance are
more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such
easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this
Ordinance shall govern. ·
4. No building, structure, or use not lawfully existing at the time of the adoption
of this Ordinance shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the
adoption of this ordinance and to the extent that and in any manner that, said
unlawful building, structure, or use is in conflict with the requirements of this
Ordinance, said building, structure, or use remains unlawful hereunder.
5. Any regulations adopted under the authority of this Ordinance which relates
to a structure, building, dam, obstruction, deposit, or excavation in or on the
floodplains of a river or stream, shall require prior approval of the Iowa
Department of Natural Resources and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to
establish, amend, supplement, change or modify such regulation or to grant a
variation or exception from it.
B. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council of the City of Charles City that
the several provisions of this Ordinance are severable, in accordance with the following:
1. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provision of this
Ordinance to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other provision of
this Ordinance not specifically included in said judgment, and
2-1
2. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of
any provision of this Ordinance to a particular property, building, or other
structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to
any other property, building or structure not specifically included in said
judgment.
2-2
f SECTION Ill
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted with the following
rules:
1. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
2. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present.
3. The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive.
4. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
5. Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this Ordinance,
its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof; and any word
appearing in parenthesis, directly after a word herein defined, shall be construed in
the same sense as that word.
6. All measured distances, expressed in feet, shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a
fraction is one-half foot or more the integral foot next above shall be taken.
7. The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Ordinance shall be
construed as here defined:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE - A subordinate structure or use which customarily is
incidental to that of the principal or special use of the premises. Customary residential
accessory uses include but are not limited to, tennis courts, swimming pools, detached
garages, garden houses, children's play houses, barbecue ovens, fire places, patios and
residential storage sheds. Garages or other accessory uses attached to the principal
structure shall be considered a part thereof and meet the requirements of the principal
structure.
ADULT -As used in this Ordinance refers to a person who has attained the age of eighteen
(18) years.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES-A business which as a part of or in the process of
delivering goods and services displays to its patrons specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas in printed form or through any form of photographic medium or by use
of male or female models. In reference to the above, the following definitions shall apply:
3-1
A. Specified sexual activities: any sexual contact, actual or simulated, either natural
or deviate, between two or more persons, or between a person and an animal, by
penetration of the penis into the vagina or anus, or by contact between a finger of
one person and the genitalia of another person or by use of artificial sexual organs or
substitute therefor in contact with the genitalia or anus.
B. Specified anatomical areas include the following: human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, and female breasts below a point immediately above the top
of the areola.
C. Substantial: more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the book, magazine,
film or video tape inventory are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
D. Adult Art or Adult Modeling Studio: an establishment or business which
provides the services of modeling for the purpose of viewing and/or reproducing the
human body wholly or partially in the nude by means of photography, painting,
sketching, drawing or otherwise; provided entrance to such establishment and such
services are available only to adults.
E. Adult Artist - Body Painting Studio: an establishment or business which provides
the services of applying paint or other substance whether transparent or
non-transparent to or on the human body when such body is wholly or partially
nude; provided entrance to such establishment and such services are available only
to adults.
F. Adult Bath House: an establishment or business which provides the services of
baths of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy; provided
entrance to such establishment and such services are available only to adults; and not
including such services provided by a medical practitioner or professional physical
therapist licensed by the State of Iowa.
G. Adult Book Store: an establishment or business having a substantial part of its
stock in trade, books, magazines, photographs, pictures and other periodicals which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined
herein and limited in sale of such sexual materials to adults.
H. Adult Cabaret: a cabaret which features go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers,
male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers.
I. Adult Motel: a motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas".
3-2
J. Adult Motion Picture Arcade: any place to which the public is permitted or
invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at
any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas".
K. Adult Motion Picture Theater: an enclosed building used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons
therein.
l. Adult Mini Motion Picture Theater: an enclosed building with a capacity for less
than 50 persons used for presenting motion pictures, slides or photographic
reproductions distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as
defined herein for observation by patrons therein.
M. Adult Massage: any method of treating the external parts of the human body by
rubbing, stroking, kneading, tapping or vibrating with the hand, other parts of the
body, or any instrument, for any consideration or gratuity.
N. Adult Massage Establishment: any establishment having a fixed place of business
where massages are administered for any form of consideration or gratuity, including
but not limited to, massage parlors, health clubs, sauna baths, and steam baths. This
definition shall not be construed to include an establishment employing (1) persons
licensed by the State of Iowa under the provisions of Chapters 148, 148A, 148B,
1509, 150A, 151, 152, 157 or 158 of the Iowa Code, when performing massage
services as a part of the profession or trade for which licensed; (2) persons performing
massage therapy or massage services under the direction of a person licensed as
described in (1) above; (3) persons performing massage therapy or massage services
upon a person pursuant to the written instruction or order of a licensed physician;
(4) nurses, aides, technicians and attendants at any hospital or health care facility
licensed pursuant to Chapter 135B, 135C or 145A of the Iowa Code, in the course of
their employment and under the supervision of the administrator thereof or of a
person licensed as described in (1) above; (5) an athletic coach or trainer (i) in any
accredited public or private secondary school, junior college, college or university, or
(ii) employed by a professional or semi-professional athletic teams or organization, in
the course of his or her employment as such coach or trainer. This definition shall
not be construed to include a volunteer fire department, a volunteer rescue squad or
a nonprofit organization operating a community center, swimming pool, tennis court,
or other educational, cultural, or recreational and athletic facilities, and facilities for
the welfare of the residents of the area.
3-3
0. Juice Bar: any establishment where alcoholic beverages are prohibited and
where for any form of consideration or gratuity, models, dancers, strippers, and
similar entertainers perform in nude or semi-nude for observation by patrons therein.
P. Model Studio: any establishment where for any form of consideration or
gratuity, models who display specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed,
or subject to lawful tactile conduct, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity,
or where for any form of consideration or gratuity, nude or semi-nude dancing,
readings, counseling sessions, body painting and other activities that present
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are
provided for observation by or communication to persons paying such consideration
or gratuity.
Q. Model: any person who for consideration or gratuity appears either nude or
semi-nude to be either viewed, photographed, sketched, drawn, sculptured; to dance;
to provide reading or counseling sessions; for body painting; to deliver a service or in
connection with the sale of merchandise; or to present materials distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
R. Nude Encounter Parlor means an establishment having a fixed place of business
where any person, therein engages in, conducts, or carries on, or permits to be
engaged in, conducted or carried on, any business of viewing any person or persons
or the actual encounter of any person or persons depicting, describing or relating to
"specified sexual activities" as defined herein.
S. Nude Photographic Parlor means an establishment having a fixed place of
business, where any person, association, firm or corporation therein engages in,
conducts, or carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on any
business of photographing any person or persons depicting, describing or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein.
T. Any one or more of the above or similar uses, which are customarily not open to
persons who have not attained the age of eighteen (18) years.
AGRICULTURE - The use of land for agriculture purposes including farming, dairying,
pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, aquatic farming, and animal
and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing
the produce: provided, however, that the operation of such accessory use shall be
secondary to that of normal agricultural activities.
AIRCRAFT - Any contrivance, now known or hereafter invented, for use in or designed for
navigation of or flight in the air.
3-4
AIRPORT (LANDING STRIP OR HELIPORn-An area of land which is used, or intended
for use, for the landing and take-off of aircraft; and any appurtenant areas which are used
or intended for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, together
with all airport buildings and facilities located thereon.
ALLEY - A right-of-way, with a width not exceeding 24 feet, which affords a secondary
means of access to abutting property.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL -Any change in the supporting members of a building such
as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL-A building or portion thereof designed or used for the care,
observation, or treatment of domestic animals.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENTIAL FACILITY - A building which provides housing with
services which may include, but are not limited to, health-related care, personal care, and
assistance with instrumental activities of daily living to six or more tenants in a physical
structure which provides a home-like environment, and which is either certified or
voluntarily accredited through the Department of Elder Affairs as provided in
Chapter 231 C, Code of Iowa.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION (GAS ST A TION) - A building or premises used for
dispensing or offering for sale at retail, any automotive fuels or oils, or having pumps and
storage tanks therefore; or elsewhere battery, tire or any similar service is rendered and
where vehicles are not parked for purposes of inspection and sale.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD - A place where two or more motor vehicles not in
running condition, or the parts thereof, are stored in the open and are not being restored to
operation, or any land, building or structure used for the wrecking or storing of such
automobiles or the parts thereof.
BASEMENT - A portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than half
its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. (See
Attachment C.)
BED AND BREAKFAST HOME - A private residence which provides lodging and meals for
guests, in which the host or hostess resides and in which no more than two guest families
are lodged at the same time and which, while it may advertise and accept reservations,
does not hold itself out to the public to be a restaurant, hotel or motel, does not require
reservations and serves food only to overnight guests.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN - A building having nine or fewer guest rooms, equipped,
used, advertised, or presented to the public as an inn, hotel, motel, motor inn, or place
where sleeping accommodations are furnished and food service for the general public is
allowed.
3-5
BILLBOARD - An outdoor advertising sign for a business, commodity, or service located or
offered elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign or billboard is located. An
off-premise outdoor advertising sign is synonymous with billboard.
BLOCK- A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of one or more streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shore lines of
waterways, or corporate boundary lines.
BOARDING OR LODGING HOUSE - A building other than a hotel where, for
compensation and by pre-arrangement for definite periods, lodging and/or meals, are
provided for three (3) or more persons, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons. Individual
cooking facilities are not provided.
BUFFER - An area of land used to visibly separate one use from another or to shield or
block noise, lights, or other nuisances.
BUILDABLE AREA- The area in between front and rear yards, and side yards.
BUILDING -Any structure which is built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to
the land.
BUILDING ACCESSORY - A subordinate building or portion of a principal building, the
use of which is incidental to that of the principal building and customary in connection
with that use.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED - A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space or from other buildings or other structures, by a permanent roof and
by exterior walls or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance or exit
doors.
BUILDING DETACHED - A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT - The vertical distance measured from the established curb level to the
highest point of the under side of the ceiling beams, in the case of a flat roof; to the deck
line of a mansard roof; and to the mean level of the under side of rafters between the eaves
and the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. Chimneys, spires, towers, elevator
penthouses, tanks, and similar projections other than signs shall not be included in
calculating the height.
BUILDING PRINCIPAL-A non-accessory building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which it is located.
3-6
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL -A building arranged, designed, used or intended to be used for
residential occupancy by one or more families. Residential buildings include but are not
limited to the following types: (1) single-family detached dwellings, (2) two-family
dwellings, (3) multiple-family dwellings, and (4) rows of one or two-family attached
dwellings developed initially under single ownership or control.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY - A building not designed to be permanently located in the
place where it is, or where it is intended to be placed or affixed.
BULK - A composite characteristic of a given building as located upon a given lot - not
definable as a single quantity but involving all of these characteristics: (1) size and height
of building, (2) location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines, streets, or to
other buildings (3) gross floor area of the building in relation to lot area (floor area ratio),
(4) all open spaces allocated to the building, and (5) amount of lot area provided per
dwelling unit
BULK STATIONS - Distributing stations commonly known as bulk or tank stations, used for
the storage and distribution of flammable liquids, or liquefied petroleum products where
the aggregate capacity of all storage tanks is more than six thousand (6,000) gallons.
Bulk station does not include retail sales.
BUSINESS - An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time, attention,
labor and materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or where services are
offered for compensation.
CAMPGROUND, COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK-Any premises
where two (2) or more camping units are parked/placed for camping purposes, or any
premises used or set apart for supplying to the public, camping space for two (2) or more
camping units for camping purposes, which include any buildings, structures, vehicles, or
enclosure used or intended wholly or in part for the accommodation of transient campers.
CAMPING UNIT -Any recreational vehicle or other vehicle, tent, or other movable shelter
used for camping purposes.
CAR WASH - A building or portion thereof where automobiles are washed; using a
conveyor, blower, steam-cleaning equipment, or other mechanical device of
production-line nature.
CELLAR - The portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and half or more
than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height is below the average grade of the adjoining
ground. (See Attachment C.)
CHURCH OR PLACE OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP-An institution that people regularly
attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings, and other activities. The term
"church" shall not carry a secular connotation and shall include buildings in which the
religious services of any denomination are held.
3-7
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL-A building or buildings in which physicians, dentists or
physicians and dentists, and allied professional assistants are associated for the purpose of
carrying on their professions.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE - A non-profit association of persons who are bona-fide
members paying annual dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building or portion thereof,
the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests. The affairs and
management of such private dub or lodge are conducted by a Board of Directors,
Executive Committee, or similar body chosen by the members of their annual meetings,
and such affairs may include the serving of food and meals on such premises, provided
dining room space and kitchen facilities are available.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT - A development designed to concentrate buildings in specific
areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space,
and the preservation of environmentally sensitive areas.
COCKTAIL LOUNGE -Any place of business, other than a "night club", located in and
accessory to a hotel, motel, or restaurant, where liquor, beer or wine is sold for
consumption on the premises, where music or other entertainment is limited to a piano bar
or other one person performance.
COMMERCIAL FEEDLOT - Feeding, raising or breeding of livestock, poultry or other
animals in confined feedlots, dry lots, pens, cages, ponds, or buildings when not in
conjunction with a farming operation.
COMMISSION - The Planning and Zoning Commission of Charles City, Iowa.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The Comprehensive Plan for City of Charles City, Iowa which
sets forth the City's long range plans for land use and transportation management and
development policies to guide the City's growth and on which the City's zoning
regulations shall be based.
CONDOMINIUM-An estate in real property as regulated by Chapter 499B of the Code of
Iowa consisting of an undivided interest in common with other purchasers in a portion of a
parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a building, such as an
apartment. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions
of such real property.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT - An easement granting a right or interest in real property
that is appropriate to retaining land or water areas predominantly in their natural, scenic,
open, wooded, or topographic condition, retaining such areas as suitable habitat for fish,
plants, or wildlife; or maintaining existing slopes and land use.
3-8
I
r CONVENIENCE STORE - Any retail establishment offering for sale food products,
household items and other goods commonly found in grocery stores, as well as retail gas
sales, and having a gross floor area of more than 1,200 square feet but less than
5,000 square feet.
CORRECTIONAL PLACEMENT RESIDENCE -A residential facility occupied by three or
more persons who have been convicted of public offenses and who have been released to
such facility during any period of (a) probation, or (b) work release while serving a
sentence in a correctional institution, or (c) assignment to the judicial district department of
correctional services after receiving a deferred sentence.
CURB LEVEL - The level of the established curb in front of a building or structure,
measured at the center of such front. Where no curb elevation has been established, the
curb level shall be deemed to be the established level of the center line of a street surface
in frontof a building or structure, measured at the center line of such front.
DAY NURSERY OR NURSERY SCHOOLS - Any private agency, institution, establishment
or place which provides supplemental parental care and/or educational work, other than
lodging overnight, for six (6) or more unrelated children of preschool age, for
compensation.
DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY OR DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED -A disability of a
person which has continued or can be expected to continue indefinitely and which is one
of the following:
(1) Attributable to mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy or autism.
(2) Attributable to any other condition found to be closely related to mental retardation
because the condition results in impairment of general intellectual functioning or
adaptive behavior similar to that of mentally retarded persons or requires treatment
and services similar to those required for the persons.
(3) Attributable to dyslexia resulting from a disability described in either subparagraph
(1) or (2).
(4) Attributable to a mental or nervous disorder.
(5) Attributable to a brain injury.
DISTRICT -A part or parts of the City of Charles City in which regulations governing the
use of buildings or premises or the height and location of buildings are uniform.
DISTRICT, OVERLAY - An overlay district which acts in conjunction with the underlying
zoning district.
DOG KENNEL-A place where four or more dogs, over four months of age, are boarded,
bred and/or offered for sale.
3-9
DRIVE-IN FACILITY -An establishment that, by design of physical facilities or by service or
packaging procedures, permits customers to receive a service or obtain a product while
remaining in a motor vehicle or to be entertained while remaining in a motor vehicle.
DWELLING - A residential building, or portion thereof, but not including hotels, motels,
rooming houses, tourist houses, trailers or mobile homes except as hereinafter provided.
DWELLING, CONDOMINIUM-A multiple dwelling as defined herein whereby the title to
each dwelling unit is held in separate ownership, and the real estate on which the units are
located is held in common ownership solely by the owners of the units, with each owner
having an undivided interest in the common real estate.
DWELLING UNIT -A group of rooms, constituting all or part of a dwelling, which are
arranged, designed, used, or intended for use exclusively as living quarters for one family
and an aggregate of not more than two roomers or boarders, and which include complete
kitchen facilities permanently installed.
DWELLING, A TI ACHED (GROUP, ROW AND TOWNHOUSES) - A residential building
joined horizontally to another residential building at one or more sides by a party wall or
walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED - A residential building entirely surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY - A residential building containing one dwelling unit, that is
detached.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED-A dwelling designed for or occupied by
one family only which is erected on a separate lot and is joined to another such residence
on one side only by a wall located on the lot line and which has yards on the remaining
sides.
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY (DUPLEX) -A residential building containing two dwelling
units, either attached or detached.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY (APARTMENT BUILDINGS) -A building or portion
thereof containing three or more dwelling units.
EASEMENT - A grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or persons of the
use of a tract of land for a specific purpose(s).
3-10
EFFICIENCY UNIT -A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room together with
bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets and/or dining alcove directly off the principal room,
provided such total unit is less than 600 square feet in area.
FAMILY - One or more persons each related to the other by blood, marriage, or adoption,
or a group of not more than four persons not all so related, together with his or their
domestic servants or gratuitous guests, maintaining a common household in a dwelling
unit.
FAMILY HOME -A community-based residential home which is located as a residential
care facility under Chapter 135C of the Code of Iowa, or as a child foster care facility
under Chapter 237 of the Code of Iowa to provide room and boarn, personal care,
habilitation services, and supervision in a family environment exclusively for not more
than eight developmentally disabled persons and any necessary support personnel.
However, family home does not mean an individual foster care family home licensed
under Chapter 237 of the Code of Iowa.
FARM - A tract of land which is used for the growing of vegetables, fruits, and grains, or
for the raising of domestic poultry and animals. The term "farming" includes the operating
of such area for one or more of the above uses and for such necessary accessory uses as
treating or storing the produce, provided, however, that any such accessory uses shall be
secondary to the normal farming activities and that such accessory uses do not include the
commercial feeding of animals or poultry in confined lots or buildings.
FARM DWELLING -A dwelling located on a farm and occupied by the owner or operator
of the farm on which it is located.
FEEDLOT -Any parcel of land or premises on which the principal use is the concentrated
feeding within a confined area of cattle, hogs or sheep. The term does not include areas
which are used for the raising of crops or other vegetation, and upon which livestock are
allowed to graze or feed.
FENCE, SOLID - A fence, including solid entrance and exit gates, which effectively
conceals from viewers in or on adjoining properties and streets, materials stored and
operations conducted behind it.
FLOODPLAIN - Those areas contiguous to a river, stream or other drainage course which
have been inundated by floodwaters or where inundation by floodwaters can be expected
to occur at a frequency of at least once in one hundred (100) years.
FLOODWA Y - The channel of a river, stream, or watercourse and those portions of the
flood plain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the
flood water.
3-11
FLOODWA Y FRINGE - Those portions of the floodplain, other than the floodway, which
can be filled, levee, or otherwise obstructed without causing substantially higher flood
levels or flood velocities within the floodway.
FLOOR AREA (BUILDING) - For the purpose of determining the floor area ratio,
conversion of existing buildings, and maximum size of business establishments: The sum
of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors, including the basement floor but not
including the cellar floor, of the building; measured from the exterior faces of the exterior
walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings.
The floor area of a building shall also include elevator shafts and stair wells on each floor;
floor space used for mechanical equipment, except equipment, open or enclosed, located
on the roof; penthouses; attic space having head-room of seven feet ten inches or more;
interior balconies and mezzanines; enclosed porches; and floor area devoted to accessory
uses provided that any space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not be included
in floor area.
FLOOR AREA (PARKING) - For the purpose of determining off-street parking and off-street
loading requirements: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the
building, or portion thereof, devoted to such use, including accessory storage areas located
within selling or working space, such as counters, racks, or closets and any basement floor
area devoted to retailing activities, to the production of processing of goods or to business
or professional offices.
However, floor area for purposes of determining off-street parking spaces shall not include:
floor area devoted primarily to storage purposes (except as otherwise noted herein) floor
areas devoted to off-street parking or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps and
maneuvering space; or basement floor area other than area devoted to retailing activities,
to the production or processing of goods, or to business or professional offices.
FLOOR AREA, GROUND- The area covered by a principal building measured from the
exterior faces of exterior walls, including utility rooms but excluding open porches or open
car ports, garages and terraces.
FLOOR AREA RA TIO - The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross area of a
building or buildings by the net site area on which such building or buildings are located.
FOSTER CHILD CARE- Care and education of not more than five (5) children unrelated to
the residents by blood or adoption.
3-12
GARAGE, PRIVATE - An accessory building or an accessory portion of the principal
building which is intended and used for storing the private passenger vehicles of the family
or families resident upon the premises, and in which no business, service or industry
connected directly or indirectly with automotive vehicles is carried on, provided that not
more than one-half of the space may be rented for the private vehicles of persons not
resident on the premises, except that all the space in a garage of one or two-car capacity
may be so rented.
GARAGE, MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR-Any building where automotive vehicles are
painted, repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed and/or stored for compensation.
GARAGE, PUBLIC -A building designed and used for the storage of automotive vehicles
operated as a business enterprise with a service charge or fee being paid to the owner or
operator for the parking or storage of privately owned vehicles.
GARAGE, STORAGE -A building or premises used for housing, only of motor vehicles,
pursuant to previous arrangements and not by transients; and where no equipment, parts,
fuel, grease or oil are sold and vehicles are not rebuilt, serviced, repaired, hired nor sold.
GRAIN ELEVATOR-A structure or group of structures whose purpose is limited to the
receiving, processing, storage, drying and transporting of bulk grain.
GREENHOUSE -A building or accessory structure constructed chiefly of glass or other
translucent material, which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other
tender plants.
GUEST, PERMANENT - A person who occupies, or has the right to occupy, a hotel or
apartment hotel accommodation for a period of 30 days or more.
HEALTH CLUB - Means an establishment providing physical fitness facilities and services
to the public for a fee, including but not limited to: game courts, exercise equipment,
exercise areas, running tracks, swimming pools, physical fitness maintenance and weight
control services and instructors, locker rooms, saunas and associated retail shop intended
for members of club only.
HOME OCCUPATION - A business, profession, occupation or trade conducted for gain or
support as an accessory use entirely within a dwelling, or a structure, which is incidental
and secondary to the use of such building for dwelling purposes and which does not
change the essential residential character of such building.
HOMEOWNERS OR PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATION - A formally constituted
non-profit association or corporation made up of the property owners and/or residents of a
definitive area; who collectively may take permanent responsibility for costs and upkeep of
commonly owned or designated community property.
3-13
HOSPITAL- Means an institution licensed by state law providing health services primarily
for human in-patient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related
facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central services
facilities, and staff offices that are an integral part of the facilities.
HOTEL-A building which provides a common entrance, lobby, halls and stairways and in
which lodging is offered with or without meals to transient guests.
HOTEL, APARTMENT -A hotel in which at least 50 percent of the hotel accommodations
are for occupancy by permanent guests.
JUNK YARD - An open area where waste, used or second-hand materials are bought, sold,
exchanged, stored, baled, packed, dissembled or handled, including, but not limited to,
scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. The term includes an
auto-wrecking yard but does not include uses carried on entirely within enclosed
buildings.
KENNEL- Any premises on which four (4) or more dogs, or four (4) or more cats, or any
combination thereof exceeding four (4) in number, which are six (6) months or older, are
kept; or the keeping of dogs or cats, regardless of number, for sale, breeding, boarding or
treatment purposes.
LAUNDROMAT, SELF-SERVICE -A business that provides home-type washing, drying
and/or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
LODGING ROOM - A room rented as sleeping and living quarters but without cooking
facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a suite of rooms without cooking
facilities, each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one
lodging room.
LOT - A parcel of land (whether legally described or subdivided as one or more lots or
parts of lots) located within a single block, occupied by, or intended for occupancy by one
principal building or principal use, and having its principal frontage upon a street; together
with any accessory buildings and such open spaces as are required by this Ordinance.
LOT AREA - The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through front,
side and rear lot lines.
LOT CORNER - A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersecting
streets or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a single street, the interior angle of
which does not exceed 135 degrees.
LOT DEPTH - The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line
of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
3-14
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE (THROUGH) -A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines
along two more or less parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a through lot both
street lines shall be deemed front lot lines but in the case of two or more contiguous
through lots, there shall be a common front lot line.
LOT LINE - A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate ownership,
except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting street or alley, the lot line
shall be deemed to be the street or alley line or the inside of the sidewalk.
LOT LINE, FRONT - That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated street
lot line as the front lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR- That boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or is
approximately, parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less than ten feet in length,
or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten feet
in length within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance from, the front lot line.
LOT.LINE,-SIDE -Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD - A lot which is a part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the
County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of
which has been so recorded.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER - A corner lot where the street-side lot line is substantially a
continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its rear.
LOT, WIDTH - The width of a lot measured at the building line and at right angles to its
depth. On corner lot, the width of the lot shall be that which has the least dimension.
MANUFACTURED HOME - A factory-built single-family structure, which is manufactured
or constructed under the authority of 42 U.S.C. Section 5403, Federal Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards, and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but
which is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved
other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site, and which does not have
permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A mobile home is not a
manufactured home unless it has been converted to real property and is taxed as a site
built dwelling. For the purposes of these regulations, manufactured home shall be
considered the same as any site built single-family detached dwelling.
MARINA- A facility for storing, servicing, fueling, berthing, and securing and launching of
private pleasure water craft that may include the sale of fuel and incidental supplies for the
boat owners, crews, and guests.
3-15
MINI-WAREHOUSE -A building or group of buildings not more than one (1) story or
twenty feet (20') in height and not having any dimension greater than one hundred fifty
feet (150') per building, containing varying sizes of individualized, compartmentalized,
and controlled access stalls or lockers for the dead storage of customer's goods or wares,
excluding junk, explosive, or flammable materials, and other noxious or dangerous
materials, including, if any, caretaker or supervisors' quarters as an accessory use. No
business activities other than rental of storage units shall be conducted on the premises.
MOBILE HOME - Any vehicle which at any time was used or maintained for use as a
conveyance upon highways or public streets, or waterways, and duly licensed as such; and
so designed and constructed as to permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling unit or sleeping
place for one (1) or more persons.
A. This definition shall refer to and include portable and potentially portable
contrivances used or intended to be used generally for living and sleeping quarters
and which is capable of being moved by its own power, towed, or transported by
another vehicle.
B. This definition shall also include and apply to such vehicles or structures that
are located on a permanent or temporary foundation but shall not include mobile
homes converted to real estate as defined herein.
MOBILE HOME PARK - Shall mean any site, lot, field or tract of land with two or more
mobile homes, manufactured homes, or modular homes, or a combination of any of these
homes are placed on developed spaces and operated as a for-profit enterprise with water,
sewer or septic, and electrical services available.
MODULAR HOME - Factory-built structure which is manufactured to be used as a place of
human habitation, is constructed to comply with the Iowa state building code for modular
factory-built structures, and must display the seal issued by the state building code
commissioner. If a modular home is placed in a mobile home park, the home is subject to
the annual tax as required by Section 435.22, Code of Iowa. If a modular home is placed
outside a mobile home park, the home shall be considered real property and is to be
assessed and taxed as real estate.
MOTEL - An establishment consisting of a group of living or sleeping accommodations
with individual bathrooms, designed for use by transients, and having not more than
50 percent of the living and sleeping accommodations occupied by, or designed for
occupancy by, persons other than transient automobile tourists. A motel furnishes
customary hotel service and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service
and the use and upkeep of furniture.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL - A building in which freight by motor truck is assembled
and sorted for routing in intrastate or interstate shipment.
NET SITE AREA- The area inside of lot lines, exclusive of streets and alleys.
3-16
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE -Any structure or building lawfully constructed prior
to the effective date of this Ordinance (or amendment thereto) which does not conform
with the bulk regulations of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE - The lawful use of any structure or land that was established
prior to the effective date of this Ordinance (or amendment thereto) which does not
conform with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
NOXIOUS MA TIER - Material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by
chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the psychological,
social or economic well-being of human beings.
OFF-PREMISE ADVERTISING - Any sign, insignia, or other advertising as defined in this
ordinance, which appears other than on the premise of the advertiser.
OPEN SALES LOT - Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling
second-hand passenger cars and/or trucks, farm machinery and equipment or for the
storing of same prior to sale.
PARKING AREA OR LOT, OFF-STREET - An area which includes the parking space plus
the maneuvering space required for the parking of motor vehicles. Space for maneuvering
incidental to parking or unparking, shall not encroach upon any public right-of-way.
Off-street parking requirements will be considered to be met only when actual spaces
meeting the zoning requirements are provided and maintained, improved in a manner
appropriate to the circumstances of the case, and in accordance with all ordinances and
regulations of the City.
PARKING SPACE - An area of not less than 9 feet by 19 feet on a lot and/or within a
building intended for the use of parking of a personal vehicle. This term is used
interchangeably with parking stall.
PERMITIED USE - A use by right which is authorized in each zoning district.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT -A development held in unified ownership or control
which includes two or more principal buildings for which the specific requirements of a
given district may be modified.
PORCH, UNENCLOSED -A roofed projection which has no more than fifty percent (50%)
of each outside wall area enclosed by a building or siding material other than meshed
screens.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING - A building in which the principal use of the lot on which the
building is located is conducted.
3-17
PRINCIPAL USE - A principal use is the main use of the premises permitted outright in a
particular zoning district as distinguished from a special use.
PRIVATE ROAD-A right-of-way open to vehicular ingress and egress established as a
separate tract for the common use and benefit of certain, adjacent properties. This
definition shall not apply to individual driveways.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE -A vehicular type camping unit primarily designed as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its own
motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The basic entities are: travel
trailer, camping or tent trailer, truck camper, and motor home or coach.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SITE - A plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park
intended for the accommodation of two or more recreational vehicles, tents, or other
individual camping units on a temporary basis.
REDEVELOPMENT AREA - For purposes of this Ordinance the Redevelopment Area is
defined to include the area designated as Riverside Tax Increment Financing (TIF) District,
(R-36(c)) Disaster Area).
RESEARCH LABORATORY - A building or group of buildings in which are located
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation but no facilities for
the manufacture of products for sale.
RESIDENTIAL- Regularly used by its occupants as a permanent place of abode, which is
made one's home as opposed to one's place of business and which has housekeeping and
cooking facilities for its occupants only.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY - Any institution, place, building or agency providing for a
period exceeding twenty-four consecutive hours accommodation, board, personal
assistance and other essential daily living activities to three or more individuals, not related
to the administrator or owner thereof within the third degree of consanguinity, who by
reason of illness, disease, or physical or mental infirmity are unable to sufficiently or
properly care for themselves but who do not require the services of a registered or licensed
practical nurse except on an emergency basis.
REST AU RANT - An establishment that prepares and serves food and beverages to persons
for immediate consumption.
A. Dine-in: a restaurant where the patron consumes foods and beverages while
seated at tables or counters located on the premises.
B. Drive-in: a restaurant that delivers prepared food and/or beverages to
patrons in motor vehicles, regardless of whether or not it also serves prepared food
and/or beverages to customers who are not in motor vehicles, for consumption on or
off the premises.
3-18
C. Carry-out: a restaurant which prepares food and/or beverages which
are packaged and delivered to the patrons or are picked up at the establishment by
the customer, there is no consumption of food or beverages on the premises by
patrons.
REST HOME (NURSING HOME) - A private home for the care of children or the aged or
infirm, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such a home does not contain
equipment for surgical care or for the treatment of disease injury, nor does it provide care
for maternity or mental illness.
ROOMING HOUSE (TOURIST HOME) - A residential building, or portion thereof,
containing lodging rooms which accommodates three or more persons who are not
members of the keeper's family. Lodging or meals or both are provided for compensation
on a weekly or monthly basis.
SATELLITE ANTENNA - SATELLITE DISH -Any accessory structure capable of receiving,
for the sole benefit of the principal use, radio or television signals from a transmitter relay
located in planetary orbit.
SERVICE STATION -Any building or premises used for the retail sale of liquefied
petroleum products for the propulsion of motor vehicles, and including such products as
kerosene, fuel oil, packaged naphtha, lubricants, tires, batteries, antifreeze, motor vehicle
accessories and other items customarily associated with the sale of such products; for the
rendering of service and making of adjustments and replacements to motor vehicles, and
the washing, waxing, and polishing of motor vehicles, as incidental to other services
rendered; and the making of repairs to motor vehicles except of a major type. Repairs of a
major type are defined to be spray painting, body, fender, clutch, transmission, differential,
axle, spring, and frame repairs, major overhauling of engines requiring the removal of
engine cylinder head or crankcase pan; repairs to radiators requiring the removal thereof;
or complete recapping or retreading of tires. A service station is not a commercial garage
nor a body or fender shop.
SETBACK - The required minimum horizontal distance between the front, rear or side lines
of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building respectively for a particular zoning
district. Setback may also be referred to as required yard.
SHOPPING CENTER-A grouping of retail businesses and service uses within a single
master planned complex of one or more buildings with common parking facilities, access
and open space.
STORY - That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the
surface of the floor next above; or if there is no floor above, the space between the floor
and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a story.
3-19
STORY-HALF -A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof
decking and wall not more than three feet above the top floor level, and in which space
not more than 60 percent of the floor area is completed for principal or accessory uses.
STREET (AVENUE, PLACE, ROAD, TERRACE OR PARKWAY) -A right-of-way, not less
than 24 feet wide, which affords a primary means of access to abutting property.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS - Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the
supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls or partitions,
columns, beams or girders; or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
STRUCTURE - Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent
location on the ground; or attached to something having a permanent location on the
ground. An advertising or business sign or other advertising device, if detached or
projecting, shall be construed to be a separate structure.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This
includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement
of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA- Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs,
or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves when
such system is either external to or attached to the exterior of a structure.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER-A tower, pole, or similar structure that supports a
telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purposes above ground in a fixed
location, freestanding, guyed, or on a building or other structure.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA- Any antenna in the shape of a
shallow dish, and the appurtenant equipment, used for the reception of communications
(television or otherwise) from orbiting satellites or ground transmitters. This definition
includes those satellite dishes less than three feet in diameter.
3-20
TOWNHOUSE - A dwelling unit which is attached horizontally, and not vertically to one
or more other dwelling units, wherein the land or lot beneath each dwelling is individually
owned by the owner of the dwelling. A townhouse subdivision shall have common
elements which are specified in or determined under the rules and regulations set forth by
recorded covenants. Covenants for a townhouse subdivision shall establish the guidelines
for maintenance of common elements and permit free movement through common areas
by members of the homeowners association (council of co-owners) to assure access to the
structural exterior of each townhouse unit by the individual unit owner.
TV ANTENNA - RADIO ANTENNA-Any accessory structure capable of receiving, for the
sole benefit of the principal use, radio or television signals.
USE - The purpose of activity for which the land, or building thereon, is designed,
arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY - A subordinate use or structure, such as a private garage, which is
clearly and customarily incidental to the principal use of a building or premises; and which
is located on the same lot as the principal building or use, except for such accessory
parking facilities as are specifically authorized to be located elsewhere.
USE, NON-CONFORMING - Any use of a building or premises which on the effective
date of this ordinance does not, even though lawfully established, comply with all of the
applicable use regulations of the zoning district in which such building or premises shall
be located.
USE, PRINCIPAL - The main use of land or building as distinguished from a subordinate or
accessory use.
WAREHOUSE -A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
YARD - An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest
level to the sky, except as otherwise permitted in this Ordinance. A yard extends along a
lot line and at right angles to such line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations
for the district in which such lot is located.
YARD, FRONT - A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line between side lot
lines.
YARD, REAR- The portion of the yard on the same lot with the principal building, located
between the rear line of the building and the rear lot line and extending for the full width
of the lot; provided that in those locations where an alley is platted in the rear of the lots,
one-half of the width of the platted alley may be included in the rear yard requirements.
YARD, SIDE -A yard extending along a side lot line between the front and rear yards.
3-21
ZERO LOT LINE - The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more of
the building's sides rests directly on a lot line.
ZONING CERTIFICATE/BUILDING PERMIT - A written statement issued by the Zoning
Administrator authorizing buildings, structures or uses consistent with the terms of the
Zoning Ordinance and for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing its provisions.
WIND GENERA TORS - A structure used primarily to harness wind energy including such
devices as wind generators, windmills, wind turbines and similar devices.
3-22
SECTION IV
GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. BUILDING ON LOT
In any district where single family dwellings are allowed, every single-family dwelling
hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot, and there shall not be
more than one principal building on one lot.
B. ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS
The following uses of land or buildings are permitted in the districts indicated hereinafter
under the conditions specified in this Ordinance.
1. Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this Ordinance.
2. Permitted uses as designated in various districts in this Ordinance.
3. Special Uses.
C. PROHIBITED USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS
No building or tract of land shall be devoted to any use other than one which is specified
as a permitted, or special use in the zoning district in which such building or land is
located. However, where a building permit for a building or structure has been issued in
accordance with law prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and where that
construction has been begun within one year of such effective date and diligently
prosecuted to completion, said building or structure may be completed in accordance
with approved plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued and further may
upon completion be occupied under a certificate of occupancy by the uses for which
originally designated.
D. CONTROL OVER USE
No building or premises shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part
thereof or structure shall be erected, raised, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, or
altered, except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which
it is located; except that in Residence Districts, a lot the ownership of which was of
record, that does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance as to area and width, may
be used for single-family residence purposes, provided it qualifies under all other
provisions.
4-1
E. CONTROL OVER BULK
All new buildings shall conform to the bulk regulations established herein for the district
in which each building is located. Further, no existing building shall be enlarged,
reconstructed, structurally altered, converted or relocated in such a manner as to conflict
or to further conflict with the bulk regulations of this Ordinance for the district in which
such building shall be located.
F. ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES
1. Accessory structures and uses shall be compatible with the principal use and
shall not be established prior to the establishment of the principal use.
2. No accessory structure, unless it is structurally a part of the principal building
and unless it conforms with requirements of accessory buildings for special
uses, shall be erected or altered at, nor moved to, a location within six (6) feet
of the nearest wall of the principal building, nor within the required area in
front or side yard of the lot, as set forth for the district, and in residence
districts an accessory building in a rear yard shall be not less than three (3)
feet from any property line, unless otherwise provided in this Section.
3. No accessory structure shall encroach upon that side yard of a corner lot
which is adjacent to the street, nor upon that side yard of a reversed corner lot
which is adjacent to the street, nor upon the rear yard of a through lot.
4. No accessory structure shall exceed the heightof 25 feet unless greater height
permitted as an accessory to business and manufacturing uses.
5. No accessory building or structure shall be erected in any yard other than a
rear yard and it shall occupy no more than thirty percent (30%) of a required
rear yard, nor be more than one thousand (1,000) square feet in area for
single- or two-family uses on lots less than one (1) acre in size. However, this
regulation shall not be interpreted to prohibit the construction of a four
hundred forty (440) square foot garage on a minimum rear yard. Only one
accessory structure as a garage may be erected on lots with single family
dwellings. No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until
construction of the principal building has been actually commenced, and no
accessory building shall be used unless the principal building on the lot is
used.
6. Any building for accessory use connected to the principal building shall be
considered a part of the said principal building and must meet the space
requirements thereof. Accessory buildings may be erected separately from
and six (6) feet distant into the side yard and rear yard from the principal
building, however, they shall meet the space requirements of the principal
building
4-2
G. SPECIAL USES
1. To provide for the location of certain uses herein after specified which
are deemed desirable for the public welfare within a given district or
districts, but which might have an adverse effect upon nearby properties
and upon the character and future development of the district in which
they are located, a classification of Special Uses is hereby established.
2. Where a use exists on the date of the adoption of this Ordinance and it is
classified as a Special Use it shall be considered to be a legal Special Use.
Additions or alterations to existing buildings or land improvements for
expansion of legal Special Uses shall not extend beyond the area included in
the ownership existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, and they
shall be subject to yard and floor area ratio requirements set forth in this
Ordinance for permitted uses in the districts in which they are located.
H. PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS- YARDS
for the purpose of this Ordinance, the following shall not be considered as obstructions
when located in the yards indicated:
1. In Any Yards: Chimneys, overhanging roof eaves, pillars, open terraces,
plants, porches, and awnings adjoining the principal building, if they do not
exceed ten percent of the depth of the yard and ornamental light standards
and flagpoles.
On any lot bounded by the street lines of intersecting streets, no fence or
structure shall be erected that will obstruct the line of sight between the
centerline of the intersecting streets when viewed across the triangular portion
of the front or side yard determined by measuring 25 feet along each street
line from the lot corner formed by the intersecting street lines; said line of
sight to be viewed from one street center line to the other of a height of three
feet above the respective established centerline grade at a point from which
viewed and at the point to which viewed. On streets containing horizontal
changes of direction no fence or structure shall be erected on any abutting
property which will obstruct clear vision of the roadway for a distance of
200 feet as measured along the centerline of the street. On all other front
yards obstruction may be permitted not to exceed three feet in height.
4-3
2. In Side Yards: Air conditioning units, open accessory off-street parking spaces
and in a side yard abutting a street as permitted in this Ordinance. fences six
feet high if they do not extend into any portion of the front yard, hedges not
to exceed six feet in height must be set back one foot from the sidewalk on
the outside side yard and two feet from the lot line in inside side yards.
Where in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator the public safety and
welfare is not otherwise involved and where not prohibited by other
provisions of this Ordinance neighbors by agreement may provide for fences
and hedges in excess of the heights permitted herein. In the event of any
disagreement, the provisions of this Ordinance shall immediately become in
fu II force and effect.
3. In Rear Yards: Air conditioning units, private garages, detached; open
accessory off-street parking spaces, accessory sheds, tool rooms or other
similar accessory buildings; recreational and laundry-drying equipment; arbors
and trellises. fences not to exceed six feet in height may be erected on the
rear lot line, hedges must be set back one foot from the rear lot line, fences on
side lot lines of rear yards not to exceed six feet in height may be erected up
to the side lot lines; hedges not to exceed six feet in height must be set back
one foot from the side lot line of rear yards abutting a sidewalk and two feet
back from inside lot lines of rear yards. Where in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator the public safety and welfare is not otherwise involved, and
where not prohibited by other provisions of this Ordinance neighbors by
agreement may provide for fences and hedges in excess of the heights
permitted herein. In the event of any disagreement, the provisions of this
Ordinance shall immediately become of full force and effect.
I. YARDS, GENERAL
1. The minimum yard space required for one structure shall not again be
considered as yard space for another adjoining structure.
2. No lot shall be reduced in area so that the yards or other open spaces
become less than required by this Ordinance.
4-4
3. In any "R" District, there shall be a minimum front yard required as
stated in the yard requirements for that particular district. However,
where lots comprising fifty (50) percent or more of the frontage within a
block length or within two hundred (200) feet of either side lot line,
when not within a recorded block excluding frontage zoned other than
residential, are developed with buildings at a greater or lesser setback,
the front yard requirement shall be the average of these building
setbacks and the minimum front yard required for the undeveloped lots.
In computing the average setback, buildings located on reverse corner
lots or entirely on the rear half of lots shall not be counted. The
required front yard as computed herein need not exceed fifty (50) feet in
any case. These requirements are applicable to both developed and
undeveloped lots subject to improvements.
4. On a vacant through lot the front-yard setback requirements shall apply to
both of its street-lot lines and either street-lot lines may be the front lot
line; except that where two or more through lots are contiguous and the
lot line of one such lot has been duly established as the front-lot line, the
same street-lot line shall thereafter be deemed to be the front-lot line of all
such contiguous lots.
J. CONVERSION OF DWELLINGS
The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any dwelling so as to
accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or families, shall be permitted only
within a district in which a new building for similar occupancy would be permitted under
this Ordinance, and only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements
governing new construction in such district with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per
dwelling unit, dimensions of yards and other open spaces, and off-street parking. Each
conversion shall be subject also to such further requirements as may be specified
hereinafter applying to such district.
K. STREET FRONTAGE, MINIMUM REQUIREMENT
No lot created after the adoption of these regulations shall contain any building used as a
single-family or two-family dwelling unless it abuts at least forty (40) feet on a street or has
a permanent exclusive non-obstructed easement of access not less than 20 (twenty) feet
wide to a public street. For multiple family dwelling, the minimum width of lot or
easement shall not be less than 50 (fifty) feet wide to a public street.
4-5
l. VALIDITY OF EXISTING BUILDING PERMITS
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layout, plans,
construction, size or designated use of any development, building, structure or part
thereof, for which official approvals and required building permits have been granted
before the enactment of this Ordinance, the construction of which, conforming with such
plans, shall have been started prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and completion
thereof carried on in a normal manner within the subsequent six-month period, and not
discontinued until completion, except for reasons beyond the building's control.
M. HOME OCCUPATIONS
Subject to the limitations of this section, any home occupation that is customarily
incidental to the principal use of a building as a dwelling shall be permitted in any
dwelling unit. Any question of whether a particular use is permitted as a home
occupation, as provided herein, shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator pursuant
to the provisions of this Ordinance. The regulations of this section are designed to protect
and maintain the residential character of established neighborhoods while recognizing that
certain professional and limited business activities have traditionally been carried on in the
home. This section recognizes that, when properly limited and regulated, such activities
can take place in a residential structure without changing the character of either the
neighborhood or the structure.
1. Use Limitations. In addition to all of the use limitations applicable to the district in
which it is located, no home occupation shall be permitted unless it complies with
the following restrictions:
(a) One employee may be employed in a home occupation business besides the
occupant.
(b) No more than 25%, including storage area, of no more than one floor of the
dwelling unit, shall be devoted to the home occupation. No stock of goods
shall be displayed or sold on the premises in excess of storage area available.
Storage is not permitted in garage, but must be within 25% of the area of no
more than one floor of the dwelling unit.
(c) No alteration of the principal residential building shall be made which
changes the character and appearance thereof as a dwelling.
(d) The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the principal
dwelling unit, and in no event shall such use be apparent from any public
way.
(e) There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment or materials used in the home
occupation.
4-6
L
(f) Not more than one commercially licensed vehicle used in connection with
any home occupation shall be parked on the property.
(g) No mechanical, electrical or other equipment which produces noise,
electrical or magnetic interference, vibration, heat, glare or other nuisance
outside the residence shall be permitted.
(h) No home occupation shall be permitted which is noxious, offensive or
hazardous by reason of vehicular traffic, generation or emission of noise,
vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, odorous matter, heat,
humidity, glare, refuse, radiation or other harmful, objectionable emissions.
(i) For permitted home occupation, an unilluminated sign not to exceed four
(4) square feet in area nor closer than eight (8) feet to any side or rear lot line
or closer than four (4) feet to the front lot line shall advertise the presence or
conduct of home occupation. No sign shall be placed in the parking.
(j) There shall be no off-premise signs.
2. Home Occupations Permitted. Customary home occupations include, but are not
limited to, the following list of occupations; provided, however, that each such
home occupation shall be subject to the use limitations set out in Section IV.N.1.
(a) Providing instruction to not more than four students at a time.
(b) Office facilities for accountants, architects, brokers, doctors, dentists,
engineers, lawyers, insurance agents and real estate agents.
(c) Office Facilities for ministers, priests and rabbis.
(d) Office facilities for salespersons, sales representatives and manufacturer's
representatives when no retail or wholesale sales are made or transacted on
the premises.
(e) Studio of an artist, photographer, craftsperson, writer or composer.
(f) Homebound employment of a physically, mentally or emotionally
handicapped person who is unable to work away from home by reason of his
or her disability.
(g) Shop of a beautician, barber, hair stylist, dressmaker or tailor.
4-7
N. PROHIBITED STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES
1. Outdoor storage of motor vehicles not currently licensed shall be prohibited
in all zoning districts, except motor vehicles held for sale by a licensed motor
vehicle dealer at the dealer's place of business in a zoning district where
motor vehicle sales are permitted and auto wrecking yards (as permitted).
0. WATER AND SEWER REQUIREMENTS
In any district in which residences are permitted, except the UA District, and where
neither public water supply nor public sanitary sewer is available, the minimum lot area
and frontage requirements shall be as follows:
1. Lot area - one acre (43,560 square feet): lot width at building line - one
hundred fifty (150) feet, provided, however, that were a public water supply
system is available these requirements shall be twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet and one hundred (100) feet, respectively.
2. The above requirements shall not apply in subdivision developments
providing common private water supply and sewage collection and disposal
systems which have been approved by the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources.
3. In all districts where a proposed building, structure or use will involve the use
of sewage facilities, and public sewer and/or water is not available, the
sewage disposal system and domestic water supply shall comply with all of
the requirements and standards of the Floyd County Board of Health.
4-8
SECTION V
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING STRUCTURES AND USES
A. USE OF BUILDING
The lawfully existing non-conforming use of part or all of a building or structure, all or
substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a use permitted
in the district in which it is located, may be continued subject to the following provisions:
1. The non-conforming use of part of a building or structure, all or substantially
all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a use permitted
in the district in which it is located, shall not be expanded or extended into
any other portion of such building or structure.
2. If a non-conforming use of a building or structure, all or substantially all of
which building or structure is designed or intended for a use permitted in the
district in which it is located, is discontinued for a period of twelve
consecutive months, it shall not be renewed; and any subsequent use of the
building or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the district in
which the premises are located.
3. No non-conforming use shall be changed to another non-conforming use
when such non-conforming use is located in a building or structure all or
substantially all of which building or structure is designed or intended for a
permitted use.
4. Any structure devoted to a use made non-conforming by this Ordinance that is
destroyed by any means to an extent of fifty (50) percent or more of its
assessed value cost at the time of destruction, exclusive of the foundations,
shall not be reconstructed and used as before such happening. If the structure
be less than fifty (50) percent destroyed above the foundation, it may be
reconstructed and used as before provided it be done within six (6) months of
such happening, and be built of like or similar materials.
B. USE OF LAND
The nonconforming use of land not involving a structure or building, or in connection
with which any building or structure thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use
of the land, may be continued subject to the following provisions:
1. A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded or extended beyond the
area included in the ownership existing at the time it became nonconforming.
5-1
2. If the nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a period of six
consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be renewed, and any subsequent
use of the land shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the
land is located.
3. The nonconforming use of land shall not be changed to any other use except
to a use permitted in the district in which the land is located.
C. USE OF EXISTING LOTS OF RECORD
In any district where dwellings are permitted, a single family dwelling may be located on
any lot of record as of the effective date of this Ordinance irrespective of its area or width;
provided however:
1. The sum of the side yard widths of any such lot or plot shall not be less than
twenty (20) percent of the width of the lot, but in no case less than ten (10)
percent of the width of the lot or five (5) feet, whichever is greater, for any
one side yard.
2. The depth of the rear yard of any such lot need not exceed twenty (20)
percent of the depth of the lot, but in no case less than twenty (20) feet.
3. Where such a lot is a corner lot, the width of side yard on the longer street
side of the corner lot shall not be less than seventy-five (75) percent of the
front yard required on the lot to the rear if there is a reverse frontage of the
corner lot.
5-2
SECTION VI
ZONING DISTRICTS
A. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance, the City of
Charles City is hereby divided into the following districts:
UA -
cos -
R-1
R-2
R-3
R-4
R-5
B-1
B-2
B-3
B-4
M-1 -
M-2 -
F-1
Urban Agriculture District
Conservation and Open Space District
Single-Family Residence District
General Residence District
Multi-Family Residence District
Mobile Home Park Residence District
Planned Unit Development (PUD) Residence District
Local Business District
General Business District
Service Business District
Highway Service Business District
Light Manufacturing District
General Manufacturing District
Floodplain (Overlay) District
B. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
The Official Zoning Map is identified by the signature of the Mayor under the following
words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Zoning
Ordinance 1013 of the City of Charles City adopted on the 3rd day of January, 20 05."
If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and Chapter 414 Code of Iowa as
amended, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed in the Official
Zoning Map, copies of such changes shall be filed with the Official Zoning Map promptly
after the amendment has been approved by the City Council.
Regardless of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time to time
be made or published, the Official Zoning Map, together with amending ordinances, shall
be the final authority as the current zoning status of land in the City.
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to
interpret because of use, the City Council may adopt a new Official Zoning Map which
shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct
drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such
correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning ordinance or any
subsequent amendment thereof. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the
signature of the Mayor attested by the City Clerk, under the following words: "This is to
certify that the Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map
adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) by the City of Charles City, Iowa.
6-1
C. BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS
When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown
on the Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets,
highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines.
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following corporate limits shall be
construed as following corporate limits.
4. Boundaries indicated as approximately following section lines, quarter
section lines, or quarter-quarter section lines shall be construed as following
such lines.
5. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be
midway between the main tracks.
6. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow
such shoe lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be
construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or
other bodies of water shall. be construed to follow such centerlines.
7. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in
subsections 1 through 6 above shall be so construed. Distances not
specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the
scale of the map.
8. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with
those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not
covered by subsections 1 through 6 above, the Board of Adjustment shall
interpret the district boundaries.
D. ANNEXED TERRITORY
Any additions to the incorporated area of the city, resulting from disconnection by the
county or otherwise, shall be automatically classified as the UA - Urban Agricultural
District until Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council have studied the area
and adopted a Zoning District or districts for the area in accordance with Section XXV of
this Ordinance.
6-2
E. EXEMPTIONS
The following uses are permitted in any district: poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits,
vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves or any other similar distributing installations for public
utilities provided that installation conforms with requirements of authorities having
jurisdiction.
6-3

SECTION VII
UA- URBAN AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The "UA" District is intended and designed to preserve or encourage continuation of
agricultural uses, to encourage urban development occur contiguous to existing developed
areas and to prevent premature urban development not adequately served by public
facilities and/or services.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the use of structure or land listed in this section shall be permitted in the UA District.
1. Agriculture and the usual agricultural buildings and structures, including a
farm dwelling.
2. Cemeteries, including mausoleums.
3. Nurseries and greenhouses; provided that any heating plant shall be a distance of
at least two hundred (200) feet from any dwelling and from any adjoining lot
lines and further that no retail sales are conducted from a store erected or
maintained on the premises.
4. Public and private schools and other educational institutions.
5. Public parks and golf courses.
6. Specialty farming, including tree farms, orchards and aquiculture.
C. SPECIAL USES
Special uses as authorized by the Board of Adjustment after public hearing.
1. Commercial outdoor recreation.
2. Communication towers.
3. Kennels provided that at least a separation distance of 200 feet from any
dwelling and from all property lines be provided.
4. Manufacture, storage and/or sales of agriculture products.
5. One mobile home on a farm if used by the owner or any employee thereof.
7-1
6. Stables, private and public and riding academies and clubs, and other
structures must be located at least two hundred (200) feet from all boundary
lines of the property on which located.
7. Utility and public service uses including transit and public transportation
facilities to include shelters, terminals, parking areas and service buildings.
8. Wind generators.
D. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
1. Uses of land and structure customarily incidental and subordinate to one of the
permitted principal uses, unless otherwise excluded.
2. Seasonal roadside stand for display and sale of agricultural products produced on
the property.
E. BULK REGULATIONS
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to modifications
included in this Ordinance.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Lot Area:
Lot Width:
front Yard:
Rear Yard:
Side Yards:
Maximum Height:
Maximum Number
of Stories:
Off-Street Parking
and Loading:
Signs:
farm dwellings: 10 Acres.
No minimum required for other permitted uses.
farm dwellings: 600 feet.
All other uses - no minimum.
50 feet.
50 feet.
50 feet minimum on each side.
Principal structure - 35 feet.
farm buildings other than farm dwelling- no height
limitations.
Principal structure - 3 stories.
Accessory structure - 2 stories.
Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of
Section XXll.
Signs shall be provided in accordance with provisions of
Section XXlll.
7-2
SECTION VIII
COS - CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The Conservation and Open Space District is intended to preserve and protect the heavily
wooded areas, the stream banks and floodplains of the City of Charles City planning area
from adverse future development. It is also intended that development of the floodplains
be restricted to minimize the danger to life and property which results from development
undertaken without full realization of such danger.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the use of structures or land listed in this section shall be permitted in the COS -
Conservation and Open Space District.
1. Forests and forestry preserves.
2. Publicly owned parks, nature areas, playgrounds, golf courses and similar
non-commercial recreational uses.
3. Any use erected or maintained by a public agency.
C. SPECIAL USES
Special uses as authorized by the Board of Adjustment after public hearing.
1. Public utility structures except those constructed by the City of Charles City.
D. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
1. Uses of land and structures customarily incidental and subordinate to one of
the permitted principal uses, unless otherwise excluded.
E. BULK REGULATIONS
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to modifications
included in this Ordinance.
8-1
1. Front Yard:
2. Side Yards:
3. Rear Yard:
4. Maximum Height:
5. Maximum Number
of Stories:
6. Off-Street Parking
and Loading:
7. Signs:
50 feet.
50 feet.
50 feet.
Principal structure - 35 feet.
Accessory structure - 25 feet.
Principal structure - 3 stories.
Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of
Section XXll.
Signs shall be provided in accordance with provisions of
Section XXlll.
8-2
SECTION IX
R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The R -1 District is intended and designed to provide for certain low-density residential
· areas now developed with single-family dwellings and areas where similar residential
development is designated in the Comprehensive Plan to occur.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the uses of structures or land listed in this section shall be permitted in the R-1
Single-Family Residence District.
1. Churches, chapels, temples, and similar places of worship, provided that all
principal buildings be set back a minimum of thirty feet from all property
lines.
2. Elder family homes as permitted by and as limited by Section 414.29 and
Chapter 135K, Code of Iowa.
3. Family homes as permitted by and as limited by Section 414.22, Code of
Iowa.
4. Homes for persons with physical disabilities as permitted by and as limited
by Section 414.30, Code of Iowa.
5. Private noncommercial recreational areas, including country clubs,
swimming pools, tennis clubs, and golf courses but not including
commercially-operated driving ranges or miniature golf courses.
6. Public and parochial schools, elementary and secondary, and other
educational institutions having an established current curricu I um the same
as ordinarily given in the public schools, provided that all principal
buildings be set back a minimum of thirty feet from all property lines.
7. Publicly owned parks, playgrounds, golf courses, and recreation areas.
8. Single-family detached dwellings.
9-1
C. SPECIAL USES
Special uses as authorized by the Board of Adjustment after Public Hearing.
1. Armories.
2. Art galleries and museums.
3. Assisted living residential facility.
4. Cemeteries.
5. Colleges and universities and uses accessory and incidental thereto - but not
colleges or trade schools operated for profit.
6. Convents, monasteries and seminaries.
7. · Day nurseries and nursery schools.
8. Dwelling attached of not more than two dwelling units.
9. Hospitals and nursing homes.
10. Libraries.
11. Nurseries and truck gardens, provided that no livestock, poultry or pigeons
are kept and that no offensive odors or dusts are created; and further that no
retail sales are conducted from a store erected or maintained on the
premises.
12. Utility and public service uses, including:
(a) Bus turnarounds - off-street.
(b) Electric substations.
(c) Fire stations.
(d) Police stations.
(e) Telephone exchanges and substations.
(f} Transit and public transportation facilities - including shelters,
terminals, parking areas and service buildings.
(g) Water filtration plants, pumping stations and reservoirs.
9-2
D. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
1. Home occupations as permitted in and as limited by Section IV.
2. One board or sign not to exceed fifty square feet in area per street frontage,
not to exceed two frontages referring to the construction, lease, hire, or sale
of a building, premises, or subdivision lots, which sign shall refer to
property on which the sign is located, and shall be removed as soon as the
premises are sold or leased or construction is completed.
3. Parabolic or dish-type antennas in accordance with the requirements of
Section XXI.
4. Private garage or carport, swimming pools, and tennis courts.
5. Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, which
buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of the
construction work.
6. Temporary use of a dwelling structure within a new subdivision as a job
office and real estate office for the subject subdivision, which use shall
terminate upon completion or abandonment of the project.
7. Uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to one of
the permitted principal uses, unless otherwise excluded.
E. BULK REGULATIONS
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the modifications
contained in this Ordinance.
1. Lot Area:
2. Lot Width:
3. Front Yard:
4. Rear Yard:
9,000 square feet.
5,000 square feet for semi-detached dwelling.
10,000 square feet for two family dwelling.
7,500 square feet in Redevelopment Area.
75 feet.
80 feet for two family dwelling.
60 feet in Redevelopment Area.
40 feet for semi-detached dwelling.
30 feet.
25 feet in Redevelopment Area.
40 feet.
30 feet in Redevelopment Area.
9-3
5. Side Yards: Minimum on each side - 10 feet.
Churches and schools - 40 feet on each side.
Redevelopment Area - 6 feet on one side.
- 16 feet combined width.
6. Maximum Height: Principal building - 35 feet.
Accessory building - 25 feet.
7. Maximum Number
of Stories: Principal building- 3 stories.
Accessory building - 2 stories.
8. Total Floor Area
Ratio: 0.4.
9. Minimum Floor
Area: 1,400 square feet (footprint of main floor).
10. Minimum Building
Width: The minimum dimension of the main body of the
principal building shall not be less than 24 feet.
11. Off-Street Parking
and loading: Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of
Section XXll.
12. Signs: Signs shall be provided in accordance with provisions of
Section XXlll.
9-4
SECTION X
R-2 GENERAL RESIDENCE DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The R-2 General Residence District is intended to provide for certain medium-density
residential areas now developed or being redeveloped and areas where similar residential
development is designated in the Comprehensive Plan.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the uses of structures or land listed in this section shall be permitted in the R-2
District.
1. Any use permitted in the R-1 District.
C. SPECIAL USES
Special uses as authorized by Board of Adjustment after public hearing.
1. Any special use listed in the R-1 District
2. Bed and breakfast home.
3. Bed and breakfast inn.
4. Campgrounds.
5. Clubs and lodges - religious and fraternal.
6. Conversion of single family dwellings into not more than four dwelling units
in accordance with the bulk regulations of this section.
7. Funeral homes.
8. Multi-family dwellings not to exceed four units.
9. Sheltered workshops.
10. Fitness centers.
D. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses permitted in and as limited in the R-1 District.
10-1
E. BULK REGULATIONS
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the modifications
contained in this Ordinance.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
lot Area:
lot Area per
Dwelling Unit:
lot Width:
Front Yard:
Rear Yard:
Side Yard:
Maximum Height:
Maximum Number
of Stories:
9. Total Floor Area
Ratio:
10.
11.
12.
13.
Minimum Floor
Area:
Minimum Building
Width:
Off-Street Parking
and Loading:
Signs:
Single family dwelling - 7,500 square feet.
Single family semi-detached dwelling - 4,000 square feet.
Two family dwelling - 8,000 square feet.
Row housing units, multiple dwellings of up to 3 units or
other permitted use - 10,000 square feet.
Row housing and multiple dwellings - 2,000 square feet
for each unit above 3.
60 feet.
50 feet in Redevelopment Area.
40 feet for semi-detached dwelling.
100 feet for multi-family dwelling.
25 feet.
30 feet.
Minimum on one side - 6 feet, and combined width -
16 feet.
Principal building - 35 feet.
Accessory building - 25 feet.
Principal building - 3 stories.
Accessory building- 2 stories.
0.4 single family dwelling.
0.5 two family and multi-family dwelling.
1,000 square feet (footprint of main floor).
The minimum dimension of the main body of the
principal building shall not be less than twenty-four feet.
Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of
Section XXll.
Signs shall be provided in accordance with provisions of
Section XXlll.
10-2
SECTION XI
R-3 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The R-3 Multi-Family Residence District is intended to provide for certain high-density
residential areas now developed with multi-family dwellings and areas where similar
residential development is designated in the Comprehensive Plan to occur.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the use of structures or land listed in this section shall be permitted in the R-3
District.
1. Any use permitted in the R-2 District.
2. Boarding and lodging houses.
3. College dormitories, fraternity and sorority houses.
4. Family homes in excess of eight residents.
5. Multi-family dwellings, including row dwellings or townhouses, apartments
and condominium dwellings.
6. Private clubs, lodges, or veterans organizations, excepting those holding a
beer permit or liquor license.
C. SPECIAL USES
Special uses as authorized by the Board of Adjustment after a public hearing.
1. Law offices, dentist offices, doctor offices (including osteopath and
chiropractor offices), real estate offices, insurance offices, small loan offices,
and other business office activities compatible with an R-3 Multi-family
Resident District.
2. Special uses allowed in R-2 District.
D. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses permitted in and as listed in the R-2 District.
11-1
E. BULK REGULATIONS
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the modifications
contained in this Ordinance.
1. lot Area: Single family dwelling - 7,500 square feet.
Two family dwelling - 8,000 square feet.
Multi-family dwelling or other permitted use -
10,000 square feet for first three units.
2. lot Area per
Dwelling Unit: Row housing and multiple dwellings - 2,000 square feet
for each unit above 3.
3. lot Width: Single family dwelling - 50 feet.
Two family dwelling- 60 feet.
Multi-family dwelling and other permitted uses -
100 feet.
In Redevelopment Area - 50 feet.
4. Front Yard: 25 feet.
5. Rear Yard: 30 feet.
6. Side Yard: Minimum on one side - 6 feet, and combined width -
16 feet.
7. Maximum Height: Principal building- 35 feet.
Accessory building - 25 feet.
8. Maximum Number
of Stories: Principal building - 3 stories.
Accessory building - 2 stories.
9. Total Floor Area
Ratio: 0.5.
10. Minimum Floor
Area: 1,000 square feet (footprint of main floor).
11. Minimum Building
Width: The minimum dimension of the main body of the
principal building shall not be less than twenty-four feet.
12. Off-Street Parking
and loading: Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of
Section XXll.
13. Signs: Signs shall be provided in accordance with provisions of
Section XXlll.
11-2
SECTION XII
R-4 MOBILE HOME PARK RESIDENCE DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The "R-4" District is intended and designed to provide for certain high density residential
areas of the City, which by reason of their design and location, are suitable for mobile
home development and which are compatible with surrounding residential areas.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES
Following are the principal uses and structures permitted in the R-4 Mobile Home Park
Residential District:
Two types of mobile home parks are permitted: Type 1 - Mobile Home Park, which
provides rental spaces for manufactured homes, and Type 2 - Mobile Home Subdivision
Park, which permits lots to be individually owned.
1. Type 1 - Mobile Home Park- Mobile home parks, in accordance with
regulations of the State of Iowa and minimum requirements contained herein,
but not including mobile home sales and display areas. No part of any park
shall be used for non-residential purposes except such uses that are required
for the direct servicing and well being of park residents and for the
management and maintenance of the park. This shall in no way prohibit the
sale by a resident owner of a mobile home located on a mobile home space
and connected to the pertinent utilities.
2. Type 2 - Modular and Manufactured Home Subdivision Park- Modular and
manufactured home subdivision parks in accordance with Charles City
subdivision ordinance and state statutes regarding platting provisions. Mobile
homes and manufactured homes converted to real estate, and modular homes
are permitted in modular and manufactured subdivision parks. The lots are
individually owned, and streets, utilities and open space not part of individual
lots are owned in common and subject to bylaws of a homeowner's
association.
C. ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses may include garages and storage buildings, common facility
service buildings which provide laundry facilities, accessory supplies, vending
machines, etc.; also park management buildings, maintenance buildings,
community buildings, and other uses of a similar nature. Common facility
service buildings shall be located within the central "park" area, and shall be
restricted to the use of the park occupants and their guests.
12-1
2. One (1) permanent identification sign shall be permitted at any entrance to a
mobile home park. Such sign shall be of ornamental metal, stone, masonry or
other permanent material and shall include only the name of such mobile
home park. Such sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in
surface area.
D. LOT AREA, LOT FRONTAGE AND YARD REQUIREMENTS
1. The minimum area proposed for a mobile home park and mobile home
subdivision park shall have at least ten (10) acres of gross development area.
The maximum density allowed for the gross development area shall be seven
(7) mobile home units per gross acre.
2. Each yard abutting on a public street shall be considered a front yard and shall
be a minimum of fifty (50) feet. All other yards, whether side or rear, shall be
a minimum of thirty (30) feet when adjacent to any other R District and fifty
(50) feet when adjacent to a B or M District.
3. The individual mobile home lot shall contain not less than four thousand five
hundred (4,500) square feet in area with a minimum depth of ninety (90) feet.
Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth
measured from the edge of the surfaced street to the closest point of the lower
face of the mobile home. Side and rear yards shall be provided and
maintained so as to provide a separation at the nearest point between mobile
homes, and other buildings and structures on adjoining lots of at least
twenty-five (25) feet but not less than ten (10) feet to any side and fifteen
(15) feet to rear yard. The construction of entrance-ways, rooms, breezeways,
or other integral parts to the existing mobile home shall meet all other
regulations.
4. A minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet for each lot shall be
provided for one (1) or more recreation areas which shall be easily accessible
to all park residents. The required recreational area shall be computed in
addition to the minimum lot area specified herein.
5. Storm shelter for residents shall be required within mobile home park.
E. PARKING
1. A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces for each mobile home shall be
provided. All parking areas shall be constructed with a portland cement
concrete or asphaltic concrete surface.
12-2
f. STREETS
1. The entrance road connecting the park streets with a public street shall have a
minimum road pavement width of thirty-one (31) feet, measured back to back
of curbs. All interior streets shall not be less than twenty-eight (28) feet in
width, measured back to back of curbs. All streets shall be constructed with
either hot mix asphalt or portland cement concrete with concrete curb and
gutter to provide for drainage. Pavement shall be constructed to City
subdivision regulations and standard specifications.
G. SKIRTING
1. Skirting of a permanent type material and construction shall be installed prior
to occupancy to enclose the open space between the bottom of a mobile
home floor and the grade level of the mobile home stand. The skirting shall
be maintained in an attractive manner consistent with the exterior of the
mobile home and to preserve the appearance of the mobile home park.
H. TIE-DOWNS
1. Ti~owns or anchors shall be provided on every mobile home space as
required by the Charles City building code and manufacturer's requirements.
Each ti~own or anchor must be able to sustain a minimum tensile strength
as required by the State Building Code.
I. FOUNDATION
1. foundations shall be provided in accordance with manufacturer's
requirements and State Building Code and Charles City building code.
J. UTILITIES
1. Sewer and water facilities shall be provided for each mobile home park space
or lot in accordance with the requirements of the Charles City subdivision
regulations and standard specifications.
12-3
K. PLAN REQUIRED
1. Each petition for a change to the R-4 zoning classification submitted to the
City shall be accompanied by a mobile home park plan. Said plan shall show
each mobile home space, the water, electrical and sewer lines serving each
mobile home space, the location of garbage cans, water hydrants, service
buildings, driveways, walkways, recreation areas, required yards, parking
facilities, lighting and landscaping. Public water and sanitary sewer to the
mobile home park site will be connected to the City utility systems, subject to
approval of the City Council. Stormwater management of the park including
storm sewer system and detention facilities will be provided based on City
subdivision standards. The plan shall be considered by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and the City Council, who may approve or disapprove
said plan or require such changes thereto, as are deemed necessary to
effectuate the intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance. All changes to the
R-4 classification shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section
XXIV of the Zoning Ordinance.
12-4
SECTION XIII
R-5 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) RESIDENCE DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The "R-5" District is intended and designed to provide a means for the development of
large tracts of ground on a unit basis, allowing greater flexibility and diversification of land
uses and building locations than the conventional single lot method provided in other
sections of this Ordinance. It is the intent of this section that the basic principles of good
land use planning including an orderly and proper relationship between various types of
uses be maintained and that the sound zoning standards as set forth in this Ordinance and
statutes concerning population density, adequate light and air, recreation and open space,
and building coverage be preserved.
B. PROCEDURE
1. The owner or owners of any tract of land comprising an area of not less than
five (5) acres, may submit to the City Council a petition requesting a change to
the "R-5" zoning district classification. The petition shall be accompanied by
a plan for the use and development of the entire tract of land. The
development plan shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for study and report. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the
conformity of the proposed development with the standards of the
Comprehensive Plan, and with recognized principles of architectural design,
land use planning and landscape architecture. The Commission may approve
the plan as submitted or, before approval, may require that the applicant
modify, alter, adjust, or amend the plan as the Commission deems necessary
to the end that it preserves the intent and purpose of this Ordinance to
promote public health, safety, morals and general welfare. The development
plan as approved by the Commission shall then be reported to the City
Council, whereupon the City Council may approve or disapprove said plan as
reported or may require such changes thereto as it deems necessary to
effectuate the intent and purpose of this Ordinance.
C. FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN
The final development plan shall be accompanied by the following required documents:
1. If the proposed development includes common land which will not be
dedicated to the City, and the proposed development will not be held in
single ownership, proposed by-laws of a homeowner's association fully
defining the functions, responsibilities and operating procedures of the
association. The proposed by-laws shall include but not be limited to
provisions:
13-1
(a) automatically extending membership in the association to all owners of
dwelling units within the development;
(b) limiting the uses of the common property to those permitted by the final
development;
(c) granting to each owner of a dwelling unit within the development the
right to the use and enjoyment of the common property;
(d) placing the responsibility for operation and maintenance of the common
property in the association;
(e) giving every owner of a dwelling unit voting rights in the association;
and
(f) if the development will combine rental and for sale dwelling units,
stating the relationship between the renters and the homeowner's
associations and the rights renters shall have to the use of the common
land.
2. Performance bond which shall insure to the City that the dedicated public
streets, utilities, and other common development facilities shall be completed
by the developer within the time specified in the final development plan.
3. Covenant to run with the land, in favor of the City and all persons having a
proprietary interest in any portion of the development premises, that the
owner of the land or successors in interest will maintain all interior streets,
parking areas, sidewalks, common land, parks and plantings which have not
been dedicated to the City in compliance with the City ordinances.
4. Any additional agreements required by the Council at the time of preliminary
plat approval.
5. A final plat shall be submitted with each stage of the final development plan.
The plat shall show building lines, lots and/or blocks, common land, streets,
easements, and other applicable items required by the subdivision ordinance.
Following approval of the final plat by the Commission and Council, the plat
shall be recorded with the County Auditor and Recorder.
6. The final development plan and required documents shall be reviewed by the
Commission, for compliance with the "R-5" standards and substantial
compliance with the preliminary plan. The Commission's recommendations
and report on the final development plan shall be referred to the Council for
final approval. .The final development plan and final plat shall be approved
by the Council before any building permit is issued.
13-2
D. PERMITTED PRINCIPAL AND ACCESSORY USES
Permitted principal and accessory land uses, lot area, yard and height requirements shall
be as set out below, which shall prevail over conflicting requirements of this Chapter or
the subdivision ordinance.
1. Buildings shall be used only for residential purposes; occupant garages,
occupant storage and similar accessory uses; non-commercial recreational
facilities; and community activities including churches and schools.
2. The minimum lot and yard requirements of the "R" zoning districts in which
the development is located shall not apply, except that minimum yards
specified in this district shall be provided around the boundaries of the
development. The Council may require open space or screenings be located
along all or a portion of the development boundaries. The height
requirements of the zoning district in which the development is located shall
apply within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of the development
boundary.
3. All public streets, water mains, sanitary sewer and storm sewer facilities shall
comply with appropriate ordinances and specifications of the City.
4. "Common land" as used in this section refers to land retained in private
ownership for the use of the residents of the development, or to land
dedicated to the general public.
5. Any land gained within the development because of the reduction in lot sizes,
below minimum zoning ordinance requirements, shall be placed in common
land to be dedicated to the City or retained in private ownership to be
managed by a homeowner's association.
6. The requirements of this Ordinance relating to off-street parking and loading,
shall apply to all "R-5" Districts.
7. The final development plan shall comply with the density requirements of the
original "R" District.
13-3
8. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in an "R-5" District shall be
determined by dividing the net development area by the minimum lot area
per dwelling unit required by the zoning district or districts in which the area
is located, then multiplied by one hundred fifteen (115) percent. (In the R-2
District, the one-family dwelling requirement shall apply.) Net development
area shall be determined by subtracting the area set aside for churches and
schools, if any, and deducting the area actually proposed for streets from the
gross development area. The area of land set aside for common land, open
space, or recreation shall be included in determining the number of dwelling
units permitted.
The maximum number of multiple dwelling units permitted in the R-5
development shall be determined by the zoning district in which the
development is located as follows:
Zoning District
R-1
R-2
R-3
Percentage of
Total Dwelling Units
Permitted as Multiples
25
50
100
If the development area contains two (2) or more different "R" zoning
classifications, the number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined in
the direct proportion to the area of each zoning classification contained in the
entire tract.
E. DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL
1. The Council may make the approval of the development plan contingent
upon the completion of construction and improvements within a reasonable
period of time; provided, however, that in the determination of such period,
the Council shall consider the scope and magnitude of the development
project and any schedule of construction and improvements submitted by the
developer. Failure to complete all construction and improvements within said
period of time shall be deemed sufficient cause for the Council to rezone the
unimproved property to the classification effective at the time of original
submission of the development plan, unless an extension as recommended by
the Commission and approved by the Council for due cause shown. Any
proposed change in the development plan after approval by the Council shall
be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as the original proposal.
The term "unimproved" property shall mean all property situated within a
stage or stages of the final development plan upon which the installation of
improvements has not been commenced.
13-4
2. In no event shall the installation of any improvements be commenced in the
second or subsequent stages of the final development plan until such time as
ninety (90) percent of all construction and improvements have been
completed in any prior stage of such plan.
13-5

SECTION XIV
B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The B-1 local Business District is intended to augment the B-2 General Business District
by accommodating neighborhood convenience service centers providing limited
commercial, personal, and professional services.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the uses of structures and land listed in this section shalt be permitted in the B-1
District. The permitted uses are retail and service business allowed on ground floor only.
1. Barber shops.
2. Beauty parlors.
3. Bed and Breakfast Homes.
4. Bed and Breakfast Inns.
5. Bicycle stores - sales, rental and repair.
6. Clothes pressing establishments.
7. Colleges and Universities.
8. Drug stores.
9. Dry cleaning and laundry-receiving stations - processing to be done
elsewhere.
10. Dwelling units are not permitted below the second floor and business uses are
not permitted on any floor except the ground floor.
11. Eating and drinking establishments where no entertainment or dancing is
provided.
12. Food stores, grocery stores, meat markets, bakeries and delicatessens.
13. Hardware stores.
14-1
14. Laundromats - automatic self-service type of hand, employing not more than
two (2) persons in addition to one (1) owner or manager, provided that
laundry machines shall not exceed ten (10) pounds capacity each.
15. Libraries - branch.
16. Private and public parking lots.
17. Shoe and hat repair stores.
18. Variety stores.
C. SPECIAL USES
Special uses as authorized by the Board of Adjustment after a public hearing.
1. Assisted living homes.
2. Automobile car washes.
3. Automobile service stations.
4. Condominiums.
5. Electric and telephone substations.
6. Nursery schools and day care centers.
7. Other similar business uses.
8. School transportation facilities, including shelters, terminals, parking areas
and service buildings.
D. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any principal
permitted use.
2. Awnings and marquees having headroom of eight feet or more.
3. Storage of merchandise incidental to the principal use.
14-2
E. BULK REGULATIONS
The following minimum requirements shall be observed, subject to modifications
contained in this Ordinance.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
lot Area:
lot Area per
Dwelling Unit:
lot Width:
Front Yard:
Rear Yard:
Side Yard:
Maximum Height:
Maximum Number
of Stories:
Floor Area:
Total Floor Area
Ratio:
Off-Street Parking
and loading:
Signs:
Screening:
No minimum requirement except for dwelling units in
which case same as R-3 District.
Same as in R-3 District.
No minimum requirement, except for dwelling units in
which case same as in R-3 District.
25 feet ..
25 feet, except when adjoining any R District in which
case same requirement as the adjoining R District.
None required except when adjoining any R District in
which case same requirement as the adjoining R District.
40 feet.
3 stories.
Maximum 5,000 square feet.
0.8.
Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of
Section XXll.
Signs shall be provided in accordance with provisions of
Section XXll I.
Where a local Business District adjoins a Residential
District screening shall be provided along the lot lines of
the business property. Evergreen planting is preferable,
but decorative concrete block or brick screen walls or
solid fences (but not chain link fences) no more than
8 feet in height are also acceptable.
14-3

SECTION XV
B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The B-2 General Business District is intended to accommodate general retail, service, and
office uses and promote compact development of the central business district, the area to
which the use of this district is generally limited.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the use of structures and land listed in this section shall be permitted in the B-2
District.
1. Uses permitted in the B-1 District except dwelling units.
2. Antique shops.
3. Art and school supply stores.
4. Automotive accessory stores.
5. Banks and financial institutions.
6. Bingo parlors.
7. Building supplies - excluding lumber yard.
8. Camera and photographic supply stores.
9. Candy and ice cream stores.
1 0. Carpet and rug stores.
11. China and glassware stores.
12. Clubs and lodges - fraternal or religious.
13. Coin and philatelic stores.
14. Department stores.
15. Dry cleaning establishments.
16. Dry goods stores.
15-1
17. Electrical and household appliance stores including radio and television sales.
18. Flower shops and conservatories.
19. Frozen food stores - including locker rental in conjunction therewith.
20. Furniture and furniture exchang~, stores - including upholstery when
conducted as part of the retail operation and secondary to the principal use.
21. Furrier shops - including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs.
22. Garages, public - servicing automotive vehicles, but not including body repair
nor painting.
23. Garden supply and seed stores.
24. Gift shops.
25. Haberdashery.
26. Hobby shops - retailing of items to be assembled or used away from
premises.
27. Hotels - including dining and meeting rooms; provided that business uses
other than those which are commonly incidental to a hotel business shall not
occupy street frontage, but may, if of a nature permitted in these districts,
occupy space fronting on a hotel hall or lobby.
28. Interior decorating shops - including upholstery and making of draperies,
slipcovers and other similar articles when conducted as part of the retail
operations and secondary to the principal use.
29. Jewelry stores - including watch repair.
30. Laboratories - medical and dental, also research and testing.
31. Leather goods and luggage stores.
32. Locksmith shops.
33. Mail order houses with displays.
34. Medical and dental clinics.
35. Meeting halls.
15-2
36. Millinery shops.
37. Motor vehicles and farm equipment sales and services.
38. Musical instrument sales and repair.
39. Newspaper offices and print shops.
40. Nursery Schools and Day Care Centers.
41. Office supply and equipment, stores.
42. Offices - business, professional and public administration.
43. Optometrists.
44. Paint and wallpaper stores.
4S. Photography studios, including developing and printing of photographs when
conducted on the premises as a part of the retail, jobbing and wholesale
business.
46. Physical culture and health services, gymnasiums, reducing salons, masseurs
and public baths.
47. Picture framing - when conducted on the premises for retail trade.
48. Post offices.
49. Plumbing and heating establishments.
SO. Radio and television broadcasting stations and radio and TV repair shops.
S 1. Restricted production and repair limited to the following: art needle work;
clothing; custom tailor manufacturing; and alterations for retail only, of
jewelry from precious metals, watches, dentures, and optical lenses.
S2. Schools - music, dance, business or linotype.
S3. Sewing machine sales and services - household machines only.
S4. Shoe stores.
SS. Sporting goods stores.
1S-3
56. Telegraph offices.
57. Theatres.
58. Tobacco shops.
59. Toy Shops.
60. Wearing Apparel Shops.
61. Wholesale establishments with storage of merchandise - limited to samples
only.
C. SPECIAL USES
Special uses as authorized by the Board of Adjustment after Public Hearing.
1. Special uses as allowed in B-1 District.
2. Art galleries and museums.
3. Churches.
4. Eating and drinking establishments where dancing and entertainment is
provided.
5. Funeral homes.
6. Health centers.
7. Hospitals and sanitariums.
8. libraries.
9. liquor store.
10. Open sales lot - set back for equipment not less than two feet.
11. Storage garages for motor vehicles.
12. Public utility and public service uses, including:
(a) Fire stations.
(b) Police stations.
15-4
(c) Railroad rights-of-way.
(d) Transit and public transportation facilities, including
shelters, terminals, parking areas and service buildings.
(e) Water filtration plants, pumping stations, and reservoirs.
(f) Other similar uses.
13. Radio and television towers.
14. Recreation buildings, community centers, pool halls, dance halls, swimming
pools and skating rinks.
15. Schools - commercial or trade - including those teaching commercial or
technical subjects, when not thereby involving increased danger of fire
and/or explosion; nor of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, glare, heat and
other objectionable influences.
16. Wholesale establishments - with storage of merchandise.
D. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any principal
permitted use.
2. Storage of merchandise incidental to the principal use.
3. Awnings and marquees having headroom of eight feet or more.
E. BULK REGULATIONS
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the modifications
contained in this Ordinance.
1. Lot Area:
2. Lot Width:
3. Front Yard:
4. Rear Yard:
5. Side Yard:
6. Maximum Height:
No minimum requirement.
No minimum requirement.
No minimum requirement.
No minimum requirement, except when adjoining any
R District in which case same requirement as the
adjoining R District.
None required except when adjoining any R District in
which case same requirement as the adjoining R District.
40 feet.
15-5
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
Maximum Number
of Stories:
Total Floor Area
Ratio:
Off-Street Parking
and Loading:
Signs:
Screening:
3 stories.
0.8.
Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of
Section XXll.
Signs shall be provided in accordance with provisions of
Section XXlll.
Where a local Business District adjoins a Residential
District screening shall be provided along the lot lines of
the business property. Evergreen planting is preferable,
but decorative concrete block or brick screen walls or
solid fences (but not chain link fences) no more than
8 feet in height are also acceptable.
15-6
SECTION XVI
B-3 SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The B-3 Service Business District is intended to accommodate certain general and service
and office uses in locations that serve the automobile traveling public and local consumer.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the uses and structures or land listed in this section shall be permitted in the B-3
District.
1. Uses permitted in the B-2 District.
2. Amusement establishments - bowling alleys, pool halls, swimming pools and
skating rinks.
3. Animal Hospitals.
4. Auction rooms.
5. Automobile service stations.
6. Blueprinting and photo-copying establishments.
7. Building material sales - including lumber yards.
8. Cartage and express facilities, providing storage of goods, motor trucks and
other equipment is in an enclosed structure.
9. Casket establishments.
10. Catering establishments.
11. Clothing and costume rental shops.
12. Contractors and construction offices.
13. Dog kennels provided any exercising yard be at least 200 feet from any
R District and existing dwelling.
14. Employment agencies.
15. Exterminating shops.
16-1
16. Feed stores.
17. Fire stations.
18. Fuel and ice sales, retail only.
19. Greenhouses.
20. Laundries.
21. Libraries.
22. Machinery sales.
23. Meat markets - including the sale of meat and meat products, to restaurants,
hotels, clubs, and other similar establishments, when conducted as part of the
retail business on the premises
24. Monument sales.
25. Open-sales lots - setback for equipment not less than two (2) feet.
26. Orthopedic and medical-appliance stores, but not including the assembly or
manufacture of such articles.
27. Parking lots and storage garages.
28. Pet shops.
29. Police stations.
30. Recording studios.
31. Recreation buildings and community centers.
32. Schools - commercial or trade, not involving any danger of fire, explosion, nor
of offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, glare, heat or other
objectionable influences.
33. Second-hand stores and rummage shops.
34. Taxidermists.
35. Telephone exchanges; microwave relay towers and telephone transmission
equipment buildings.
16-2
I
I
36. Travel bureaus and transportation ticket offices.
37. Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.
C. SPECIAL USES
Special uses as authorized by the Board of Adjustment after a public hearing.
1. Special uses allowed in the B-2 District.
2. Assembly and Storage of animal cages.
3. Automobile, truck and trailer body repair.
4. Bending and Fabrication of Tubing.
5. Car sales lots.
6. Collection and processing of recyclable materials.
7. Custom Wood Manufacturing.
8. Grain storage.
9. Other service business uses.
10. Outdoor amusement establishments - fairgrounds, permanent carnivals, kiddie
parks and other similar amusement centers and places of assemble such as
stadiums and arenas.
11. Packaging pharmaceuticals and rodenticides.
12. Recreational vehicle parking.
D. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any principal
permitted use.
2. Awnings and marquees having headroom of eight feet or more.
3. Storage of merchandise incidental to the principal use.
16-3
E. BULK REGULATIONS
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the modifications
contained in this Ordinance.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
Lot Area:
Lot Width:
Front Yard:
Rear Yard:
Side Yard:
Maximum Height:
Maximum Number
of Stories:
Floor Area:
Total Floor Area
Ratio:
Off-Street Parking
and Loading:
Signs:
Screening:
No minimum requirement.
No minimum requirement.
30 feet.
30 feet.
No minimum requirement.
40 feet.
3 stories.
Maximum 5,000 square feet.
0.7
Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of
Section XXll.
Signs shall be provided in accordance with provisions of
Section XXll I.
Where a local Business District adjoins a Residential
District screening shall be provided along the lot lines of
the business property. Evergreen planting is preferable,
but decorative concrete block or brick screen walls or
solid fences (but not chain link fences) no more than
8 feet in height are also acceptable.
16-4
SECTION XVII
B-4 HIGHWAY SERVICE BUSINESS DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The B-3 Service Business District is intended to accommodate certain general and service
and office uses in locations that serve primarily the automobile traveling public.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the uses and structures or land listed in this section shall be permitted in the B-4
District.
1. Uses permitted in the B-3 District.
C. SPECIAL USES
Special uses as authorized by the Board of Adjustment after a public hearing.
1. Special uses allowed in the B-3 District.
D. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to any principal
permitted use.
2. Awnings and marquees having headroom of eight feet or more.
3. Storage of merchandise incidental to the principal use.
E. BULK REGULATIONS
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the modifications
contained in this Ordinance.
1. Lot Area: No minimum requirement.
2. Lot Width: No minimum requirement.
3. Front Yard: 30 feet.
4. Rear Yard: 30 feet.
5. Side Yard: No minimum requirement.
6. Maximum Height: 40 feet.
7. Maximum Number
of Stories: 3 stories.
17-1
8.
9.
10.
11.
Floor Area:
Total Floor Area
Ratio:
Off-Street Parking
and Loading:
Signs:
Screening:
Minimum 5,000 square feet.
0.7
Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of
Section XXll.
Signs shall be provided in accordance with provisions of
Section XXlll.
Where a local Business District adjoins a Residential
District screening shall be provided along the lot lines of
the business property. Evergreen planting is preferable,
but decorative concrete block or brick screen walls or
solid fences (but not chain link fences) no more than
8 feet in height are also acceptable.
17-2
SECTION XVIII
M-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The M-1 light Manufacturing District is intended and designed to provide flexibility in the
location of certain manufacturing, industrial, and warehousing uses while maintaining
protection for nearby non-industrial districts. The M-1 District is characterized by lots with
landscaped grounds, provisions for off-street parking and loading spaces, structures
generally one or two stories in height, and exterior storage enclosed by fence or landscape
buffer.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the uses of structure or land listed in this section shall be permitted in the M-1
District.
1. Manufacturing and processing uses that are wholly contained within a
building and create no offensive noise, dust, odor, vibration, or electrical
interference.
2. Automobile, truck and trailer body repair.
3. Banks.
4. Beverage (non-alcoholic) processing and bottling.
5. Boat building and repair.
6. Building and material sales including lumber yards.
7. Cameras and other photographic equipment, except film.
8. Cartage and express establishments.
9. Ceramic products - such as pottery and small glazed tile.
10. Clubs and lodges.
11 . Contractors' offices.
12. Cosmetics and toiletries.
13. Dyeing and cleaning works.
18-1
14. Electrical appliances, equipment and supplies - small.
15. Frozen food lockers.
16. Fuel and ice sales.
17. Garages, public and automobile parking lots.
18. Greenhouses.
19. Leather products, fabricating only.
20. Medical laboratory supplies, equipment, furnishings and specialties.
21. Metal finishing.
22. Monument and ornamental stone works.
23. Motor vehicle and equipment sales and service.
24. Musical instruments manufacture.
25. Paper products, small - such as envelopes and stationery.
26. Pharmaceutical products - compounding only.
27. Plastic products, small.
28. Public utility and public service uses.
29. Publishing and printing.
30. Radio and television broadcasting stations.
31. Research laboratories.
32. Restaurants.
33. Seed processing.
34. Stone quarries.
35. Storage and warehouse establishments, except gasoline and other such
flammable materials.
36. Manufacture of textiles.
18-2
37. Manufacture of toys.
38. Vehicles and equipment such as farm implements, equipment and
machinery, bicycles, etc, but not including motor vehicles - assembly.
39. Wholesale, general except gasoline and other such flammable materials.
40. Wood products.
41. Manufacture and/or sales of agricultural products.
The following uses shall not be located within 200 feet of the R-1 District.
1. Automobile service stations.
2. Feed and grain processing.
3. Food products - processing and combining, except fish.
4. Fertilizer manufacture not to include organic materials, but chemicals
processing permitted.
5. Ice - dry and natural - manufacturing and processing.
6. Laundries.
7. Milk bottling and distributing stations.
8. Motor freight terminals.
9. Theatres, automobile drive-in only.
10. Prefabrication, assembly and storage of prefabricated houses.
C. SPECIAL USES
Special uses as authorized by the Board of Adjustment after a public hearing.
1. Adult entertainment business.
2. Airports.
3. Amusement and recreation enterprise including bowling alleys, skating rinks,
tennis and racquet ball facilities and other similar types or uses.
18-3
4. Other similar manufacturing, fabricating, repairing or storing establishments
unless prohibited by this Ordinance.
5. Parks and playgrounds.
6. Wind generators.
The following uses shall not be located within 200 feet of the R-1 District.
1. Abattoirs.
2. Fuel oil, coal, gasoline and gas - sales and bulk storage.
3. Stadiums, auditoriums and armories.
4. Stockyards or slaughter of animals and fowls and processing.
D. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses of land or structures customarily incidental and subordinate to
any of the above principal uses.
2. Dwelling for watchman or caretaker.
3. Employee cafeteria or other food concession in conjunction with permitted
use.
E. BULK REGULATIONS
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the modifications
contained in this Ordinance.
1. Lot Area:
2. Lot Width:
3 Front Yard:
4. Rear Yard:
5. Side Yard:
6. Maximum Height:
7. Number of Stories:
8. Total Floor Area
Ratio:
9. Off-Street Parking
and Loading:
No minimum requirement.
No minimum requirement.
30 feet.
30 feet.
25 feet.
40 feet.
2 stories.
0.7.
Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of
Section XXI I. .
18-4
10. Signs:
11. Screening:
Signs shall be provided in accordance with provisions of
Section XXll 1.
Where a Manufacturing District adjoins a Residential
District screening shall be provided along the lot lines of
the business property. Evergreen planting is preferable,
but decorative concrete block or brick screen walls or
solid fences (but not chain link fences) no more than
8 feet in height are also acceptable.
F. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Required front and side yards shall be maintained as open landscaped areas
and shall not be used for parking, loading, storage or other uses.
2. Exterior storage other than the display of products for retail sale shall be
enclosed by a fence or suitable landscape planing, the design or type of
which shall be approved by the planning commission, and which will screen
the stored materials from view from public streets or residential areas.
3. No raw material, finished product, or waste product which may cause dust or
odor which would adversely affect adjoining properties shall be stored
outside a building nor shall any junk, debris, or waste material be permitted
to accumulate on the site.
4. Adult Entertainment Businesses. It is the purpose of this Ordinance to
regulate adult entertainment businesses to limit their inherent adverse impact
in the community while at the same time permitting lawful businesses to
conduct operations in the community. The City Council finds as evidenced
in other cities that the number of adult entertainment businesses is increasing
and that, because of their very nature, are recognized as having serious,
objectionable operational characteristics, which are magnified when located
in close proximity to dwellings, churches, schools, and parks. Special
regulation of adult entertainment businesses is necessary to ensure that these
adverse affects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the
surrounding neighborhood. The City Council further finds that these
regulations are necessary to protect the youth of this community from the
objectionable operational characteristics of such businesses by restricting
their location. The City Council further finds that these regulations are
necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of all residents of
the community.
(a) Limitations on Adult Entertainment Businesses: Adult entertainment
businesses shall be subject to the following restrictions and no person
shall cause or permit the establishment of any adult entertainment
business contrary to said restrictions:
18-5
1) No adult entertainment business shall be open for business
between the hours of twelve (12) midnight and six (6) a.m.
2) An adult entertainment business shall not be allowed within five
hundred (500) feet of another existing adult entertainment business.
3) An adult entertainment business shall not be located within five
hundred (500) feet of any residentially zoned district.
4) An adult entertainment business shall not be located within one
thousand (1,000) feet of a pre-existing school, public park, or
church.
5) Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the main entrance of such
adult entertainment business to the point on the property line of
such other business, school, church, public park or areas zoned for
residential use which is closest to the said main entrance of such
adult entertainment business.
(b) Prohibited Activities of Adult Entertainment Businesses:
1) No adult entertainment business shall employ any person under
eighteen (18) years of age.
2) No adult entertainment business shall furnish any merchandise or
services to any person who is under eighteen (18) years of age.
3) No adult entertainment business shall be conducted in any manner
that permits the observation of any model or any material
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas by display, decoration, sign, show
window or other opening from any public way or from any
property not licensed as an adult use. No operator of an adult
entertainment business or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent, owner, or employee of such business shall
engage in any activity or conduct or permit any other person to
engage in any activity of conduct in or about the premises which is
prohibited by this Ordinance or any laws of the State.
4) No part of the interior of the adult entertainment business shall be
visible from any pedestrian sidewalk, walkway, street, or other
public or semi-public area.
18-6
5) An adult entertainment business shall post a sign at the entrance of
the premises which shall state the nature of the business and shall
state that no one under the age of eighteen (18) years is allowed on
the premises. This Section shall not be construed to prohibit the
owner from establishing an older age limitation for coming on the
premises.
6) Except as hereinafter provided no person shall intentionally expose
those parts of his or her body hereinafter listed to another in any
public place, or in any place where such exposure is seen by
another person or persons located in any public area.
a) A woman's nipple, the areola thereof, or any portion of the
female breast at or below the nipple thereof, except as
necessary in the breast feeding of a baby.
b) The pubic hair, pubes, perineum, or anus of a male or female,
the penis of scrotum of a male, or the vagina of a female,
excepting such body parts of prepubescent infants of either
sex.
(c) Establishment of adult entertainment businesses shall include
the opening of such business as a new business, the
relocation of such business, or the conversion of an existing
business location to any of the uses described in Section 3 -
Rules and Definitions.
(d) Special Use Permit: The adult entertainment businesses may
be permitted subject to approval by the Board of Adjustment
after public hearing. In its determination upon the particular
use at the location requested, the Board shall consider all of
the following provisions:
1) That the proposed location, design, construction and operation of
the particular use adequately safeguards the health, safety and
general welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining or
surrounding property;
2) That such use shall not impair an adequate supply of light and air
to surrounding property;
3) That such use shall not unduly increase congestion in the streets or
public danger of fire and safety;
4) That such use shall not diminish or impair established property
values in adjoining or surrounding property; and
18-7
5) That such use shall be in accord with the intent, purpose and spirit
of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan of the City of
Charles City.
6) Applications for an adult entertainment business under the terms of
this Section shall be accompanied by evidence concerning the
feasibility of the proposed request and its effect on surrounding
property and shall include a site plan defining the areas to be
developed for buildings and structure, the areas to be developed,
for parking, the locations and driveways and the points of ingress
and egress, the location and height of walls, the location and type
of landscaping, the location, size and number of signs and the
manner of providing water supply and sewage treatment facilities.
18-8
SECTION XIX
M-2 GENERAL MANUFACTURING DISTRICT
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The M-2 General Manufacturing District is intended and designed to provide areas
suitable for activities and uses of a medium and heavy industrial nature. It is intended that
no residential development be permitted in the M-2 District.
B. PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES
Only the uses and structures or land listed in this section shall be permitted in the M-2
District.
1. Uses permitted in the M-1 Districts.
2. Automobile, tractor, truck, trailer, motorcycle and other motor vehicles
manufacture and assembly, including parts.
3. Building materials, such as prefabricated houses, composition wallboards,
partitions, panels, stone-and gravel processing plants and cement, concrete
and asphaltic concrete mixing plants.
4. Chemicals - processing.
5. Equipment, miscellaneous, such as farm implements and machines,
construction machines and equipment, such as power shovels, graders,
excavators, manufacture and assembly, including parts.
6. Food products - manufacturing of basic products from raw state and
refining, roasting, pasteurizing and extracting.
7. Fuel oil, coal, gasoline, and gas - sales and bulk storage.
8. Glass - manufacture and fabricating.
9. Machines, business - such as typewriters, accounting machines, calculators
and card counting equipment.
10. Machines, miscellaneous - such as washing machines and dryers, firearms,
refrigerators, air-conditioning and commercial motion-picture equipment.
11. Machine tools - such as metal lathes, metal presses, metal stamping and
woodworking.
19-1
12. Meat and fish products - packing and processing of, but not including glue
and size manufacturing.
13. Metal alloys and foil, miscellaneous - such as solder, brass, bronze, tin,
lead and gold.
14. Metal finishing, plating, grinding, sharpening, polishing, cleaning,
rust-proofing and heat treatment.
15. Metal and metal products, treatment and processing- such as enameling,
japanning, lacquering and galvanizing.
16. Metal products - such as fabrication and assembly of metal doors, cabinets
and similar products.
17. Metal, structural - such as fabrication of bars, girders, wire and similar
products.
18. Paint.
19. Paper products - such as shipping containers and pulp goods, pressed or
molded (including paper mache), carbon paper and coated paper stencils.
20. Plastic products, large.
21. Tools and other hardware- such as bolts, nuts, screws, doorknobs, drills, hand
tools and cutlery, hinges, house hardware, locks, nonferrous metal castings
and plumbing appliances.
22. Signs - as regulated in this subsection
23. Wholesale and storage establishments for gasoline and other such flammable
materials
24. Wood and lumber and other wood products - including sawmills and
planing mills, excelsior, plywood and veneers and wood-preserving
treatment.
C. SPECIAL USES
Special uses as authorized by the Board of Adjustment after a public hearing.
1. Special uses of M-1 District, except Adult Entertainment Business.
2. Other manufacturing, fabricating, repairing or storing establishments unless
prohibited in this Ordinance.
19-2
3. Automobile wrecking yards.
4. Junk yards.
5. Public sanitary land fill.
6. forge plants, crushers, blast furnaces.
D. PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES
1. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted principal use.
2. Accessory uses permitted in the M-1 District.
E. BULK REGULATIONS
The following minimum requirements shall be observed subject to the modifications
contained in this Ordinance.
1. Lot Area:
2. Lot Width:
3. front Yard:
4. Rear Yard:
5. Side Yard:
6. Maximum Height:
7. Number of Stories:
8. Total Floor Area
Ratio:
9. Off-Street Parking
and Loading:
10. Signs:
11. Screening:
No minimum requirement.
No minimum requirement.
40 feet.
30 feet.
25 feet.
40 feet.
2 stories.
0.6.
Spaces for off-street parking and loading shall be
provided in accordance with the provisions of
Section XXll.
Signs shall be provided in accordance with provisions of
Section XXlll.
Where a local Manufacturing District adjoins a
Residential District screening shall be provided along the
lot lines of the business property. Evergreen planting is
preferable, but decorative concrete block or brick screen
walls or solid fences (but not chain link fences) no more
than 8 feet in height are also acceptable.
19-3
F. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
1. No certificate of compliance shall be issued for any use in conflict with any
ordinance of the City of Charles City or law of the State of Iowa regulating
nuisances.
2. No certificate of compliance shall be issued for any dwelling, school,
hospital, clinic, or other institution for human care, except where accessory to
a permitted principal use.
3. The special uses hereinbefore listed may be permitted, subject to approval by
the Board of Adjustment after p_ublic hearing. In its determination upon the
particular uses at the location requested, the Board shall consider all of the
following provisions:
(a) That the proposed location, design, construction, and operation of the
particular use adequately safeguards the health, safety, and general
welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining or surrounding
property. To this end the Board may require that appropriate
landscaping, walls, fences, or other artificial screens be provided as
buffers to minimize the effects of these uses on adjoining or surrounding
property.
(b) That such use shall not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
surrounding property.
(c) That such use shall not unduly increase congestion in the streets, danger
of fire, or other threats to public safety.
(d) That such use shall not diminish or impair established property values in
adjoining or surrounding property.
19-4
SECTION XX
F-1 FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT (OVERLAY) DISTRICT
A. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT AND PURPOSE
1. Statutory Authorization
The Legislature of the State of Iowa has in Chapter 414, Code of Iowa,
delegated the responsibility to cities to enact zoning regulations to secure
safety from flood and to promote health and the general welfare.
2. Findings of Fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of Charles City are subject to periodic inundation
which can result in loss of life and property and health; and, safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extra-ordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base; all of which adversely affect the health,
safety and general welfare of the community.
(b) These losses, hazards and related adverse effects are caused by (i) the
occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to flood damages
which create hazardous conditions as a result of being inadequately
elevated or otherwise protected from flood and (ii) the cumulative effect
of flood plain construction on flood flows, which causes increases in
flood heights and flood water velocities.
(c) This Ordinance relies upon engineering methodology consisting of a
series of interrelated steps including:
1) Determination of flood magnitudes and the corresponding flood
frequencies by statistical and engineering calculations which
permits a consideration of such flood factors as expected frequency
of occurrence, area inundated and depth of inundation.
2) Calculation of water surface profiles based upon a hydraulic
engineering analysis of the capability of the stream channel and
overbank areas to convey flood flows.
3) Computation and delineation of a floodway, an area which must be
reserved (no obstructions) for conveyance of flood flows so that
flood heights and velocities will not be substantially increased by
future encroachment on the flood plain.
20-1
3. Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare by minimizing those flood losses described in Section A2 with
provisions designed to:
(a) Reserve sufficient flood plain area for the conveyance of flood flows so
that flood heights and velocities will not be increased substantially.
(b) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety or property
in times of flood or which cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities.
(c) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public utilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
(d) Protect individuals from buying lands which are unsuited for intended
purposes because of flood hazard.
(e) Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the
community to purchase flood insurance through the National Flood
Insurance Program.
B. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. Lands to which Ordinance Applies
This Ordinance shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of Charles City
shown on the Flood Boundary and Flood Map to be within the 100 year flood
boundaries.
2. Establishment of Official Flood Plain Zoning Map
The Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps prepared as part of the Flood
Insurance Study for the City of Charles City, dated February 2, 1977, are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be the Official Flood Plain
Zoning Map. The flood profiles and all explanatory material contained with
the Flood Insurance Study and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps are also
declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
20-2
3. Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries
The boundaries of the zoning district shall be determined by scaling distances
on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map. Where interpretation is needed as to
the exact location of the boundaries of the district as shown on the Official
Zoning Map the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to present their case and submit technical evidence.
4. Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
located, extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance
with the terms of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations which
apply to uses within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance.
5. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this Ordinance
imposes greater restrictions, the provision of this Ordinance shall prevail. All
other ordinances inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the
extent of the inconsistency only.
6. Interpretation
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be held to meet minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in
favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of
any other powers granted by State statutes.
7. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific
methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights
may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge
openings restricted by debris. This Ordinance does not imply that areas
outside the flood plain districts or land uses permitted within such districts
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance shall not create
liability on the part of Charles City or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this Ordinance or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
20-3
8. Severability
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Ordinance is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
C. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
The flood plain areas within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance are hereby divided
in the following districts:
1. Floodway District - The Floodway District shall be consistent with the
boundaries of the floodway as shown on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.
2. Floodway Fringe District - The Floodway Fringe District shall be
those areas shown as floodway fringe on the Official Flood Plain Zoning Map.
D. FLOODWA Y DISTRICT
1. Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted within the Floodway District to the
extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning
district) and provided they do not include placement of structures,
factory-built homes, fill or other obstruction, the storage of materials or
equipment, excavation, or alteration of a watercourse.
(a) Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant
nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming
and wild crop harvesting.
(b) Industrial-commercial uses such as loading areas, parking areas, airport
landing strips.
(c) Private and public recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis courts,
driving ranges, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps,
swimming areas, parks, wild-life and nature reserves, game farms, fish
hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges,
hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding trails.
(d) Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas and play areas.
(e) Such-other open-space uses similar in nature to the above uses.
20-4
2. Special Uses
The following uses which involve structures (temporary or permanent), fill,
storage of materials or equipment may be permitted only upon issuance of a
Special Use Permit by the Board of Adjustment as provided for in Section F 3.
Such uses must also meet the applicable provisions of the Floodway District
Performance Standards.
(a) Uses or structures accessory to open-space uses.
(b) Circuses, carnivals and similar transient amusement enterprises.
(c) Drive-in theaters, new and used car lots, roadside stands, signs and
billboards.
(d) Extraction of sands, gravel and other materials.
(e) Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves.
(f} Utility transmission lines, underground pipelines.
(g) Other uses similar in nature to uses described in Section DI or 2
which are consistent with the provisions of Section D 3 and the
general spirit and purpose of this Ordinance.
3. Performance Standards
All Floodway District uses allowed as a Permitted or Special Use shall
meet the following standards.
(a) No use shall be permitted in the Floodway District that would result in
any increase in the 100 year flood level. Consideration of the effects of
any development on flood levels shall be based upon the assumption
that an equal degree of development would be allowed for similarly
situated lands.
(b) All uses within the Floodway District shall:
1) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood maps.
2) Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
3) Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage.
20-5
(c) No use shall affect the capacity of conveyance of the channel or
floodway or any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch or any
other drainage facility or system.
(d) Structures, buildings and sanitary and utility systems, if permitted, shall
meet the applicable performance standards of the Floodway Fringe
District and shall be constructed or aligned to present the minimum
possible resistance to flood flows.
(e) Buildings, if permitted, shall have a low flood damage potential and
shall not be for human habitation.
(f) Storage of materials or equipment that are buoyant, flammable,
explosive or injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited.
Storage of other material may be allowed if readily removable from the
Floodway District within the time available after flood warning.
(g) Watercourse alterations or relocations (channel changes and
modifications) must be designed to maintain the flood carrying capacity
within the altered or relocated portion. In addition, such alterations or
relocations must be approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
(h) Any fill allowed in the floodway must be shown to have some beneficial
purpose and shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary.
(i) Pipeline river or stream crossings shall be buried in the streambed and
banks or otherwise sufficiently protected to prevent rupture due to
channel degradation and meandering or due to the action of flood
flows.
E. FLOODWAY FRINGE DISTRICT
1. Permitted Uses
All uses within the Floodway Fringe District shall be permitted to the extent
that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance (or underlying zoning
district) and provided they meet applicable performance standards of the
Floodway Fringe District.
2. Performance Standards
All uses must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and
shall meet the following applicable performance standards.
20-6
I
(a) All structures shall (i) be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure, (ii) be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage, and
(iii) be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
(b) Residential buildings - All new or substantially improved residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basements, elevated a
minimum of one (1) foot above the 100 year flood level. Construction
shall be upon compacted fill which shall, at all points, be no lower than
one (1) foot above the 100 year flood level and extend at such elevation
at least 18 feet beyond the limits of any structure erected thereon.
Alternate methods of elevating (such as piers) may be allowed, subject
to favorable consideration by the Board of Adjustment and issuance of a
Special Use Permit, where existing topography, street grades or other
factors preclude elevating by fill. In such cases, the methods used must
be adequate to support the structure as well as withstanding the various
forces and hazards associated with flooding.
All new residential buildings shall be provided with a means of access
which will be passable by wheeled vehicles during the 100-year flood.
(c) Non-residential buildings - all new and substantially improved
non-residential buildings shall have the first floor (including basement)
elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level, or
together with attendant utility and sanitary systems, be flood proofed to
such a level. When floodproofing is utilized, a professional engineer
registered in the State of Iowa shall certify that the floodproofing
methods used are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with the
100-year flood; and that the structure, below the 100-year flood level, is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
A record of the certification indicating the specific elevation (in relation
to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) to which any structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Zoning Administrator.
(d) All new and substantially improved structures:
1) Fully enclosed areas below the "lowest floor" (not including
basements) that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
20-7
a) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot
above grade.
c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
2) New and substantially improved structures must be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
3) New and substantially improved structures must be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
(e) Factory-built-homes:
1) Factory-built homes including those placed in existing factory-built
home parks or subdivisions shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement.
2) Factory-built homes including those placed in existing factory-built
homeparks or subdivisions shall be elevated on a permanent
foundation such that the lowest floor of the structure is a minimum
of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level.
(f) Utility and Sanitary Systems
1) All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize and eliminate infiltration of flood waters into
the system as well as the discharge of effluent into flood waters.
Wastewater treatment facilities shall be provided with a level of
flood protection equal to or greater than one (1) foot above the
100-year flood elevation.
2) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located or designed to
avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system
during flooding.
20-8
3) New or replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
Water supply treatment facilities shall be provided with a level of
protection equal to or greater than one (1) foot above the 100-year
flood elevation.
4) Utilities such as gas or electrical systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage to the system
and the risk associated with such flood damaged or impaired
systems.
(g) Storage of materials and equipment that are flammable, explosive or
injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited unless elevated a
minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood level. Other material
and equipment must either be similarly elevated or (i) not be subject to
major flood damage and be anchored to prevent movement due to flood
waters or (ii) be readily removable from the area within the time
available after flood warning.
(h) Flood control structural works such as levees, flood walls, etc. shall
provide, at a minimum, protection from a 100-year flood with a
minimum of 3 ft. of design freeboard and shall provide for adequate
interior drainage. In addition, structural flood control works shall be
approved by the Department of Natural Resources.
(i) No use shall affect the capacity or conveyance of the channel or
flood-way of any tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or other
drainage facility or system.
(j) Subdivisions (including factory-built home parks and subdivisions) shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages and shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
Development associated with subdivision proposals shall meet the
applicable performance standards. Subdivision proposals intended for
residential development shall provide all lots with a means of vehicular
access that will remain dry during occurrence of the 100-year flood.
(k) The exemption of detached garages, sheds and similar structures from
the 100-year flood elevation requirements may result in increased
premium rates for insurance coverage of the structure and contents,
however, said detached garages, sheds and similar accessory type
structures are exempt from the 100-year flood elevation requirements
when:
1) The structure shall not be used for human habitation.
20-9
2) The structure shall be designed to have low flood damage potential.
3) The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of
floodwaters.
4) Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which
may result in damage to other structures.
5) The structures' service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or flood-proofed to at least one (1)
foot above the 100-year flood level.
F. ADMINISTRATION
1. Appointment, Duties and Responsibilities of Zoning Administrator.
(a) A Zoning Administrator designated by the City Council shall administer
and enforce this Ordinance and will herein be referred to as the
Administrator.
(b) Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not
necessarily be limited to, the following:
1) Review all flood plain development permit applications to ensure
that the provisions of this Ordinance will be satisfied.
2) Review all flood plain development permit applications to ensure
that all necessary permits have been obtained from federal, state or
local governmental agencies.
3) Record and maintain a record of (i) the elevation (in relation to
National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the lowest floor of all new
or substantially improved buildings or (ii) the elevation to which
new or substantially improved structures have been
flood-proofed.
4) Notify adjacent communities and/or counties and the Department
of Natural Resources prior to any proposed alteration or relocation
of a water course and submit evidence of such notifications to the
Federal Insurance Administrator.
5) Keep a record of all permits, appeals, variances and such other
transactions and correspondence pertaining to the administration of
this Ordinance.
20-10
6) Submit to the Federal Insurance Administrator an annual report
concerning the community's participation utilizing the annual
report form supplied by the Federal Insurance Administrator.
7) Notify the Federal Insurance Administration of any
annexations or modifications to the community's boundaries.
8) Review subdivision proposal to ensure such proposals are
consistent with the purpose of this Ordinance and advise the City
Council of potential conflicts.
2. Flood Plain Development Permit
(a) Permit Required - A Flood Plain Development Permit issued by the
Administrator shall be secured prior to initiation of any flood plain
development (any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations) including the
placement of factory-built homes.
(b) Application for Permit- Application for a Flood Plain Development
Permit shall be made on forms supplied by the Administrator and shall
include the following information.
1) Description of the work to be covered by the permit for
which application is to be made.
2) Description of the land on which the proposed work is to be
done (i.e., lot, block, tract, street address or similar description)
that will readily identify and locate the work to be done.
3) Identification of the use or occupancy for which the proposed
work is intended.
4) Elevation of the 100-year flood.
5) Elevation (in relation to National Geodetic Vertical Datum) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of buildings or of the level to
which a building is to be floodproofed.
6) For building being improved or rebuilt, the estimated cost of
improvements and market value of the building prior to the
improvements.
7) Such other information as the Administrator deems reasonably
necessary for the purpose of this Ordinance.
20-11
(c) Action for Permit Application - The Administrator shall, within a
reasonable time, make a determination as to whether the proposed
flood plain development meets the applicable provisions and
standards of this Ordinance and shall approve or disapprove the
application. For disapprovals, the applicant shall be informed, in
writing, of the specific reasons therefore. The Administrator shall not
issue permits for Special Uses or Variances except as directed by the
Board of Adjustment.
(d) Construction and Use to be as Provided in Application and Plans - Flood
Plain Development Permits issued on the basis of approved plans and
applications authorize only the use, arrangement and construction set
forth in such approved plans and applications and no other use,
arrangement or construction. Any use, arrangement, or construction at
variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this
Ordinance and shall be punishable as provided in Section IX. The
applicant shall be required to submit certification by a professional
engineer or land surveyor, as appropriate, registered in the State of Iowa,
that the finished fill, building floor elevations, floodproofing or other
flood protection measures were accomplished in compliance with the
provisions of this Ordinance, prior to the use or occupancy of any
structure.
3. Special Uses, Appeals and Variances
(a) Appointment and Duties of Board of Adjustment - A Board of
Adjustment is hereby established which shall hear and decide (i)
applications for Special Uses upon which the Board is authorized to pass
under this Ordinance; (ii) Appeals, and (iii) request for Variances to the
provisions of this Ordinance; and shall take any other action which is
required of the Board.
(b) Special Uses - Requests for Special Uses shall be submitted to the
Administrator, who shall forward such to the Board of Adjustment for
consideration. Such requests shall include information ordinarily
submitted with applications as well as any additional information
deemed necessary to the Board of Adjustment.
20-12
(c) Appeals - Where it is alleged there is any error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of this Ordinance, the aggrieved party may
appeal such action. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the Board of
Adjustment and with the official from whom the appeal is taken and
shall set forth the specific reason for the appeal. The official from whom
the appeal is taken shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was
taken.
(d) Variances - The Board of Adjustment may authorize upon request in
specific cases such variances from the terms of this Ordinance that will
not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions
a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance wil I result in
unnecessary hardship. Variances granted must meet the following
applicable standards.
1) No variance shall be granted for any development within the
Floodway District which would result in any increase in the
100-year level. Consideration of the effects of any development on
flood levels shall be based upon the assumption that an equal
degree of development would be allowed for similarly situated
lands.
2) Variances shall only be granted upon (i) a showing of good and
sufficient cause, (ii) a determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant,
and (iii) a determination that the granting of the variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
or extraordinary public expense; create nuisances, or cause fraud
on or victimization of the public.
3) Variance shall only be granted upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard to
afford relief.
4) In cases where the variance involves a lower level of flood
protection for buildings than what is ordinarily required by this
Ordinance, the applicant shall be notified in writing over the
signature of the Zoning Administrator that (i) the issuance of a
variance will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance
coverage and (ii) such construction increases risks to I ife and
property.
20-13
5) All variances granted shall have the concurrence or approval of
the Department of Natural Resources.
(e) Hearings and Decisions of the Board of Adjustment
1) Hearings. Upon the filing with the Board of Adjustment of an
appeal, an application for a Special Use or a request for a Variance,
the Board shall hold a public hearing. The Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing and give public notice thereof, as
well as due notice to parties in interest. At the hearing, any party
may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present written or
oral evidence. The Board may require the appellant or applicant to
provide such information as is reasonably deemed necessary and
may request the technical assistance and/or evaluation of a
professional engineer or other expert person or agency, including
the Department of Natural Resources.
2) Decisions. The Board shall arrive at a decision on an Appeal,
Special Use or Variance within a reasonable time. In passing upon
an appeal, the Board may, so long as such action is in conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or
in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from, and it shall make its decision, in writing,
setting forth the findings of fact and the reasons for its decision. In
granting a Special Use or Variance, the Board shall consider such
factors as contained in this section and all other relevant sections of
this Ordinance and may prescribe such conditions as contained in
Section F 3 e (2) (b).
a) Factors Upon Which the Decision of the Board Shall be
Based. In passing upon applications for Special Uses or
request for Variances, the Board shall consider all relevant
factors specified in other sections of this Ordinance and:
1. The danger to life and property due to increased
flood heights or velocities caused by
encroachments.
2. The danger that materials may be swept on to other
lands or downstream to the injury of others.
3. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems
and the ability of these systems to prevent disease,
contamination and unsanitary conditions.
20-14
4. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner.
5. The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community.
6. The requirements of the facility for a flood plain
location.
7. The availability of alternative locations not subject to
flooding for the proposed use.
8. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the
foreseeable future.
9. The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and flood plain management
program for the area.
10. The safety of access to the property in times of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
11. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise
and sediment transport of the flood water expected at
the site.
12. Such other factors which are relevant to the purpose of
this Ordinance.
b) Conditions attached to Special Uses or Variances - Upon
consideration of the factors listed above, the Board may
attach such conditions to the granting of Special Uses or
Variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of
this Ordinance. Such conditions may include, but not
necessarily be limited to:
1. Modification of waste disposal and water supply
facilities.
2. Limitation on periods of use and operation.
3. Imposition of operational controls, sureties and deed
restrictions.
20-15
4. Requirements for construction of channel
modification, dikes, levees and other protective
measures, provided such are approved by the
Department of Natural Resources and are deemed the
only practical alternative to achieving the purposes of
this Ordinance.
5. Floodproofing Measures. Such floodproofing
measures may include but are not necessarily limited
to the following:
(i) Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral
movement.
(ii) Installation of watertight doors, bulk heads and
shutters or similar methods of construction.
(iii) Reinforcement of walls to resist water
pressures.
(iv) Use of paints, membranes or mortars to reduce
seepage of water through walls.
(v) Addition of mass or weight structures to resist
flotation.
(vi) Installation of pumps to lower water levels
in structures.
(vii) Construction of water supply and waste
treatment systems so as to prevent the entrance
of flood waters.
(viii) Pumping facilities or comparable practices for
subsurface drainage systems for building to
relieve external foundation wall and basement
flood pressures.
(ix) Construction to resist rupture or collapse
caused by water pressure or floating debris.
(x) Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and
storm drains which will permit the drains to be
closed to prevent backup of sewage and storm
waters into the buildings or structures.
20-16
(xi) Location of all electrical equipment, circuits and
installed electrical appliances in a manner which
will assure they are not subject to flooding.
(f) Appeals to the Court - Any person or persons, jointly or severally,
aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may present to a
court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision
is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality.
Such petition shall be presented to the court within thirty days after the
filing of the decision in the office of the Board.
G. NONCONFORMING USES
A structure or the use of a structure on land which was lawful before the passage
or amendment of the Ordinance but which is not in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance may be continued subject to the following
conditions:
1. No structural alteration, addition or repair to any nonconforming structure
over the life of the structure shall exceed 50 percent of its value at the time of
its becoming a nonconforming use, unless the structure is permanently
changed to a conforming use.
2. If such use is discontinued for twelve consecutive months, any future use of
the building premises shall conform to this Ordinance. The assessor shall
notify the Zoning Administrator in writing of instances of nonconforming
uses which have been discontinued for twelve months.
3. If any nonconforming use or structure is destroyed by any means, including
floods, to an extent of 50 percent or more of its value prior to destruction, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
4. Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be
entitled to continue as nonconforming uses.
5. Except as provided in Section G 4 any use which has been permitted as a
Special Use or Variance shall be considered a conforming use.
H. DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application.
BASEMENT -Any enclosed area of a building which has its floor or lowest level
below ground level (subgrade) on all sides. Also see "lowest floor".
20-17
DEVELOPMENT - Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
FACTORY-BUILT HOME - Any structure, designed for residential use, which is
wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in
manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation, on a building
site. For the purpose of this Ordinance factory-built homes include park trailers,
travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than
180 consecutive days.
FACTORY-BUILT HOME PARK-A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided
into two or more factory-built home lots for rent or sale.
FLOOD -A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas resulting from the over flow of streams or rivers or from
the unusual and rapid runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD ELEVATION - The elevation floodwater would reach at a particular site
during the occurrence of a specific flood. For instance, the 100-year flood
elevation is the elevation of flood waters related to the occurrence of the 100-year
flood.
FLOOD INSURANCE RA TE MAP - The official map prepared as part of (but
published separately from) the Flood Insurance Study which delineates both the
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY -A study initiated, funded and published by the
Federal Insurance Administration for the purposes of evaluating in detail the
existence and severity of flood hazards; providing the city with the necessary
information for adopting a flood plain management program; and establishing
actuarial flood insurance rates.
FLOOD PLAIN - Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water as a result
of a flood.
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT - An overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damages and promoting the wise use of flood plains,
including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
flood-proofing and flood plain management regulations.
FLOODPROOFING - Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which
will reduce or eliminate flood damage to such structures.
20-18
FLOODWAY - The channel of a river or stream and those portions of the flood
plains adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and
discharge flood waters or flood flows so that confinement of flood flows to the
floodway area will not result in substantially higher flood levels and flow
velocities.
FLOODWAY FRINGE - Those portions of the flood plain, other than the floodway,
which can be filled, leveed or otherwise obstructed without causing substantially
higher flood levels or flow velocities.
LOWEST FLOOR- The floor of the lowest enclosed area in a building including a
basement except when all the following criteria are met:
1. Theenclosed area is designed to flood to equalize hydrostatic pressure
during floods with walls or openings that satisfy the provisions of Section E
2d(1) and
2. The enclosed area is unfinished (not carpeted, dry walled, etc.) and used
solely for low damage potential uses such as building access, parking or
storage, and
3. Machinery and service facilities (e.g., hot water heater, furnace, electrical
service) contained in the enclosed area are located at least one (1) foot above
the 100-year flood level, and
4. The enclosed area is not a "basement" as defined in this section.
In cases where the lowest enclosed area satisfies criteria 1, 2, 3 and 4
above, the lowest floor is the floor of the next highest enclosed area that
does not satisfy the criteria above.
NEW CONSTRUCTION (new buildings, factory-built home parks) - Those
structures or development for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
ONE HUNDRED (100) YEAR FLOOD-A flood, the magnitude of which has a one
(1) percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year or which, on
the average, will be equalled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100)
years.
STRUCTURE - Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to the
ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins,
factory-built homes, storage tanks and other similar uses.
20-19
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT -Any improvement to a structure which satisfies
either of the following criteria:
1. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of
the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either
(1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement officer and which are the minimum
necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) any alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".
2. Any addition which increases the original floor area of a building by
25 percent or more. All additions constructed after February 2, 1977 shall be
added to any proposed addition in determining whether the total increase in
original floor space would exceed 25 percent.
20-20
I
I SECTION XXI
EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS
The regulations specified in this Ordinance shall be subject to the following additional
requirements, exceptions, modifications and interpretations.
A. HEIGHT LIMITATIONS
Height limitations stipulated in this Ordinance shall not apply to the following.
1. To barns, silos, or other farm buildings or structures on farms, provided these
are not less than fifty feet (50') from every lot line; to church spires. belfries,
cupolas and domes, monuments, water towers, fire and hose towers, masts
and aerials; to parapet walls extending not more than four feet (4') above the
limiting height of the building. However, if, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, or his equivalent, such structures would adversely affect
adjoining or adjacent properties, such greater height shall not be authorized
except by the Board of Adjustment.
2. To places of public assembly such as churches, schools, and other permitted
public and semi-public buildings not to exceed six (6) stories seventy-five feet
(75') where a permitted use requires greater heights than specified, such may
be authorized by the Board of Adjustment.
3. To bulkheads, conveyors, derricks, elevator penthouses, water tanks, wind
generator, monitors and scenery lofts; to monuments, fire towers, hose towers,
cooling towers, grain elevators, gas holders or other structures, where the
manufacturing process requires a greater height. Where a permitted use
requires greater heights than specified, such may be authorized by the Board
of Adjustment.
B. COMMUNICATION TOWERS
The general intent of these minimum standards for installation, siting and regulation of
communication towers are: a) to minimize adverse visual effects of towers through careful
design, siting, and vegetative screening; b) to avoid potential damage to adjacent
properties from tower failure and falling ice through engineering and careful siting of
tower structure; c) to allow for reasonable location and use for communication towers and
d) to address adverse effects on human health and safety.
1. Definitions
(a) "Communication tower" means a structure that is used primarily as a
communication antenna or as a communications antenna support
structure.
21-1
1) "Broadcast/common carrier communications tower" means a
tower used for communications services for commercial gain or
public reception.
2) "Private business/government communications tower" means a
tower used for purposes to augment or facilitate the primary
function of a business or governmental agency.
3) "Non-commercial communications tower" means a tower usedfor
purposes in which there is no commercial gain, i.e. amateur
radio, Civil Air Patrol, Red Cross, etc.
(b) "Tower height" means the distance betWeen the ground which the tower
or tower base sits and the top of the highest appurtenance mounted on
the tower.
(c) "ANSI C-95.1" means the most recently adopted standard of the
American National Standards Institute which establishes guidelines for
human exposure to non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation.
(d) "EIA-222" means Electronics Industries Association Standard 222,
'Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Support
Structures'.
(e) "Freestanding tower" means a tower which has the tower base as the
only or primary means of resisting the designed tower loads.
(f) "Guy supported tower" means a tower which requires the use of flexible
guying cables or wires as the only or principle means of resisting the
designed tower loads.
(g) "Effective tower height" means the distance from the highest point of
rigid, non-guyed support to the top of the highest appurtenance mounted
on the tower.
(h) "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission.
(i) "FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration.
(j) "Retractable tower" means a tower whose height can be changed by
extension or retraction without structural modification. Tower height of a
retractable tower shall be determined in the extended position.
21-2
(k) "Camouflaged tower" means a communication tower or antenna which
is designed to enhance compatibility with the surrounding environment
including but not limited to, architecturally screened roof mounted
antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and towers to
look such as light poles, power poles and trees. At a minimum,
camouflaged towers not requiring FAA painting or markings, shall have
exterior finish which is galvanized or painted dull blue, gray or black.
2. Application
(a) A special use permit shall be obtained when authorized by the Board of
Adjustment prior to construction of communications towers. Tower shall
be registered at the time the permit is obtained. Each application for a
permit shall include the following information, supplied by the tower
owner, operator, or contractor installing the tower:
1) A site plan, professionally prepared, drawn to a scale of one
inch (1 ") equals fifty feet (50') unless a different scale is approved
by the Zoning Administrator. The plan shall show the property
boundaries, tower(s), guy wire anchors (if any), existing structures,
proposed transmission buildings and/or other accessory uses,
access, parking, fences, landscape plan (specifying i.e., spacing
and plant materials proposed), and existing land uses adjoining
the site.
2) Plans and specifications from a registered professional engineer
experi~nced in the design and/or analysis of communication
towers. The plans and specifications shall include:
a) Tower height.
b) Type of structure.
c) Type of materials.
d) Specification for materials used for structural elements of the
tower(s).
e) Name of tower manufacturer.
f) Soils investigation (where required for footing design)
g) list of the type and location of all antennas, cables and other
appurtenances which will be installed at the time the tower
is erected.
h) list of the type and location of all antennas, cables and other
appurtenances which may or could be installed in the future.
3) The plans and specifications shall include a statement that to the
best of the engineer's knowledge, information, and belief, the
proposed structure has been designed in accordance with all of
the following:
a) Applicable ordinances as adopted by Charles City.
21-3
b) The current version of EIA-222 "Structural Standards for Steel
Antenna Towers and Antenna Support Structures".
4) A written statement certifying that all FAA and FCC requirements
will be met or addressed.
5) The tower owner shall supply a report stating that the tower
has been constructed and installed according to the design
submitted to obtain the zoning compliance permit. This report
shall be accompanied by "as-built" drawings and test results and
submitted to the Zoning Administrator.
3. Site and Structure Requirements
(a) Guy anchor installations shall comply with the front and, where
applicable, corner side yard setback requirements and shall not be
placed closer than three feet (3 ') from any side or rear property line or
closer than ten feet (10') from any principal structure.
(b) Freestanding towers shall be located on the lot so that the distance from
the base of the tower to any adjoining property line is a minimum of one
hundred fifty percent (150"/o) of the proposed tower height.
(c) Guy supported towers shall be located so that the distance from the base
of the tower to any adjoining property line is a minimum of one hundred
fifty percent (150"/o) of the effective tower height from its base.
(d) No guy anchors or towers shall be located in an easement located on the
property. No tower accessories or appurtenances shall defeat the
purpose of any easement on the property.
(e) Accessory structures or buildings shall be located on the property
according to the setback and structure requirements of the zoning district
in which they are located.
(f) Part or all of the property required to meet the area requirements set forth
in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subsection can be provided by recorded
lease and/or easement, however the following additional requirements
shall apply:
1) The lease and/or easement must be for the duration
commensurate with the structural life and use expectancy of the
tower.
2) The tower owner has primary authority and responsibility for the
property/tower for compliance to this Ordinance.
21-4
3) Dwelling units shall not be builtwithin the area set forth
in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subsection.
4. Screening/Fencing/Signage
(a) On-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
(b) Where the tower site abuts residentially developed land,
residential ("R") zoning districts, public land or streets, or is located in a
primary residential development areas as designated on the Charles City
Comprehensive Plan, the site perimeter shall be landscaped with at least
one row of deciduous trees, not less than 1-1/2 inches (1-1/2") in
diameter measured three feet (3') above the grade, spaced not more than
twenty feet (20') apart and within twenty-five feet (25') of the site
boundary, as well as at least one row of evergreen trees or shrubs, at
least four feet (4 ') when planted and spaced not more than fifteen feet
(15') apart and within forty feet {40') of the site boundary. Alternatives
such as walls or fences may be permitted by the Charles City Board of
Adjustment based on security or other reasons.
(c) Eight feet (8') high security fencing, with barbed wire shall be required
around the base and guy anchors of the tower.
(d) Appropriate signage shall be posted indicating that trespassing
and/or vandalism to the property may be punishable under local, state,
or federal statutes.
5. Tower Inspection
(a) Inspection records shall be kept by the tower owner and made available
upon request to the Zoning Administrator during regular business hours.
1) At least once every thirty-six (36) months the tower shall be
inspected by an expert who is regularly involved in the
maintenance, inspection and/or erection of communication
towers. At a minimum, this inspection shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and in
accordance with the tower inspection check list provided in the
EIA-222 as applicable. This is considered a major inspection.
21-5
2) In addition to the regularly scheduled major inspection
set forth in paragraph A above, a minor inspection, at a minimum,
will be conducted if the tower or its appurtenances are noted at
any time to be visibly damaged. Additionally a major inspection
should be conducted if the visible damage to the tower is
significant or when, after conducting a minor inspection,
significant questions remain about the structural integrity of the
tower.
6. Structurally Unsafe or Unused Towers
(a) Any tower found, through inspection by the owner or by inspection of
the Zoning Administrator, to be structurally unsafe and cannot be
brought into compliance within 180 days must be removed at the
owner's expense.
(b) Any tower that is no longer used and maintained as a tower for a period
of five (5) years shall be removed at the owner's expense.
7. Compliance with Standards
(a) Current or former EIA standards shall apply to the addition of antennas or
other appurtenances to communications towers under the following
conditions:
1) Additions to tower constructed prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance regardless of whether the additions were
accounted for in the original design, shall comply with the current
EIA standards, and the wind loading specified therein. Additions
to towers constructed subsequent to the effective date of this
Ordinance shall comply with EIA standards. If the EIA standards
have changed since the tower was designed, a structural analysis
must be performed by Owner before any appurtenances or
equipment are added.
2) Existing towers which will not have any appurtenances added
to them shall at a minimum comply with the EIA standards in
existence at the time the tower was erected.
3) Replacement of antennas or other appurtenances shall at a
minimum comply with the EIA standard in existence at the time
the tower was erected if the replacement does not add to the
original design loading.
21-6
4) If a structural analysis shows a tower is not in compliance
with the appropriate EIA standards, the owner shall notify the
Zoning Administrator promptly, and provide the Zoning
Administrator with a plan to bring the tower into compliance
within six (6) months.
5) The Zoning Administrator shall be notified in writing when a
required analysis is complete. A copy of the analysis report shall
be made available to the County upon request. .That report shall
also give details of the net result of any changes made to the
tower or its appurtenances since the last inspection.
6) Retractable towers shall conform to all provisions of this
Ordinance, except that a retractable tower must either meet the
EIA-222 standards for wind loading when extended and be sited a
distance of at least 1500/o of the extended tower height from any
adjoining property line. For either case, the retractable tower
must meet EIA-222 standards when retracted.
8. Non-Ionizing Electromagnetic Radiation (NIER)
(a) A source of non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), when
combined with existing sources of NIER, shall not expose the general
public to ambient radiation exceeding standards established by ANSI
C-95.1 or applicable Environmental Protection Agency regulations.
(b) Lighting
1) No permanent lighting is allowed on towers except as
required by the FCC or the FAA.
(c) Fees
1) The City Council of Charles City shall, from time to time, establish
by resolution fees for the registration, processing, and permitting
of communication towers. No application shall be considered
filed with the City unless and until said application is
accompanied by the fee, as established by resolution.
C. SATELLITE DISH AND ANTENNA
Satellite antenna, satellite dish, TV antenna, and radio antenna shall, for the purpose of
this Ordinance, be an accessory structure unless they are the primary structure. Satellite
dish and antenna shall:
1. Be installed with a proper foundation meeting manufacturer's specifications.
21-7
2. Be screened from adjoining properties by the use of landscape plantings
and/or screen fences or walls.
3. Satellite dishes larger than thirty-six inches (36") in diameter shall be
permitted in rear yards only and are permitted a maximum height of twelve
feet (12'). Such dishes must be set back at least five feet (5') from all rear and
side property Ii nes.
4. Communications towers, including television antennas and amateur radio
antennas, not used for commercial purposes, maybe utilized in residential
districts, provided they do not exceed ten feet (10') above the height limit
determined for principal structures in the applicable district and are at least
one-half (1/2) the total height of the tower from any lot lines. Total height
shall be measured as the distance from the average grade at the base of the
supporting structure to the top of the highest point of the tower, including
beacons and antennae.
D. WIND GENERATORS
1. "Wind generators" shall mean a structure used primarily to harness wind
energy including such devices as wind generators, windmills, wind turbines
and similar devices.
2. Application
(a) A special use permit shall be obtained when authorized in accordance
with the requirements of Article XXV prior to construction of wind
generators. Wind generators shall be registered at the time the permit is
obtained. Each application for a permit shall include the following
information, supplied by the wind generator owner, operator, or
contractor installing the wind generator:
1) A site plan, professionally prepared, drawn to a scale of one
inch (1 ") equals fifty feet (50') unless a different scale is approved
by the Zoning Administrator. The plan shall show the property
boundaries, wind generator(s), existing structures, proposed
buildings and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences,
landscape plan (specifying i.e., spacing and plant materials
proposed), and existing land uses adjoining the site.
2) Plans and specifications from a registered professional engineer
experienced in the design and/or analysis of wind generators.
The plans and specifications shall include:
a) Wind generator height.
b) Type of structure.
c) Type of materials.
21-8
d) Specification for materials used for structural elements of the
wind generator(s).
e) Name of manufacturer.
f) Soils investigation (where required for footing design) ·
g) List of the type and location of all other appurtenances
which will be installed at the time the wind generator is
erected.
h) List of the type and location of all wind generators and other
appurtenances which may or could be installed in the future.
3) The plans and specifications shall include a statement that to the
best of the engineer's knowledge, information, and belief, the
proposed structure has been designed in accordance with all of
the following:
a) Applicable ordinances as adopted by Charles City.
b) The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE).
c) The Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) Utility Wind
Turbine Verification Program.
4) A written statement certifying that all FAA and FCC requirements
will be met or addressed.
5) The wind generator owner shall supply a report stating that
the wind generator has been constructed and installed according
to the design submitted to obtain the zoning compliance permit.
This report shall be accompanied by "as-built" drawings and test
results of turbine safety and stability and submitted to the Zoning
Administrator.
3. Site and Structure Requirements
(a) No structure support shall be located in an easement located
on the property. No structure accessories or appurtenances shall defeat
the purpose of any easement on the property.
(b) Accessory structures or buildings shall be located on the property
according to the setback and structure requirements of the zoning district
in which they are located.
(c) Spacing of support structures of wind generators when more
than one generator is located on-site shall be in accordance with the
state and federal regulations.
21-9
4. Screening/Fencing/Signage
(a) On-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent
possible.
(b) Where the wind generator site abuts residentially developed
land, residential ("R"j zoning districts, public land or streets, or is located
in a primary residential development areas as designated on the
Charles City Comprehensive Plan, the site perimeter shall be landscaped
with at least one row of deciduous trees, not less than 1-1/2 inches (1-
1/2") in diameter measured three feet (3') above the grade, spaced not
more than twenty feet (20') apart and within twenty-five feet (25') of the
site boundary, as well as at least one row of evergreen trees or shrubs, at
least four feet (4') when planted and spaced not more than fifteen feet
(15') apart and within forty feet (40') of the site boundary. Walls or
fences shall be installed as required by the Charles City Board of
Adjustment based on security or other reasons.
(c) Eight feet (8') high security fencing, with barbed wire shall be required
around the structure of the wind generator.
(d) Appropriate signage shall be posted indicating that trespassing and/or
vandalism to the property may be punishable under local, state, or
federal statutes.
5. Wind Generator Inspection
(a) Inspection records shall be kept by the wind generator owner and made
available upon request to the Zoning Administrator during regular
business hours.
1) At least once every thirty-six (36) months the wind generator
shall be inspected by an expert who is regularly involved in the
maintenance, inspection and/or erection of wind generators. At a
minimum, this inspection shall be conducted in accordance with
the provisions of this Ordinance and in accordance with the
applicable state and federal regulations. This is considered a
major inspection.
21-10
2) In addition to the regularly scheduled major inspection
set forth in paragraph A above, a minor inspection, at a minimum,
will be conducted if the wind generator or its appurtenances are
noted at any time to be visibly damaged. Additionally a major
inspection should be conducted if the visible damage to the wind
generator is significant or when, after conducting a minor
inspection, significant questions remain about the structural
integrity of the wind generator.
6. Structurally Unsafe or Unused Wind Generators
(a) Any wind generator found, through inspection by the owner or by
inspection of the Zoning Administrator, to be structurally unsafe and
cannot be brought into compliance within 180 days must be removed at
the owner's expense.
(b) Any wind generator that is no longer used and maintained as a wind
generator for a period of five (5) years shall be removed at the owner's
expense.
7. Compliance with Standards
(a) State and federal standards shall apply to the addition of appurtenances
to wind generators.
1) Replacement of turbines and rotors or other appurtenances
shall at a minimum comply with the state and federal standards in
existence at the time the wind generator was erected if the
replacement does not add to the original design loading.
2) If a structural analysis shows a wind generator is not in
compliance with the appropriate state and federal standards, the
owner shall notify the Zoning Administrator promptly, and
provide the Zoning Administrator with a plan to bring the wind
generator into compliance within six (6) months.
3) The Zoning Administrator shall be notified in writing when a
required analysis is complete. A copy of the analysis report shall
be made available to the County upon request. That report shall
also give details of the net result of any changes made to the wind
generator or its appurtenances since the last inspection.
8. Lighting
1) No permanent lighting is allowed on wind generators
except as required by the FCC or the FAA.
21-11
9. Fees
(a) The City Council of Charles City shall, from time to time, establish by
resolution fees for the registration, processing, and permitting of wind
generators. No application shall be considered filed with the City unless
and until said application is accompanied by the fee, as established by
resolution.
E. WALLS AND FENCES- HEIGHT RESTRICTIONS
1. In any "R" Residential, "B" Commercial, or "M" Industrial District, the
following shal! apply:
(a) Every fence hereafter erected within ten feet (10') of a property line shall
be done in the following manner; posts, supporting rails and other such
supporting elements shall face the property on which the fence is
located.
(b) Any fence or wall shall conform to the vision clearance requirements of
Section IV.H.
(c) No person shall place, construct or maintain, or cause to be placed,
constructed or maintained any electric fence.
(d) No fence shall be erected until a permit has been obtained from the
Zoning Administrator except chain link and wire fences four feet (4') or
less in height and all other fences three feet (3 ') or less in height.
(e) The requirements in this section shall not apply to fences and walls
located on airport, park, or school premises.
2. In any "B" Commercial or "M" Industrial Districts, the following shall apply:
(a) No fence or wall in any required yard may exceed ten feet (1 O') in
height; and no fence or wall in a required yard adjoining a street may
exceed three feet (3') in height unless constructed of materials which
provide openings of not less than seventy-five percent (750/o) or more in
area of the vertical surface of the fence or wall to permit transmission of
light, air and vision. Fences or walls in any required yard adjoining a
residential district shall conform to the requirements applicable to
residential districts.
21-12
(b) No person shall place, construct or maintain, or cause to be placed,
constructed or maintained any wire or chain link type fence with the cut
or selvage end of the fencing material exposed at the top, when such
exposed top is less than six feet (6') above ground level. Barbed wire or
similar material may be permitted on the top of a fence, provided, no
strand is less than six and one half feet (6-1/2') above the ground level
and does not extend beyond the property line.
3. In any "R" Residential Districts, the following shall apply:
(a) No fence or wall in any required front yard may exceed three feet (3 ') in
height, except the fence or wall may be erected to a height of four feet
(4 ') if the fence or wall or that portion of the fence or wall in excess of
three feet (3') is constructed of materials which provide openings of not
less than seventy-five percent (75%) in area of the vertical surface of the
fence or wall to permit transmission of light, air and vision through the
vertical surface. On a corner lot, a fence not to exceed six feet (6') in
height may be erected in the rear yard area extended to the street side lot
line.
(b) Fences or walls along interior lot lines within the limits of the side yard
on the adjoining lot shall not exceed four feet (4') in height, except in
those cases where the adjoining dwelling has a side yard of five feet (5'),
or more, then the fence or wall may be erected to a height of six feet (6').
The fence or wall may be erected to a height of eight feet (8') if the
fence or wall or that portion of the fence or wall in excess of six feet (6')
is constructed of materials which provide openings of not less than
seventy-five percent (75%) in area of the vertical surface of the fence or
wall to permit transmission of light, air and vision through the vertical
surface at a right angle.
(c) No person shall place, construct or maintain, or cause to be placed,
constructed or maintained any wire or chain link type fence with the cut
or selvage end of the fencing material exposed at the top. Further, no
person shall construct, use or maintain any barbed wire or similar type
material fence on residential zoned property.
21-13

SECTION XXll
OFF-STREET LOADING AND PARKING
A. PURPOSE AND SCOPE
1. The purpose of this Section is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens, prevent traffic congestion and hazards, provide for proper
traffic safety by preserving the public thoroughfares for the unimpaired
movement of pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic, provide for attractive,
secure, properly lighted, and well screened off-street parking facilities, assure
the mobility and access of emergency vehicles, provide for appropriately
designed parking facilities in proportion to the needs generated by the
varying types of land use, minimize the negative visual impacts of large
expanses of parking by reducing glare and hot spots from parking lots
through open space and landscaping around the parking areas, ensure that
loading and delivery services are compatible with adjacent parcels and
surrounding neighborhoods.
B. JURISDICTION
The lawful use of parking facilities existing at the time of the enactment of this Section
may be continued although such use may not conform to the regulations herein. For
those parking facilities permitted before the adoption of these regulations,. such facilities
shall be classified as "permitted non-conforming" facilities. No permit shall be issued for
any lot, tenant, or development after the effective date of and not in substantial
conformity with the provisions of these regulations. Nor shall any parking facility, except
as herein specified, be substantially improved, converted, enlarged, or otherwise altered
without conforming to the provisions of these regulations.
C. APPLICABILITY
In all districts, except the B-2 District, in connection with every industrial, commercial,
business, recreational, or dwelling use, and all other uses, space for off-street parking and
storage of vehicles shall be provided in accordance with all of the following regulations
except as elsewhere provided herein.
D. OFF-STREET PARKING
1. General Provisions: All of the following standards shall apply to all off-street
parking:
(a) No structure or use shall be permitted or constructed unless off-street
parking spaces are provided in accordance with the provisions of this
Section.
22-1
(b) All parking areas shall be so arranged and marked so as to provide for
orderly and safe loading or unloading, parking and storage of
self-propelled vehicles.
(c) Fractional space requirements shall be rounded up to the next whole
space.
(d) The number of required parking spaces for uses with differing business
hours that share a parking lot may be reduced by twenty-five percent
(25°1o) of the total required for each use if it is determined by the Zoning
Administrator that such reduction will not have a negative impact on the
congestion or safety of the development.
(e) When any principal building is enlarged, increased in capacity, or when
a change in use creates an increase in the amount of off-street parking
space required, additional off-street parking spaces shall be required, in
conformity with this Section.
(f) For a building where a single tenant has multiple uses, parking spaces
shall be provided in accordance with the parking requirements of each
use. An example of a mixed-use building is one containing a
combination of both office and manufacturing uses. The area dedicated
to each use can be calculated at its individual requirement, at the
discretion of the Zoning Administrator. The tenant may need to
demonstrate that the parking can meet the more restrictive standard if the
uses are changed.
(g) Buildings developed as "flexible space" shall be designed to
accommodate 5 spaces per thousand square feet of gross building area.
(h) Outdoor patron use areas or areas used for assembly shall be included in
the gross floor area (G.F .A.) for calculating parking requirements.
Outdoor dining or drinking areas shall be included in the G.F.A. for
bars, restaurants, and taverns when calculating parking requirements.
(i) Any required parking spaces displaced by building expansion shall be
provided elsewhere on the site. No required off-street parking facility
shall be reduced in capacity below the minimum requirements of this
Section.
(j) Required parking spaces shall be used only for parking of vehicles for
property owners, guests, renters, patrons or employees of the site.
Required parking spaces shall not be used for sale, display, rental or
repair of other motor vehicles.
22-2
(k) All parking of vehicles, including automobiles, vans, campers, trucks,
trailers, tractors, recreational vehicles, boats, construction equipment
and any other mobile vehicle equipped for street and highway travel
shall occur on paved areas and on private property only. City ROW
between the property line and the roadway shall not be used for parking
of vehicles.
(I) Parking and Storage. No person shall park, place, keep or store, or
permit the parking or storage of a stock car, racing car, inoperable
vehicle, vehicular component parts, or miscellaneous junk and debris on
any public or private property unless it shall be in a completely enclosed
building. This regulation shall not apply to legitimate businesses
operating in a lawful place and manner provided, however, that such
outside areas are screened from public view.
(m) No operable vehicle in "R" Districts shall be parked on lawn in front
yard except on designated surfaced driveway as approved by the Zoning
Administrator. In allowed areas, no more than forty (40) percent of the
front yard shall be surfaced for parking, but in no case greater than thirty
(30) feet wide.
E. HANDICAPPED PARKING REGULATIONS
1. With respect to handicapped parking, all of the following shall apply:
(a) The owner, contractor, and developer shall comply with all federal,
state, and local laws regarding handicapped parking including, but not
limited to, Iowa Code Chapter 321 Land the Americans with Disabilities
Act.
(b) Handicapped parking spaces required by federal, state, and local laws
shall count toward meeting the requirements of this Section.
F. DESIGN STANDARDS
1. Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private off-street parking area
shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the all of following
requirements:
2. With respect to access, all of the following shall apply:
(a) There shall be provided an access drive not less than ten (10) feet in
width in the case of a single family dwelling and not less than
twenty-four (24) feet in width for all other uses.
22-3
(b) Fire and emergency apparatus access roads, approved by the Fire Chief,
shall have an unobstructed width of not less than twenty (20) feet and
an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than fourteen (14) feet.
Upon approval by the Fire Chief, vertical clearance may be reduced,
provided such reduction does not impair access by fire and/or
emergency apparatus and approved signs are installed and maintained
indicating the established clearance.
3. All the following rules shall apply with respect to driveways:
(a) Driveways for individual single family residences shall not be located
closer than two (2) feet from an adjoining residential lot line, unless such
driveway is jointly used by adjoining property owners and a joint
easement has been recorded with the County Recorder.
(b) Except for single family residences, the minimum width of a one-way
drive without parking stalls shall be sixteen (16) feet. The minimum
width of a two-way drive without parking stalls shall be twenty-four (24)
feet.
4. Off-street parking facilities shall accommodate the maneuvering and
circulation of all vehicles on site, so as not to impair the movement of
vehicles on public streets. Except for single family and attached single family
dwellings, there shall be no backing of vehicles from an off-street parking
facility into the public street.
5. All the following rules shall apply concerning parking lot setbacks:
(a) No part of any parking space in B-1, B-3, M-1, or M-2 shall be closer
than ten (10) feet to any established public street right-of-way or public
street easement. The minimum side and rear yard setback of parking
facilities shall be five (5) feet. In case the parking lot is adjacent to an
"R" district, it shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the "R"
district boundary and shall be effectively screened with plantings.
(b) The minimum side and rear yard setback of parking facilities shall be
five (5) feet. In case the parking lot is adjacent to an "R" district, it shall
be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the "R" district boundary and
shall be effectively screened with plantings.
(c) Off-street parking areas may be established in any "R" District that
immediately adjoins a "B" or "M" District, or is directly across an alley
from a "B" or "M" District provided that:
22-4
1) Such parking shall be accessory to and for use of one or more
permitted uses in the adjoining "B" or "M" District and shall not
include trucks.
2) Such parking areas shall not extend more than one hundred (100)
feet from the boundary of the less restricted district. In no case
shall said areas extend closer than thirty (30) feet to the street
right-of-way line. The yard between said parking areas and the
adjoining streets shall be screen planted and landscaped as
provided in subparagraph (c)3) below.
3) A thirty (30) foot buffer shall be maintained between said parking
areas and adjoining lots in residential districts. Said buffer shall
be consistent with the requirements set forth herein this
ordinance. A masonry wall or other suitable fence may be
substituted for the wood fence.
4) All entrances and exits for said parking areas shall be from said
adjoining alley or "B" or "M" District.
6. A parking space reserved for the parking of vehicles shall have a dimension of
not less than nine (9) feet in stall width and nineteen (19) feet in length for
ninety (90) degrees parking without front-end overhang.
(a) Any parking stalls proposed at any angle other than specified above shall
have a length and depth sufficient to allow a nine (9) foot by nineteen
(19) foot rectangle parking area.
(b) Any parking space located parallel to a wall or other solid barrier shall
be widened by an additional two (2) feet.
(c) When the front of a parking stall abuts a sidewalk, the minimum width
of the sidewalk shall be six (6) feet. When the front of a parking stall
abuts open space within the perimeter of the parking lot, the minimum
width of the open space shall be three feet.
(d) When the front of a parking stall provides space as defined above, the
stall length may be decreased two (2) feet.
7. All off-street parking and loading areas shall conform to the Charles City
Standard Specifications for Public Improvements as well as the following
guidelines regarding surfacing:
22-5
(a) All off-street parking, loading areas, access roadways, and outdoor
storage and/or sales areas shall be paved with hot mix asphalt (HMA) or
Portland cement concrete (PCC) pavement.
(b) The minimum thickness of pavement of the parking areas shall
be as follows:
1) Driveways:
a) Multiple family and commercial: 6" PCC or 7" HMA.
b) Truck routes: 7" PCC or 8" HMA.
2) Parking areas: 5" PCC or 6" HMA.
(c) An alternate pavement or surfacing may be used in B-3, B-4, M-1 and
M-2 Districts, provided a geotechnical report substantiates the alternate
requirement, approved by the City.
(d) Material utilized in the subgrade shall be well drained and not
susceptible to frost boils.
(e) Driveway approaches and any other area within the City right-of-way
shall be constructed in accordance with Charles City Standard
Specifications for public improvements.
8. All parking spaces, except parking spaces for single-family attached and
detached residences, shall be striped in accordance with approved site plan.
The striping shall be maintained in a clear and visible manner.
9. All off-street parking areas and associated driveways, access roadways and
frontage roads, except driveways for single-family attached and detached
residences, shall be constructed with permanent, PCC curb and gutter of at
least six (6) inches high and twenty-four (24) inches wide or of alternate
height and width approved by the City. Prefabricated portable curb or wheel
stops shall not be considered an acceptable alternative, unless otherwise
approved by the City Council during review of a development request.
10. With respect to lighting, all of the following shall apply:
a) Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking or loading area
shall be designed for uniformity and be so arranged as to divert the light
away from adjoining residential uses or premises in any residential
district and away from public streets.
(b) lighting fixtures shall possess hard cut-off qualities at property lines.
22-6
(c) Lighting fixtures shall not be forward throwing. Lighting fixtures shall be
shoebox style with a flat lens. Such lights may be decorative or
ornamental subject to plan approval of the parking area.
(d) Any project adjacent to residential or sensitive areas such as parks or
open space shall be required to prepare an isometric foot-candle contour
lighting plan for review and approval by the City. The Zoning
Administrator may also require an isometric plan at his discretion for
any other parking plan.
(e) The illumination of the parking area shall be as follows:
1) Adjacent to uses other than residential/ sensitive areas:
a) Four hundred (400) watt light fixtures shall be permitted at a
maximum.
b) The overall height of the light fixture shall not be greater than
thirty (30) feet from grade, including base.
2) Adjacent to residential areas/sensitive areas:
a) Two hundred-fifty (250) watt light fixtures shall be permitted
as a maximum.
b) The overall height of the light fixture shall not be greater than
twenty-five (25) feet from grade, including base.
3) Under convenience store canopies, lighting shall provide seventy
(70) foot candle (fc) maximum with an average of fifty (50) fc or
less. Light fixtures shall be recessed into the canopy in such a way
that the lens is not visible.
11. All parking facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained with
security as a priority to protect the safety of the users. All required parking
facilities shall be permanently maintained, free of litter and debris.
12. Notwithstanding anything else contained herein, the provisions of this Section
shall not apply to the following uses:
(a) Temporary parking areas that have been approved by the City pursuant
to a temporary site plan and;
22-7
(b) Parking areas and access roadways located within a public park or
recreational area.
G. PROVISIONS FOR COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL USES
1. Off-street parking for commercial or industrial uses shall be located on the
same lot, structure or use to be served.
(a) For auto repair, car wash, oil change shops or other similar uses, lift
racks shall not be considered as a required parking space.
(b) Required parking spaces shall not be used or permitted to be used for the
repair, servicing or storage of vehicles, or for storage of materials.
(c) No outdoor parking spaces or drives shall be used as long term storage.
"Long term" in this case shall be defined as a period of time greater than
ten (10) days.
H. NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
1. In case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is not
specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use that is mentioned and
to which said use is similar shall apply, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
All following requirements listed are the minimum that must be met. Additional parking
may be required at the discretion of the City Council:
Assisted Living Centers 1 space per 2 dwelling units plus 1 per staff
Automotive repair stations: 3 spaces per service bay.
1 space per service vehicle.
2.5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of non-service area.
Automotive sales: 1/1,000 s.f. GFA plus 1/5,000 s.f. of
developed area.
Animal boarding/ kennels 3.5 spaces per 1,000 s.f.
Banks 2.5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA.
3 queuing spaces per drive through station.
Barber, beauty shops: 2 spaces per chair or beautician station
Bed and Breakfast: 2 spaces.
2 additional spaces for visitors.
Bowling centers: 3 spaces per lane.
5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of floor area for
associated eating and drinking places.
22-8
Car wash, drive-thru oil change: 3 spaces per 1,000 s.f.
Queing capacity equal to 2 per service
capacity.
Car washes- self service: .5 spaces per wash bay plus 2 queing
spaces per bay. The car wash bay does not
constitute one required space.
Child care center: 1 space; per 5 students, 5 spaces minimum.
1 space; per each van or bus, plus one queue
space per 6 students.
Commercial entertainment: , 5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of outdoor area and
building combined
Convenience stores: 5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA.
Dance and assembly halls, theaters, 1 space per 4 fixed seats. In the case of no
auditoriums and gymnasiums: fixed seats, 10 spaces per 1000 s.f.
Delicatessen/ donut shop/ coffee bar: 10 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA.
Drinking establishments/ lounge 15 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA.
Driving ranges: 2 per tee area.
Additional spaces as required for accessory
uses.
Elementary and junior high schools: 1 space per 2 employees plus auditoriums
Furniture, carpet/appliance retail: 2.5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA.
Funeral homes/mortuary: 1 space per 4 fixed seats. In cases of no fixed
seats, 10 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of assembly area.
Fitness Centers/Health clubs: 2.25 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA.
Golf courses: 6 spaces per hole.
Additional spaces as required for accessory uses.
Grocery stores: 5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. GFA.
Hospitals, nursing homes and similar 1 space for each 5 beds plus 1 for each dayshift
care centers: employee for facilities 20 or more beds. For
facilities 19 beds and under, 1 space for each 3
beds plus 1 for each dayshift employee.
Hotels and Motels: 1 space per guestroom.
Additional spaces as required by accessory
services.
Industrial or manufacturing facility: 1.5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA.
Libraries: 3 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA.
Manufacturing plants, research or 2 for each 3 employees on maximum working
testing laboratories, bottling plants: shift.
Medical office/clinic: 3 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA.
Multi-family dwelling: 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
1 visitor space per 5 dwelling units.
22-9
Professional/Business Office: 2.5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA.
Outdoor recreation: swimming 20 spaces per 1,000 s.f. pool area, 6 spaces
pools, tennis, basketball courts, per court, 18 spaces per field.
baseball, soccer fields:
Religious organizations: 1 space per 4 fixed seats. In cases where an
auditorium is not involved 10 per 1000.
Restaurant- fast food: 1 5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA.
5 queuing spaces per drive thru lane.
Restaurant - sit down, nonfast food: 15 spaces per 1,000 s.f. GFA.
Retail, general commercial 5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. of GFA.
Secondary schools, colleges and 1 space per classroom.
universities, and vocational schools: 1 space per 4 student seats at capacity.
Auditoriums and gymnasiums - 1 space per
4 seats.
Self-storage and mini-warehousing: 1 space per 20,000 s.f. GFA.
1 space per 50,000 s.f. vehicle or boat
storage spaces. Office space equal to office
space requirement.
Single family dwelling: 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Theaters: 1 for each 4 seats.
Townhomes/Attached/Multi Family/ 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Apartment Dwellings: 1 visitor space per 5 dwelling units.
Warehousing: 1 space per 1,000 s.f. of GFA or one space
per two employees, whichever is greater.
Note: s.f. ~ square feet, GFA ~ gross floor area
In case of any use which is not specifically mentioned in the above table, the provisions
for a similar use which is mentioned shall apply.
I. OFF-STREET LOADING REGULATIONS
1. In any "B" or "M" district, except B-2 District, in connection with every
building or part thereof hereafter erected, having a gross floor area of ten
thousand (10,000) square feet or more, which is to be occupied by
manufacturing, storage, warehouse, retail store, wholesale store, hospital,
mortuary, laundry, or other uses similarly requiring the receipt or distribution
by vehicles of material or merchandise, there shall be provided and
maintained on the same lot with such building, at least one (1) off street
loading space plus one (1) such loading space for each twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area so used in
excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet, provided:
22-10
(a) Each loading space shall be not less than ten (1 O) feet in width and
thirty-five (35) feet in depth. Such space shall be designed in a manner
acceptable to the City providing adequate space for loading access.
(b) loading yards and loading docks shall be screened and buffered from
general public view and from all other adjoining properties of
contrasting and conflicting uses.
(c) All loading yards and accesses shall be paved in accordance with the
design standards of this Section.
(d) loading areas shall be striped indicating the loading spaces. The striping
shall be permanently maintained in a clear and visible manner.
(e) loading areas and docks shall be permitted only in rear or side lot areas
unless otherwise approved by the City Council during the review of a
development request.
(f) loading spaces shall be located and designed so that trucks shall not
back into or from a public street.
(g) No area may be utilized and counted as a required parking space and a
loading dock.
(h) No part of a street or alley shall be used for loading or unloading, except
in a B-2 District.
I. WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS
1. The City Council reserves the right to waive or modify to a lesser restriction
any provision or requirement of off-street parking and loading areas
contained in this Section in any redevelopment of property within the City,
provided. a favorable report on such change is approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, and further provided said waiver or modification does
not adversely affect the intent of these regulations to adequately safeguard the
general public and surrounding property. Exceptions will only be considered
for those uses where special circumstances warrant a change and whereby
the modification or waiver is determined to be in the best interest of the
general public.
22-11

SECTION xxm
ADVERTISING AND SIGNS
A. STATEMENT OF INTENT
The purpose of this Section is to permit such signs as will not, by reason of their size,
location, construction or manner of display, endanger life and limb, confuse or mislead
traffic, obstruct vision necessary for traffic safety, or otherwise endanger the public morals,
health and safety; and further, to regulate such permitted signs in a way to promote
development that is not detrimental to the property values and aesthetics of the City. No
sign shall be erected or maintained in the City's jurisdiction, except those specifically
allowed by this Section. Signs allowed by this Section may be erected and maintained
only as on-premise signs.
All signs as permitted by the applicable zoning district regulations in all zoning districts in
the City of Charles City shall comply with the regulations of this Section.
B. GENERAL PROVISIONS
The following general provisions shall apply to display and outdoor advertising signs:
1. Nothing in this Article shall require the removal or discontinuance of a legally
existing sign that is not altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended, or relocated and
the same shall be deemed a nonconforming use under the terms of this
ordinance; provided however, the following signs shall be made to conform
with the provisions of this Article or shall be removed by the owner and/or
tenant upon written notice of the Zoning Administrator, forthwith in the case
of the immediate danger and in any case within not more than thirty (30) days
following said notice:
(a) Any sign which is in a state of serious disrepair or is no longer
functional;
(b) An obsolete sign that advertises an activity, business, product or service
no longer conducted on the premises on which the sign is located, or
any other sign which has been abandoned;
(c) Any sign which is in violation of the provisions of Subsections XXlll.B.2
and XXlll.B.3;
(d) Any portable sign that is not permanently anchored or secured to either a
building or the ground;
(e) Any sign that becomes insecure, in danger of falling, or otherwise
unsafe; or any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained.
23-1
If within thirty (30) days said order is not complied with, the Zoning
Administrator may cause such sign to be removed at the expense of the owner
and/ or tenant.
2. No sign shall closely resemble or approximate the shape, form and color of
any official traffic sign, signal or device. No sign shall be erected at any
location where it may, by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or
manner of illumination, constitute a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic
safety by obstructing the vision of motorists, by detracting from the visibility of
any traffic control device. No rotating beacon, beam or flashing illumination
resembling an emergency light shall be used in connection with any sign or
be visible for any adjacent street. Lights resembling an emergency light or
such words as "Stop", "Look", "Danger" or any other words, phrases, symbols
or characters, which in any manner interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic
shall not be used in connection with any sign.
3. No sign other than an official traffic, street, or related sign approved for
placement by the Zoning Administrator or City Engineer or other public officer
in the performance of his public duty, shall be placed on or over any street or
public property unless approved by City Council or otherwise provided in this
Ordinance.
4. Off-site signs are prohibited in all districts except as specifically permitted in
this Section; provided however, such signs may be permitted by the Board of
Adjustment when unusual or compelling circumstances may require.
5. Two (2) signs may be mounted on the same sign standard or structure
provided that the combined surface areas of such signs shall not exceed the
maximum area permitted for a single sign, except as specifically permitted in
this Section.
6. Illuminated signs shall not be of an intermittent flashing type and shall not
display any direct or focused illumination such as photo flood lamps, reflector
lamps or lamps with an optical reflector located in the rear of same. An
illumination from any lamp of over twenty-five (25) watts rating shall be
through a diffusing lens or frosted envelope, excepting indirect illumination.
In case of indirect illumination, all reflected or directed illumination must be
focused on said sign so that same cannot be seen from any direction in
adjacent areas.
7. Signs which are displayed inside or upon a window facing the outside and
which are intended to be seen from the exterior shall be permitted subject to
the same conditions and restrictions as wall signs.
8. These regulations shall not apply to any sign that is visible only from the premises
upon which it is erected, such as on walls of courts or malls in shopping centers.
23-2
9. These regulations shall not apply to signs which are accessory to the use of
any kind of operable vehicle, provided the sign is painted or attached directly
to the body of the vehicle.
C. GENERAL REGULATIONS
1. Conformance Required. Except as may be hereinafter specified, no sign shall
be erected, placed, maintained, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered which does not comply with all of the regulations
established by this Ordinance.
2. Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a good state of repair,
including, but not limited to, the structural components, the lighting if any,
the portion attaching the sign to the ground or structure, and the surface
features.
3. Non-Conforming Signs. Where a sign exists at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this
Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, use, height, setback, or other
characteristics of the sign or its location on the lot, such sign may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
(a) No such sign may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its
non-conformity; however, reasonable repairs and alterations may be
permitted.
(b) Should such sign be destroyed by any means to an extent of fifty percent
(50%) or more of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not
be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
4. Permit Required. A sign permit, signed by the owner and/or tenant, and
approved by the Zoning Administrator, shall be required before the erection,
construction, alteration, placing, or locating of all signs conforming with this
ordinance.
5. Permit Not Required. A permit shall not be required for repainting without
changing permanent wording, composition, or colors; or for nonstructural
repairs.
6. Plans. A copy of plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for each sign regulated by this Ordinance. Such plans shall
show sufficient detai Is about size of the sign, location and materials to be used
and such other data as may be required for the Zoning Administrator to
determine compliance with this Ordinance.
23-3
7. Appeal. Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning
Administrator to approve or disapprove a sign permit, as provided by this
Ordinance, may appeal such decision to the Board of Adjustment.
D. DEFINITIONS
1. Sign Area. The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the
entire area within a regular geometric form or combinations of regular
geometric forms comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all
of the elements of the matter displayed. Frames and structural members not
bearing advertising matter shall not be included in computation of the surface
area, except where such frames and structural members are used as an integral
primary or subsidiary portion of the graphic, literal, or numerical display, such
as forming a picture frame to facilitate continuity or providing contrasts to
emphasize the intended purpose of the sign.
2. Sign, Exterior. A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, service,
product or activity sold or offered upon the premises where such a sign is
located. An exterior sign maybe a sign attached flat against a building or
structure, or projecting out from a building or structure or erected upon the
roof of a building or structure. An exterior sign may include any of the
following:
(a) Fascia Sign: A single-faced building or wall sign that is directly attached
to and parallel to its supporting wall.
(b) Projecting Sign: A double-faced building or wall sign projecting at right
angles to its supporting wall.
(c) Marquee Sign: A sign attached to and contained within the perimeter of
the face or valance of a marquee.
(d) Roof Sign: A sign attached upon or above a roof or parapet of a building.
3. Sign, Free Standing or Post. Any sign erected or affixed in a rigid manner to
one or more poles, posts or the ground, and which carries any advertisement
strictly incidental and subordinate to a lawful use of the premises on which it
is located, including signs, or sign devices indicating the business transacted,
services rendered or goods sold or produced on the premises by an occupant
thereof. A free standing or post sign may also include the following:
(a) Directory Sign: A sign containing the name of a building, complex or
center and two or more identification signs or panels of the same size,
color and general design, limited to one identification sign per occupant.
23-4
(b) Monument Sign: A structure, built on grade that forms an integral part of
the sign or its background.
4. Sign, Billboard. As used in this Ordinance, billboard shall include all
structures, regardless of the materials used in the construction of the same,
that are erected, maintained or used for public display of posters, painted
signs, wall signs (whether the structure be placed on the wall or painted on
the wall itself), and pictures or other pictorial reading matter which advertise a
business or attraction which is not carried on or manufactured in or upon the
premises upon which said signs or billboards are located.
5. Sign, Institutional Bulletin Board. An on-premises sign containing a surface
area upon which is displayed the name of a religious institution, school,
library, public building, community center or similar institution and the
announcement of its services or activities.
6. Sign, Temporary. A temporary sign is any sign not permanently attached to
the ground, wall or building, and intended to be displayed for a short and
limited period of time.
7. Sign, Home Occupation. An un-illuminated sign displaying only the
occupant's name and occupation, that advertise the presence or conduct of
the home occupation.
8. Sign, Development. Sign identifying the name of a building, complex, or
development included on a wall or within landscape feature including planter
beds, fountains or decorative walls.
E. PROHIBITED SIGNS
Signs hereinafter designated shall be prohibited in all zoning districts:
1. Banners, Balloons, Posters, etc. Signs which contain or consist of banners,
balloons, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, or other similarly
moving devices, except as specifically provided in Section 23.F.(d) hereof.
These devices when not part of any sign shall also be prohibited.
2. Off-Premise Signs on Public Property. Off-premise signs located on public
property which is being used for public purposes.
3. Flashing Signs. No flashing, blinking, or rotation lights shall be permitted for
either permanent or temporary signs, except time and temperature signs and
brief public announcement signs.
23-5
4. Moving Signs. No sign shall be permitted any part of which moves by any
mechanical or electronic means except as approved by the Board of
Adjustment.
5. Painted Wall Signs. Off-premise signs painted on building walls for
commercial purposes.
6. Projecting Signs. Signs that encroach more than eighteen (18) inches on or
over a street right-of-way.
7. Off-Premise Signs. No off-premise sign advertising a commercial business
shall be permitted, either as permanent or temporary sign, except as approved
by the Board of Adjustment.
F. SIGNS PERMITTED IN All DISTRICTS
Signs hereinafter designated shall be permitted in all zoning districts. Semi-temporary and
permanent signs are subject to a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator.
1. Temporary Signs:
(a) Real Estate Signs. Signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the
premises or part of the premises on which the signs are displayed. One
(1) non-illuminated sign, not to exceed six (6) square feet, shall be
permitted on each premises. Such signs shall not extend higher than
four (4) feet above grade level or be closer than ten (10) feet to any
property line unless located on the wall of a building. Such signs shall
be removed within seven (7) days after the disposition of the premises.
Two signs meeting these requirements are allowed on a corner lot.
(b) Political Campaign Signs. Signs announcing candidates seeking public
political office or pertinent political issues. Such signs shall be confined
to private property and shall be removed within one (1) week following
the election to which they pertain.
(c) Street Banners. Signs advertising a public event providing that specific
approval is granted under regulations established by the City Council.
Such signs shall be removed within 30 days after approval by City
Council.
(d) Seasonal Decorations. Signs pertaining to recognized national holidays
and national observances. Such signs shall be confined to private
property and shall be removed within 15 days within a 60 day time
frame.
23-6
(e) Personal Announcement and Celebration Signs. Signs announcing
births, anniversaries, weddings and similar celebrations. Such signs shall
be confined to private property and shall be removed within 15 days
within a 60 day time frame.
(f) Banners, balloons and posters advertising an opening or closing of
business and for special events providing that specific approval is
granted by the Zoning Administrator. Such signs shall be confined to
private property and shall be removed within 15 days within a 60 day
time frame.
2. Semi-Temporary Signs
(a) Construction Signs. Signs identifying the architect, engineer, contractor
or other individuals involved in the construction of a building and such
signs announcing the character of the building enterprise or the purpose
for which the building is intended but not including produce advertising.
One (1) non-illuminated sign not to exceed fifty (50) square feet, shall
be permitted per street frontage. Such sign shall not extend higher than
ten (10) feet above grade level or be closer than ten (10) feet to any
property line unless located on the wall of a building on the premises or
on a protective barricade surrounding the construction. Such signs shall
be removed within one (1) week following completion of construction.
(b) Portable Signs. Signs advertising a business or sales event providing that
specific approval is granted by the Zoning Administrator. Such signs
shall be removed within 15 days within a 60 day time frame.
3. Permanent Signs
(a) Public Signs. Signs of a non-commercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by or upon the order of a public officer in the
performance of public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs,
trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical
interest and other similar signs, including signs designating hospitals,
libraries, schools and other institutions or places of public interest or
concern.
(b) Integral Signs. Signs for churches or temples, or names of buildings,
dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets and
other similar signs when carved into stone, concrete or other building
material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent type of
construction and made an integral part of the structure to which they are
attached.
23-7
(c) Window Signs. Such signs which are displayed inside of a window or
within a building, provided however, that lighted window signs shall be
permitted only in those districts where lighted signs are permitted.
4. Signs Permitted in the "COS" District
(a) Signs not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area pertaining to a
permitted recreation use or areas of scenic beauty provided such signs
shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from any right-of-way and there
shall be a distance of three hundred (300) feet between any such signs.
5. Signs Permitted in the "UA'' District
(a) Signs as permitted and regulated in "COS" District.
(b) Signs accessory to roadside stands shall be limited to two (2) signs per lot
with no sign being larger than ten (10) square feet in area and set back at
least ten (10) feet from the right-of-way of a street, highway or road.
(c) Real estate signs of a temporary nature, not exceeding two (2) in number
per lot or larger than twelve (12) square feet, set back twenty (20) feet
from any right-of-way of a highway, street or road.
(d) Signs not over eighteen (18) square feet in area, set back at least twenty
(20) feet from any right-of-way of a highway, street or road, may be
erected in connection with any of the permitted principal uses of a
nonresidential nature.
(e) Institutional bulletin board signs.
6. Signs Permitted in the "R-1" District
(a) Real estate signs of a temporary nature, not exceeding two (2) in number
per lot or larger than six (6) square feet, set back five (5) feet from any
right-of-way of a highway, street or road.
(b) A sign or signs flat against a building appertaining to a nonconforming
use on the premises, not exceeding in the aggregate fifty (50) square feet
in area.
(c) Signs not over eighteen (18) square feet in area, set back at least twenty
(20) feet from any right-of-way of a highway, street or road, may be
erected in connection with any of the permitted principal uses of
nonresidential nature.
(d) One (1) nameplate not exceeding two (2) square feet for each dwelling.
23-8
(e) Home occupation signs.
(f) Development sign, a monument sign not exceeding 60 square feet on
one side, a height of 10 feet and setback of 15 feet.
7. Signs Permitted in the "R-2" District
(a) Signs as permitted in "R-1" District.
8. Signs Permitted in the "R-3" District
(a) Signs as permitted in "R-2" District.
9. Signs Permitted in the "R-4" District
(a) Signs as permitted and regulated in "R-4" District, Section Xll.C.2.
10. Signs Permitted in the "R-5" District
(a) Signs as permitted in the "R-3" District.
11. Signs Permitted in the "B-1" District
(a) Trade or business identification signs for firms located on the site
provided that they:
1 ) Do not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height.
2) Are not located in required yard, except that one (1) free standing
sign not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height may be located in
the required front yard, subject to other provisions contained herein
and provided that the face or copy area of such signs shall not be
located lower than ten (10) feet above grade.
3) That such sign shall not have a surface area in excess of one
hundred (100) square feet on any one (1) side and not more than
two (2) sides of said sign shall be used for advertising purposes.
4) That such sign will not be located closer than ten (10) feet to the
right-of-way line.
5) A directory sign or monument sign may be substituted in place of a
free standing pole sign, subject to the requirements set forth above.
A monument sign shall not be more than ten (10) feet in height and
shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to any property line.
23-9
(b) Exterior signs located on the street frontages of principal buildings
referring only to a use or uses located within such building, and attached
or integral thereto, provided that:
1) Such signs shall not have an aggregate surface area in excess of
twenty percent (20%) of the total surface area of the building
elevation to which they are attached.
2) Signs which project out from the building more than eighteen (18)
inches must be at least twelve (12) feet above grade and may
project a maximum of six (6) feet but no closer than ten (10) feet to
any property line.
3) No sign shall project more than four (4) feet above the roof line or
parapet where one exists.
12. Signs Permitted in the "B-2" District
(a) Exterior fascia signs only, located on the street frontages of principal
buildings referring only to a use or uses located within such building,
and attached or integral thereto, provided that:
1) Such signs shall not have an aggregate surface area in excess of
twenty percent (20%) of the total surface area of the building
elevation to which they are attached:
2) Such signs may not project out from the building more than
eighteen (18) inches.
3) No sign shall project more than four (4) feet above the roof line or
parapet where one exists.
(b) One (1) free standing or post sign referring only to a use or uses
conducted on the premises may be erected in any yard abutting a public
street, provided however:
1) That such sign shall not have a surface area in excess of one
hundred (100) square feet on any one (1) side and not more than
two (2) sides of said sign shall be used for advertising purposes.
13. Signs Permitted in the "B-3" District and the "B-4" District
(a) Signs as permitted and regulated in "B-1" District except that signs shall
not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
23-10
(b) In "B-4" District, freestanding signs shall not exceed forty (40) feet in
height except in areas within five hundred (500) feet of the right-of-way
of "Avenue of the Saints" highway where a sign not to exceed sixty (60)
feet in height is permitted.
(c) Billboards and signboards, through special use permit, are subject to the
same location requirements as other structures in the "B-3" and "B-4"
Districts and also subject to the following conditions and restrictions:
1) No billboard, signboard or similar advertising signs shall be located
at intersections so as to obstruct vision, hearing or interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular safety.
2) No billboard, signboard or similar advertising signs shall be located
within fifty (50) feet of any lot in an "R" District.
3) No billboard or signboard shall exceed three hundred (300) square
feet in area.
4) No billboard or signboard shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in
height.
5) No billboard, signboard or similar advertising sign shall be so
constructed or located where it will unreasonably interfere with the
use and enjoyment of adjoining property.
14. Signs Permitted in the "M-1" District and the "M-2" District
(a) Temporary sign advertising the sale or lease of the premises, not
exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area.
(b) Trade, business or industry identification signs for firms located on the
site provided that:
1) Free standing or pole signs shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150)
square feet in area or twenty-five (25) feet in height. Such a sign
shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to the right-of-way line.
2) A directory sign or monument sign may be substituted in place of a
free standing sign, subject to the requirements set forth above. A
monument sign shall not be more than ten (10) feet in height and
shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet to any property line.
23-11
3) Signs mounted flush on the wall of a building shall not exceed ten
percent (10%) of the area of the wall of the building on which they
are located or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is smaller.
4) Overhanging signs, attached to a building shall not project above
the height of the building or more than four (4) feet from the wall of
the building and shall not have more than one hundred (100)
square feet of area.
5) Not more than one (1) sign of each category above may be
provided for any single use, although each sign may be a double
faced or back to back sign.
(c) Billboards as permitted in "B-4" Districts.
G. OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
The following regulations shall govern the placement of outdoor advertising signs and
billboards:
1. The regulations governing off-premise outdoor advertising signs and billboards
shall comply with all State and Federal regulations.
2. All off-premise outdoor advertising signs and billboards shall be set back from
any existing or proposed right-of-way line of any street or highway, at least as
far as the required front yard setback for the district in which it is permitted.
At any street intersection, the setback of any outdoor advertising sign or
billboard shall not be less than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the
established right-of-way line of each such street.
3. No off-premise outdoor advertising sign or billboard which faces the front or
side lot line of any lot in any Class "R" District used for residential purposes
shall be permitted within one hundred fifty feet (150') of such lot line.
4. No off-premise outdoor advertising sign or billboard which faces any public
parkway, public square or entrance to any public park, public or parochial
school, church or cemetery or similar institution shall be permitted within
three hundred feet (300') thereof.
23-12
SECTION XXIV
ADMINISTRATION
A. ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
1. Enforcement. The Zoning Administrator appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council and with aid of other municipal
departments shall enforce this Ordinance.
2. Powers and Duties of Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall
enforce this Ordinance, and in addition thereto and in furtherance of said
authority, shall:
(a) Issue all zoning certificates and make and maintain records thereof;
(b) Issue all occupancy permits and make and maintain records thereof;
(c) Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and use of land to determine
compliance with the terms of this Ordinance;
(d) Maintain permanent and current records of these regulations, including,
but not limited to, all maps, amendments, uses on review, variances,
appeals and applications therefor;
(e) Provide and maintain a public information service relative to all matters
arising out of this Ordinance;
(t) Forward to the Council and/or the Planning and Zoning Commission all
applications for amendment to this Ordinance;
(g) Transmit to the Board of Adjustment applications for appeals, variances,
special uses on review or other matters on which the Board of
Adjustment is required to pass under this Ordinance.
(h) Issue occupancy permit regulating the erection of buildings or structures
and use of land for periods not to exceed ten (10) days for specific
purposes such as temporary carnivals, churches, charities, and revival
meetings which are not detrimental to the public health, safety, morals,
comfort, convenience or general welfare; provided, however, that said
use of operation and any incidental temporary structures or tents are in
conformance with all other ordinances and codes of the City.
(i) Issue permits for construction within floodplain.
24-1
(j) Initiate, direct and review from time to time a study of the provisions of
this Ordinance and make recommendations to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Council.
3. Zoning Compliance Certificates and Occupancy Permits.
(a) Zoning Compliance Certificates. Except as hereinafter provided, no
permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by any
officer, department, or employee of the City unless the application for
such permit has been examined by the Zoning Administrator, indicating
that the proposed building or structure complies with all the provisions
of this Ordinance. Any permit or certificate issued in conflict with the
provisions- of this Ordinance shall be null and void.
(b) Occupancy Permits. No building, or addition thereto, constructed after
the effective date of this Ordinance, and no addition to a previously
existing building shall be occupied, and no land, vacant on the effective
date of this Ordinance, shall be used for any purpose until an occupancy
permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator. No change in a
use, other than that of a permitted use to another similar permitted use,
shall be made until an occupancy permit has been issued by the Zoning
Administrator. Every occupancy permit shall state that the use or
occupancy complies with the provisions of this Ordinance.
1) Application for Occupancy Permit. Every application for a building
permit shall be deemed to be an application for an occupancy
permit. Every application for an occupancy permit for a new use of
land where no building permit is required shall be made directly to
the Zoning Administrator.
2) Plans. Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by
plans in duplicate and plot plan drawn to scale in ink or blueprint,
or similar print, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot
to be built upon, the exact location, size and height of the building
or structure to be erected or altered, the existing and intended use
of each building or part, the proposed number of families or
housekeeping units, and such other information with regard to the
lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary for the enforcement of
this Ordinance. One (1) copy of such plans shall be signed and
returned to the applicant when approved by the Zoning
Administrator together with such permit as may be granted.
24-2
3) Corner Pins. Prior to building construction, lot corner pins based
on actual survey need to be identified when Zoning Administrator
or Building Official cannot determine property lines in field. If
disturbed by construction or grading corner pins shall be reset in
proper location based on actual survey.
4) Issuance of Occupancy Permit. No occupancy permit for a
building, or portion thereof, constructed after the effective date of
this Ordinance, shall be issued until construction has been
completed and the premises inspected and certified by the Zoning
Administrator to be in conformity with the plans and specifications
upon which the zoning certificate was based. Pending the issuance
of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate may be issued to be
valid for a period not to exceed six (6) months from its date during
the completion of any addition or during partial occupancy of the
premises. Reasons in writing for refusal to issue an occupancy
permit must be forwarded to the applicant no later than fourteen
(14) days after the request for an occupancy permit.
5) Zoning Compliance Certificate in Non-Conforming Uses. No
non-conforming structure or use shall be maintained, renewed,
changed, or extended until a certificate of zoning compliance shall
have been issued by the administrative official. The certificate of
zoning compliance shall state specifically wherein the
non-conforming use differs from the provisions of this Ordinance,
provided that upon enactment or amendment of this Ordinance,
owners or occupants of non-conforming uses or structures shall
have one (1) year to apply for certificates of zoning compliance.
Failure to make such application within one (1) year shall be
presumptive evidence that the property was in conforming use at
the time of enactment or amendment of this Ordinance.
4. Penalties. Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to
comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction,
be fined for each offense as provided in this Ordinance. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
5. Remedies. In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, the
City Attorney, in addition to other remedies under the Code of Iowa, is hereby
authorized to institute an action to enjoin, or any other appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent such erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance or use.
24-3
B. BOARD Of ADJUSTMENT
1. Creation, Membership and Procedure. A Board of Adjustment, consisting of
five (5) members, shall be appointed by the Council in accordance with
provisions of Chapter 414 of the Code of Iowa. The appointment authority
may remove any member of the Board for cause and after public hearing.
(a) The Board shall elect its own Chairperson and shall have the power to
adopt rules and regulations for its own government, not inconsistent with
law or with the provisions of this Ordinance or any other ordinance.
Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other
times as the Board may determine. The Chairperson, or in the absence
of the Chairperson, the Acting Chairperson may administer oaths and
compel attendance of witnesses.
(b) Meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, minutes shall be kept
of proceedings, showing the action of the Board and the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
that fact, and records shall be made of the Board's examination and other
official actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the
Board as a public record.
(c) Three (3) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board
shall act by resolution, and the concurring vote of three (3) members of
the Board is necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Zoning Administrator or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
Ordinance or to effect any variation in the requirements of this
Ordinance.
(d) The Board may call on municipal departments for assistance in the
performance of its duties and shall be the duty of such departments to
render such assistance to the Board as may reasonably be required.
2. Applications and Appeals.
(a) An application to the Board, in cases in which it has original jurisdiction
under the provisions of this Ordinance, may be taken by any property
owner, including a tenant, or by any governmental officer, department,
board or bureau. Such application shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator, together with a fee as established by the City Council,
who shall transmit the same, together with all the plans, specifications
and other papers pertaining to the application, to the Board. Should the
application be withdrawn prior to publication of legal notice thereon,
such fee will be returned upon written request of the applicant.
24-4
(b) An appeal to the Board may be taken by any property owner, including a
tenant, or by any governmental officer, department, board or bureau
affected by any ruling of the Zoning Administrator. Such appeal shall be
taken within a reasonable time, as prescribed by the rules of the Board,
by filing with the Zoning Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit to
the Board such notice of appeal, together with all the plans and papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
A fee as established by the City Council shall also accompany the
appeal. Should the appeal be withdrawn prior to publication of legal
notice thereon, such fee will be forfeited.
(c) The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an application or
of an appeal in accordance with the Code of Iowa. It shall give notice of
the time and place of such hearing by insertion in a newspaper having
circulation in the community, and shall also give notice delivered by first
class mail before the time fixed for such hearing to the applicant or
appellant and to the Zoning Administrator, and to the respective owners
of record of property adjoining or adjacent to the premises in question.
Any party may appear at such hearing in person or by agent or by
attorney. The Board shall decide the application or appeal within a
reasonable time.
(d) Stay of Proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to
the Board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in
the opinion of the Zoning Administrator cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by an order which may, on due cause shown, be granted by the Board
on application, after notice to the Zoning Administrator, or by a court of
record.
3. Power to Make Special Exceptions and Interpretations of Map. The Board
shall have the power to hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of
this Ordinance, requests or applications for special exceptions or for
interpretation of the zoning map or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which the Board is authorized to pass. In addition to permitting the
special exceptions heretofore specified, the Board shall have authority to
permit the following:
(a) Nonconforming Uses. The substitution for a nonconforming use,
another nonconforming use, if no structural alterations except those
required by law are made; provided, however, any use so substituted
shall be of the same or a more restricted classification.
24-5
(b) Temporary Uses and Permits.
1) The temporary use of a building or premises in any district for a
purpose or use that does not conform to the standards prescribed
by this Ordinance, provided that such use is of a true temporary
nature and does not involve the erection of substantial buildings.
Such permit shall be granted in the form of a temporary and
revocable permit for not more than a 12-month period, subject to
such conditions as will safeguard the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare.
2) The temporary use of a building or premises in undeveloped
sections for a purpose that does not conform to the standards
prescribed by this Ordinance, provided that such structure or use
is of a true temporary nature, is promotive of or incidental to the
development of such undeveloped sections, and does not involve
the erection of substantial buildings. Such permit shall be granted
in the form specified under paragraph (1) above.
(c) Interpretation of Map. Where the street or lot layout actually on the
ground or as recorded, differs from the street and lot lines indicated on
the zoning map, the Board, after notice to the owners of the property and
after public hearing, shall interpret the map in such a way as to carry out
the intent and purposes of this Ordinance for the particular section or
district in question.
4. Administrative Review. The Board has the power to hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, grant or refusal made by the Zoning Administrator in
the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance.
5. Variances. The Board may authorize on appeal in specific cases such
variance from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that
the spirit of this Ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done, as
follows:
24-6
(a) Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a
specific piece of property at the time of enactment of these regulations,
or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions, or other
extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of
property, or of the use or development of property immediately
adjoining the piece of property in question, the literal enforcement of the
provisions of this Ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional
practical difficulties or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner
of such property, unnecessary to carry out the spirit and purpose of this
Ordinance, the Board shall have the power to authorize, upon appeal, a
variance from such strict application, so as to relieve such difficulties or
hardships, and so that the spirit and purpose of this Ordinance shall be
observed and substantial justice done. In authorizing a variance, the
Board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location,
character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as
it may deem advisable in the interest of the furtherance of the purposes
of this Ordinance.
(b) No such variance in the provisions or requirements of this Ordinance
shall be authorized by the Board unless the Board finds beyond
reasonable doubt that all of the following conditions exist:
1) There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applying to the property in question or to the intended use of the
property that do not apply generally to other properties or class of
uses in the same zoning district.
2) Such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same
zoning district and in the vicinity.
3) The authorizing of such variance will not be of substantial detriment
to adjacent property and will not materially impair the purposes of
this Ordinance or the public interest.
(c) No grant or variance shall be authorized unless the Board specifically
finds the condition or situation of the specific piece of property for
which the variance is sought is not of so typical or recurrent a nature as
to make reasonably practicable the formulation of a general regulation,
under an amendment of this Ordinance, for such conditions or
situations.
(d) The Board shall have no power to authorize a variance for the
establishment of a nonconforming use where none previously existed.
24-7
(e) In considering a request for a variance from the regulations concerning
signs, the Board shall give consideration and arrive at a finding on the
following:
1) Shape and area of lot in question.
2) Bulk and floor area of the main building or structure.
3) Setback of proposed sign from all property lines.
4) Zoning and use of surrounding parcels.
5) Unusual or exceptional topography.
6) Compatibility with general intent of the zoning regulations to
encourage development without detracting from the use and
enjoyment of surrounding property.
6. Special Use Permit. The Board of Adjustment shall review, before issuing any
special use permit, the conformity of the proposed building or use with the
standards of the Comprehensive Plan and recognized principals of land use
planning. The Board of Adjustment may approve the special use permit as
submitted, or before approval, may require that the applicant modify, alter,
adjust, or amend the proposal as the Board of Adjustment deems necessary to
preserve the intent and purpose of this Ordinance in order to promote the
health, safety, and general welfare of the community.
(a) In the event a Special Use Permit is granted under the terms of this
Ordinance, any changes thereafter in the approved use or site plan shall
be resubmitted and considered in the same manner as the original
proposal.
(b) A Special Use Permit shall not be granted by the Board unless and until:
1) A written application, on forms provided by the Zoning
Administrator, is submitted indicating the Section of this Ordinance
under which the special exception is sought and stating the grounds
on which it is requested.
(c) The Board shall look specifically upon the following criteria in granting
or denying a Special Use Permit, plus any additional criteria the Board
finds necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
in accordance with the intent of this Ordinance:
24-8
1) That the proposed location, design, construction and operation of
the particular use adequately safeguards the health safety, and
general welfare of persons residing or working in adjoining or
surrounding property;
2) That such use shall not impair an adequate supply of light and air to
surrounding property;
3) That such use shall not unduly increase congestion in the streets or
public danger of fire and safety;
4) That such use shall not diminish or impair established property
values in adjoining or surrounding property, and
5) That such use will not unduly burden public utilities.
(d) In granting any Special Use Permit, the Board of Adjustment may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this
Ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a
part of the terms under which the special use permit is granted, shall be
deemed a violation of this Ordinance and punishable under provisions
of this Ordinance.
7. Action of Board. In exercising its powers, the Board may, in conformity with
the provisions of the Code of Iowa and of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as, in the Board's opinion, ought to be made, and
to that end has all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
8. Judicial Review. All final administrative decisions of the Board of Adjustment
shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 414,
Code of Iowa, and all amendments and modifications thereof, and the rules
adopted pursuant thereto.
9. City Council Remand. The City Council, may, at its discretion, review any
affirmative decision of the Board of Adjustment at any time before the
effective date of the decision in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 414 Code of Iowa. After such review, but prior to the effective date
of the variance, the City Council may remand any such decision to the Board
of Adjustment for further review. Upon remand, the Board of Adjustment may
reconsider its decision and issue its final decision on the request within thirty
(30) days after the date of such remand.
24-9
10. Expiration of Special Use Permit and Variance. All special use permits and
variances shall expire and terminate ninety (90) days after the date of the
granting of such Special Use Permit or variance unless a building permit has
been issued for the construction authorized by such Special Use Permit or
variance, or if no construction is authorized, then unless a Certificate of
Zoning Compliance has been issued for such authorized use. The Board of
Adjustment may, upon written request of the affected person, extend the time
for the issuance of a building permit or Certificate of Zoning Compliance for
sixty (60) days. In the event the building permits for the construction so
authorized is canceled, such Special Use Permit or variance shall thereupon
expire and terminate.
24-10
SECTION XXV
AMENDMENTS
A. DISTRICT CHANGES AND ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS
1. In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 414, Code of Iowa, the Council
may from time to time on its own action or on petition, after public notice and
hearing as provided by law, and after report by the Planning and Zoning
Commission amend or change by ordinance the number, shape, or area of
districts established on the zoning map or the standards set forth in these
regulations; but no such amendment or change shall become effective unless
the proposed amendment or change shall first be submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Commission for approval, disapproval or suggestions, and the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall have been allowed a reasonable time,
not less than thirty (30) days, for consideration and report. According to
Section 414.5, Code of Iowa, the City Council may impose conditions on a
property owner which are in addition to existing regulations if the additional
conditions have been agreed to in writing by the property owner before the
public hearing required under this section or any adjournment of the hearing.
The conditions must be reasonable and imposed to satisfy public needs
which are directly caused by the requested change.
8. HEARING
1. Before submitting its recommendations and report to the Council, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
amendment, supplement or change. It shall give notice of public hearing as
provided by law, and by mailing notices to all property owners directly
involved, contiguous within two hundred (200) feet to, and directly across a
street or alley from the area proposed to be altered. However, the regulation,
restriction, or boundary shall not become effective until after a public hearing
by City Council at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an
opportunity to be heard. The notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be published as provided in. section 362.3, Code of Iowa, except that at least
seven (7) days notice must be given and in no case shall the public hearing be
held earlier than the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting following
the published notice.
25-1
C. PETITION
1. Whenever any person, firm or corporation desires that any amendment or
change be made in this Ordinance, including the text and/or map, as to any
property in the City, and there shall be presented to the Council a petition
requesting such change or amendment and clearly describing the property
and its boundaries as to which the change or amendment is desired, duly
signed by the owners of fifty percent (50%) of the area of all real estate
included within the boundaries of said tract as described in said petition, and
in addition, duly signed by the owners of fifty percent (50%) of the area of all
real estate lying outside of said tract but within two hundred (200) feet of the
boundaries thereof, (intervening streets and alleys not to be included in
computing such two hundred (200) feet) it shall be the duty of the Council to
vote upon such petition within a reasonable time after the filing of such
petition with the City Clerk.
D. NOTICE
1. In accordance with the Code of Iowa prior to the public hearing, the text or
copy of the text of such ordinance or petition, together with the maps or plans
or copies thereof shall be on file, for public examination, in the office of the
Zoning Administrator. No ordinance which differs from the recommendation
made by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall become effective unless
passed by not less than three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the Council.
E. WRITTEN PROTEST
1. In case a written protest against a proposed change in the boundaries of a
district signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or
more of the area of the lots included in the proposed change or repeal, or by
the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of the property which is located
within two hundred (200) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property for
which the change or repeal is proposed, is filed with the Clerk, such change
or repeal shall not be passed or become effective except by the favorable vote
of at least three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the Council. The protest, if
filed, must be filed before or at the public hearing.
25-2
F. NOTIFICATIONS
1. The failure to notify, as provided by this section, shall not invalidate an
ordinance, provided such failure was not intentional, and the omission of the
name of any owner or occupant of property who may, in the opinion of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, be affected by such amendment,
supplement or change, unless such omission is intentional, shall not
invalidate any ordinance passed hereunder, it being the intention of this
section to provide so far as may be for notice to the persons substantially
interested in the proposed change that an ordinance is pending before the
Council, proposing to make a change in zoning.
G. FEES
The Federal Insurance Administration and the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources shall be notified of each amendment to the boundaries or
regulations of the "F-1" District.
1. The City Council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees, charges,
and expenses and a collection procedure for amendment to this zoning
ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the City
Clerk, and may be altered or amended only by resolution by the City Council.
H. DENIAL OF PETITION
1. Denial of Petition. Whenever any petition for an amendment, supplement, or
change of the zoning regulations herein contained or subsequently
established shall have been denied by the City Council, then no new petition
covering the same property, or the same property and additional property,
shall be filed with or considered by the City Council until one (1) year shall
have elapsed from the date of the filing of the first petition.
25-3

SECTION XXVI
SCHEDULE OF FEES
The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection
procedure for certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, and other matters pertaining to
this Ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the City Clerk and
may be periodically altered or amended by Resolution of the City Council.
No certificate, special exception, or variance shall be issued unless or until such costs,
charges, fees, or expenses have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken on
proceedings before the Board of Adjustment unless or until preliminary charges and fees
have been paid in full.
26-1

ATTACHMENTS- ILLUSTRATIONS
A-1

ROOF
DIRECTORY
MARQUEE
DIRECTIONAL
MONUMENT
FREE STANDING
SIGN TYPES
A x B = SIGN AREA
~A--t I r1\ A~ ~~ L_L
- f-.--o. I ' ' . f . I I I I 1 1 ' 1 I ' ' .
SIGN AREAS
ATTACHMENT A

SIDE YARD
Least Width
FIRST
REVERSED
FRONTAGE
LOT
REVERSED
FRONTAGE
LOT
SECOND
STREET
CORNER
LOT
INTERIOR LOTS
CORNER
LOT
STREET
w
;:;)
z
~
J DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS [_
THIRD
REAR YARD
Least Depth
-~- SIDE YARD
r--i!,i:;::<:+::J Least Width
Least Depth
FRONTYAR
THIRD
BUILDING OR
,..,.---s~BACK LINE
PROPERTY LINES
STREET
STREET
1
LOT & YARD DEFINITIONS
ATTACHMENT B

H
I
H
I
H
I
A
HALF
~----r-.,./~STORY
STORY
STORY
··=,,."~ .,_i~ • ••.
·~v !i;v
...... ··:. ••· .. -. . .. .. ,.. 8
WHEN B IS GREATER. THAN A, WHEN B IS LESS THAN A,
C IS A CEllAR C IS A BASEMENT
CELLAR, BASEMENT, HALF STORY, STORY
END VIEW SIDE VIEW
MANSARD ROOF
PITCH (GABLE) ROOF
HIP ROOF
r !!!Ill 1111111111, II,!! 'I
FLAT ROOF
BUILDING HEIGHTS
ATIACHMENTC

Residential Buildings
must meet the 1tfW"
requirements if lowest
floor comes within 11
of 100.year flood
elevation.
Flood Plain Overlay District ----------------1
"GF" t----------- General Flood Plain District -----------i
(Zone A)
"FF11
.__ _ Floodway Fringe ---i
District
(Residential)
B 1'f---t-
• ~I
Bulldlngt with no part of
lowert floor below 11 above
the 100-year flood elevation
Oncluding basements). Storage
and crawl spaced allowed
below with approved
engineering plans.
"FW"
Floodway
District
-1-00--Ye·ar
Flood Elevation
Normal River Channel
Permitted Uses:
Parks, open space,
parking lots, dams,
and bridges.
No homes allowed.
"FF"
i---- Floodway Fringe __ ...,
District
(Non-Residential)
Bulldlngt flood proofed to
10()..yetr flood elevatlon
or elevated 1' above
100oyear flood elevation.
o•
Garage
Buildings out of 100-.,.ear
floodplain have no
additional requirement.
FLOOD PLAIN (OVERLAY) DISTRICT
ATIACHMENTD

I -
PARKING STALL REQUIREMENTS
Degree Stall to Aisle Curb
of Curb Width Length
Angle (A) (B) (Q
0 9.0' 12.0' 20.0'
45 20.5' 13.0' 13.1'
60 21.5' 18.0' 10.0'
90 20.0' 24.0' 9.0'
"B" DISTRICT
~ 15' WHEN A B or M DISTRICT ABUTS AN R DISTRICT
I l I 2' WHEEL BARRIER SETBACK
\
VEHICULAR
MANEUVERING
AREA n VEHICULAR OVERHANG
-----~ PERMEABLE MATERIAL
AND LANDSCAPED
"M" DISTRICT
5' VEHICULAR FRONT--YARD
SETBACK AREA
TYPICAL PARKING LOT LAYOUT
ATTACHMENT E

SINGLE
DETACHED (DUPLEX] SEMl-0 TACHED · ol rn: 1 1
1
._____Lor __ _L •~' ~-••• i ~
0.5
1.0
LOT LOT LOT LOT
<?%11 Q
1 Story
Covers ~ of lot
1 Story
Cover• all of lot
I l I I j
I 1 t I I L.---l--t---+.--.:---+---
1 1 I I I
I ! ; ! :
FLOOR AREA RATIO
~ 2 Story
Covers ~ of lot
2 Story
Covers ls of Lot
4 Story
Covers Ii; of lot
TYPES OF DWELLING UNITS
ATTACHMENT F

SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
CHARLES CITY, IOWA
'
Approved by:
Planning and Zoning Commission
City Council
Effective:
11/01/04
1/03/05
1/07/05

SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
CHARLES CITY, IOWA
2005
CITY COUNCIL
James A. Erb, Mayor
Dean Andrews
Andy Cerio
Jerry Joerger
Dennis Sanvig
Arvin Tibbitts
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Marilee Monroe
Ed Duroe
Norm Gerdes
Betty Held
Tom Keiser
Chuck LeMaster
Mike Schear
CITY STAFF
Don Lorsung, City Administrator
Jody Meyer, City Clerk
Ralph Smith; City Attorney
Tracy Meise, Project and Planning Coordinator
Dave Boehmer, Assistant Building Official
Roy Schwickerath, Fire Chief/Building Official
Dennis Willemssen, Project Engineer
Prepared by
VEENSTRA & KIMM, INC.
West Des Moines, Iowa
Mason City, Iowa

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION SUBJECT PAGE
PREAMBLE ...................................................................................... i
PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION ................................................. 1-1
A. PURPOSE ......................................................................... 1-1
B. JURISDICTION ................................................................. 1-1
II RULES AND REGULATIONS ...................................................... 2-1
A. DEFINITIONS ...........................•....................................... 2-1
Ill GENERAL PROVISIONS ............................................................. 3-1
A. INTERPRETATION .•.......•....................................••••......•... 3-1
B. RESERVATIONS AND APPEALS ....................................... 3-2
C. AMENDMENTS ..........................•........................•............ 3-2
D. ACRE SUBDIVISION .......................•................................ 3-2
E. AUDITOR'S PLATS ...........•...••....•...................................•. 3-2
F. VACATION OF PLATS ..........................•.......................... 3-2
G. VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS ..........•.......................... 3-3
H. FEES ...........................................•...................•................. 3-3
I.· ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES .....•....... 3-3
IV PLATTING PROCEDURES AND PLAT REQUIREMENTS ............. 4-1
A. PRELIMINARY PLATTING PROCEDURE .•........................ 4-1
B. CONSTRUCTION PLANS ......•.•..•...........................•......... 4-3
C. FINAL PLA TIING PROCEDURE .•..................•.................. 4-3
D. MINOR PLAT .................................•..•..........................•... 4-4
E. AUDITOR'S PLAT ............................................................ 4-4
F. PERMITS .......................................................................... 4-4
G. PLATS WITHIN TWO (2) MILES OF A CITY .................... .4-4
H. PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE ......................................... .4-5
I. PERFORMANCE BOND ................................................... 4-5
V PRELIMINARY PLAT ................................................................... 5-1
A. GENERAL ........................................................................• 5-1
B. IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION .......•...................• 5-1
C. EXISTING CONDITIONS .................................................. 5-1
D. SUBDIVISION DESIGN FEATURES ............•..................... 5-2
VI FINAL PLAT ................................................................................ 6-1
A. GENERAL ........................................................................• 6-1
B. CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT ............................................ 6-1
C. MATERIAL TO ACCOMPANY FINAL PLAT ......•.........•..... 6-3
D. MINOR PLAT ................................................................... 6-4
VII BONDS ....................................................................................... 7-1
A. PERFORMANCE BOND .....................................•............. 7-1
B. MAINTENANCE BONDS ......•.....•.........•...........•............... 7-2
C. RECORDS AND REQUIREMENTS .................................... 7-3
D. PROCEDURE ON DEFAULT ................•.......................... .7-3
E. SURVIVAL OF OBLIGATION .....................•..................... 7-3
-1-

vm SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS ........................................ 8-1
A. STREET PLAN ...•......•.....................•.................................. 8-1
B. STREETS ...........................•............................................... 8-1
C. ALLEYS AND PEDESTRIAN WAYS ......................•............ 8-3
D. EASEMENTS ..................................................................... 8-3
E. BLOCK STANDARDS ......•..•.....•............•.......................... 8-3
F. LOT STANDARDS ......................•....................................• 8-4
G. ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS .............................................. 8-5
IX REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS .......................................... 9-1
A. GENERAL ...........•.......•..•..........................•.............•........• 9-1
B. SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM ...................•.......................... 9-1
C. WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM .............•....................... 9-2
D. STORM SEWER SYSTEM ................•................................. 9-4
E. SITE AND STREET GRADING ...•.............................•........• 9-6
F. STREET IMPROVEMENTS ...•............................................. 9-6
G. SIDEWALKS .......•..................•..•.................•..................... 9-7
H. STREET LIGHTS ..........•..........................•..•....................... 9-8
I. PUBLIC UTILITIES .......................................•.................... 9-9
j. STREET SIGNS ................................••........•..•.................... 9-9
K. STREET TREES ....................•.......................•................... 9-10
X PARKS AND RECREATION ....................................................... 10-1
A. PURPOSE ..........................................•.....................•...... 10-1
B. PARK SITE DEDICATION AND RESERVATION ....•....•.... 10-1
C. PARK LAND DEDICATION AND DEVELOPMENT ......•.. 10-2
D. PAYMENT IN LIEU OF DEDICATION ...•........................ 10-2
E. SPECIAL FUND ............................•................................. 10-3
F. PROCEDURES .................•.............................................. 10-3
-2-

ORDINANCE NO. 1014
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
CITY OF CHARLES CITY, IOWA
PREAMBLE
AN ORDINANCE providing rules and regulations for the approval of plats, subdivisions,
resubdivisions, or dedications in Charles City and within two miles of the unincorporated
areas of Floyd County; prescribing minimum standards for the design layout and
development thereof; providing for the preliminary and final approval or disapproval
thereof; providing for the enforcement and penalties for the violation thereof, all for the
purpose of promoting the adequacy, safety, and efficiency of the street and road system;
and for the purpose of improving the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens;
and repealing the existing ordinance and all amendments thereto.
WHEREAS the City Council has adopted a Comprehensive Plan as a guide to the future
development of Charles City; and
WHEREAS in accordance with said Comprehensive Plan the City Council has adopted a
zoning ordinance to assist in controlling the future development of Charles City by
regulating the uses of land, the size of lots, the height and bulk of buildings, the size of
yards and open spaces around buildings, the density of population and the locations and
uses of buildings and structures for agriculture, residences, commerce, industry and other
purposes; and
WHEREAS it is essential that the subdivisions of land be coordinated with the zoning
ordinance for the purpose of guiding the future development of Charles City as outlined in
the Comprehensive Plan; and
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of Charles City, Iowa:
SECTION 1. The existing subdivision regulations of the City of Charles City as amended,
is hereby amended by repealing and enacting in lieu of the preceding subdivision
ordinance, the following subdivision ordinance.
SECTION 2. REPEALER. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed.
SECTION 3. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, provision or part of this ordinance
shall be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the
validity of the ordinance as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not adjudged
invalid or unconstitutional.
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its final
passage, approval and publication as provided by law.
PASSED BY THE CITY COUNCIL ON THE 3rd DAY OF January , 2005, AND
APPROVED ON THE 3rd DAY Of January , 2005, AT THE CITY OF
CHARLES CITY, IOWA.
Isl James A. Erb
Mayor
Isl Jody Meyer
City Clerk
Published as Ordinance No. 1014 in the Charles City Press on the 7th day of
January , 2005.
ii
SECTION I
PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION
A. PURPOSE
Because each new subdivision accepted by the City becomes a permanent unit in the
basic physical structure of the future community and to which the future community will,
of necessity, be forced to adhere, all subdivisions hereafter planned within the
incorporated limits of the City of Charles City, and within two miles of the unincorporated
Floyd County, shall in all respects be in full compliance with the regulations hereinafter
contained in this Ordinance. These regulations are designed to provide for the orderly and
harmonious development of the City of Charles City for the coordination of streets within
new subdivisions with other existing or planned streets, and to secure a uniform system of
utilities and services, and otherwise to promote realization of the Comprehensive Plan of
the City of Charles City.
B. JURISDICTION
1. Outside City. In accordance with the provisions of Section 354.9 of the Code
of Iowa, these regulations shall apply to the subdivision of land within two (2)
miles of the corporate limits.
The City Council shall have the right to waive such requirements as are
contained in this Ordinance to the end that the City Council is satisfied that
equally suitable regulations have been placed on these subdivisions by the
Board of Supervisors; provided however, that the Floyd County Board of
Supervisors furnish the Commission and Council with a copy of said
subdivision certifying that all requirements of the appropriate County
ordinances have been met. The Commission shall study such plat to
determine that no conflict exists with the extension of existing streets and
rights-of-way within the City into the unincorporated area and to determine if
the plat would otherwise interfere in any way with the implementation of the
Comprehensive Plan for the City of Charles City. If the Commission is
satisfied by their studies that these conditions are provided for, they shall
endorse their approval upon said plat and submit it to the City Council. Upon
approval by the City Council, the City Clerk shall notify the County Auditor
and Recorder in accordance with the provisions of existing statutes.
The purpose of this section is to facilitate the orderly processing of
subdivisions in unincorporated areas within two (2) miles of the City of
Charles City and to avoid conflicting regulations while at the same time
assuring that provisions are made for proper and orderly future growth of the
City of Charles City.
1-1
2. City Inspection. All improvements constructed on any land subject to the
jurisdiction of the City shall be inspected by the City and shall comply with
the City's standard construction specifications.
1-2
SECTION II
RULES AND REGULATIONS
The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted in accordance with
the following rules:
1. the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular;
2. the present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the
present;
3. the word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive;
4. whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this
Ordinance, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition
thereof; and any word appearing in parenthesis, directly after a word herein
defined, shall be construed in the same sense as that word;
5. the masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter;
6. all measured distance, expressed in feet, shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a
fraction is one-half foot or more the integral foot next' above shall be taken; and
7. the following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Ordinance, shall
be construed as here defined:
A. DEFINITIONS
ACQUISITION PLAT: The graphical representation of the division of land or rights in
land, created as the result of a conveyance or condemnation for right-of-way purposes
by an agency of the government or other persons having the power of eminent
domain.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: The City Official appointed by the City Council to assist with
the administration of this Ordinance.
ALIQUOT PART: A 40-acre fractional part of a section within the United States public
land survey system. Only the fractional parts one-half, one-quarter, one-half of
one-quarter, or one-quarter of one-quarter shall be considered an aliquot part of a section.
ALLEY: A right-of-way, with a width not exceeding 24 feet, which affords a secondary
means of access to abutting property.
2-1
ARTERIAL STREET (THOROUGHFARE, MAJOR STREET, HIGHWAY): A public
right-of-way with the highest degree of traffic continuity and serving as a major
trafficway for fast or heavy traffic between the various districts of Charles City, as
shown on the Comprehensive Plan.
AUDITOR'S PLAT: A plat prepared at the request of the County Auditor to clarify
property boundaries for the purposes of assessment and taxation.
BLOCK: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets and
the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision.
BOND: Cash deposits, surety bonds or instruments of credit in the amount and form
satisfactory to the City. All bonds shall be accepted and approved by the City Council
whenever a bond is required by these regulations.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line within a plat or other parcel of land, so designated on
the preliminary plan between which and the adjacent street the erection of an enclosed
structure or fence is prohibited.
CITY: The City of Charles City, Iowa.
CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City of Charles City, Iowa.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Charles City, Iowa.
CITY ENGINEER: A registered Civil Engineer that is appointed or designated by the City of
Charles City to serve in this capacity for the purposes of this Ordinance and its provisions.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street of considerable continuity which carries traffic from local
streets to an arterial street, including the principal entrance streets of residence
development and the principal circulating streets within such a development.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: Refers to the composite of the functional and geographic
elements of the Plan or any segment thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts
and textual material, as adopted by the City of Charles City.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS: The maps or drawings prepared by a registered engineer
accompanying the subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of
improvements to be installed in the subdivision. The term construction drawing means
the same.
CONTRACTOR: Any person who constructs the improvements required herein.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having one open end and being permanently terminated
at the other by a vehicular turn-around.
2-2
DEAD-END STREET: A street presently closed to through traffic at the end and is planned
for future extension.
EASEMENT: A grant by a property owner of the specific use of a strip of land by others.
FINAL PLAT: A map or plan of a subdivision, and any accompanying material, as
described in Section VI.
GOVERNMENT LOT: A tract, within a section, which is normally described by a lot
number as represented and identified on the township plat of the United States public
land survey system.
HALF STREET: A street bordering one or more property lines of a tract of land in which the
developer has allocated out part of the ultimate right-of-way width in accordance with the
requirements as set forth in Section VIII.
LOCAL STREET: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting
properties and the local needs of a neighborhood.
LOT: A portion of subdivision or other land intended as a unit for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development.
LOT, BUTI: A lot at the end of a block and located between two corner lots.
MAINTENANCE BOND: A surety bond or cash deposit made to the City in an amount
equal to the full cost of the improvements which are required by this Ordinance, such cost
being estimated by the City Engineer, and the surety bond or cash deposit being legally
sufficient to secure to the City that the improvements have been constructed by the
contractor in accordance with this Ordinance and the City's standard specifications.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to, or in
the immediate vicinity of an arterial street and which has for its purpose the relief of such
thorough fare from the local service of abutting properties.
METES AND BOUNDS DESCRIPTION: A description of land that uses distances and
angles, uses distance and bearings, or describes the boundaries of the parcel by reference
to physical features of the land.
OFFICIAL PLAT: Either an auditor's plat or a final subdivision plat that meets the
requirements of this Ordinance and has been filed for record in the offices of the recorder,
auditor and assessor.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other
legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided to
commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under the Ordinance for
himself or for another.
2-3
PEDESTRIAN WAY (CROSSWALK): A right-of-way across a block or providing access
within a block, to be used primarily by pedestrians.
PERFORMANCE BOND: A surety bond or cash deposit made to the City in an amount
equal to the full cost of the improvements which are required by this Ordinance, such cost
being estimated by the City Engineer, and the surety bond or cash deposit being legally
sufficient to secure to the City that the improvements will be constructed in accordance
with this Ordinance.
PERMANENT REAL ESTATE INDEX NUMBER: A unique number or combination of
numbers assigned to a parcel of land pursuant to 441.29, Code of Iowa, as amended.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other
legal entity.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The Charles City Planning and Zoning
Commission.
PLANS OF RECORD (AS-BUILT): Plans prepared by a registered engineer, showing the
engineer's signature and certifying that the public improvements have been constructed as
shown.
PLAT: A map, drawing, or chart representing a proposed subdivision of land submitted by
the owner with intent to record.
PLAT OF SURVEY: The graphical representation of a survey of one or more parcels of
land, including a complete and accurate description of each parcel within the plat,
prepared by a registered land surveyor.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision, as described in
Section V.
PROPRIETOR'S PLAT: A plat submitted by the owner of the land being platted, or his
agent, or other private entity, acting with the consent of the owner.
PROTECTIVE COVENANTS: Contracts entered into between private parties and constitute
a restriction on the use of all private property within a subdivision for the benefit of
property owners, and to provide mutual protection against undesirable aspects of
development which would tend to impair stability of values.
STREET (AVENUE, HIGHWAY, ROAD, BOULEVARD, LANE): A right-of-way which
affords primary means of access by pedestrians and vehicles to abutting properties.
STREET (PRIVATE): A road or street in a subdivision not dedicated and/or accepted by the
City of Charles City as a public street, but built in accordance with standard specifications
of the City of Charles City. Maintenance of said private street shall not be the
responsibility of the City of Charles City.
2-4
STREET (PUBLIC): A road or street in a subdivision which meets all requirements and has
been constructed in accordance with the standard specifications of the City of Charles City
and for which a right-of-way has been granted and accepted by the City of Charles City.
Maintenance of said public street shall be the responsibility of the City of Charles City.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between lines delineating the right-of-way of a
street.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person commencing proceedings under this Ordinance for himself or
for another.
SUBDIVISION: A described tract of land which is to be or has been divided into two or
more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or,
if a new street involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term includes subdivision
and, where if is appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to
the land subdivided. However, the sale or exchange of parcels of land to or between the
owners of adjacent platted lots, where such sale or exchange does not create any
additional lots or non-conforming lots, shall not be considered a subdivision but shall be
subject to provisions for a minor property transfer.
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The guides, principles and specifications for the
preparation of subdivision plans indicating among other things, the minimum and
maximum dimensions of the various elements set forth in the preliminary plan.
SUBDIVISION - MINOR: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land that meets the
· following conditions:
(a) All the lots of the subdivision abut an existing dedicated public road,
highway, or street.
(b) No new street within the subdivision is proposed nor is any new street
required by the City in order to assure adequate access to an existing
public road, highway, or street from any of the lots of the subdivision.
(c) All City service systems and public improvements are already extended
so that each system is readily accessible for the direct and individual
service connection thereto from each lot of the subdivision.
2-5

SECTION Ill
GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. INTREPRETATION
1. Minimum Requirements. These regulations shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, and general welfare.
2. Relation To Other Regulations. It is not intended by these regulations to
repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any existing
provisions of law. Where any provision of these regulations imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of these
regulations or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provisions of
law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher standards
shall control.
3. Conditions. No land within the corporate limits of the City or within two (2)
miles of the corporate limits of the City shall be subdivided until the
subdivider or agent has obtained final approval of the plat by the Council.
4. Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy. No more than one (1)
building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel or
plat of land which was created by sub- division after the effective date of, and
not in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. No excavation of
land or construction of any public or private improvement shall take place or
be commenced until in conformity with these regulations.
5. Public Improvements. No public improvements over which the City Council
has control shall be made with City funds, nor shall any City funds be
expended for street maintenance, street improvements or other services in any
area that has been subdivided after the date of adoption of these Subdivision
Regulations unless the subdivision and streets have been approved in
accordance with the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations and the street
accepted by the City Council as a public street.
3-1
B. RESERVATIONS ANO APPEALS
1. Any subdivision plat that has received preliminary approval by the Council
prior to the effective date of these regulations, shall be subject to the
conditions effective at the time of the approval and for a period of one (1) year
from such date of approval and shall continue to be processed according to
those requirements during such period. The preliminary approval shall be
considered null and void if after one (1) year from the time of such
preliminary plat approval the applicant has not completed public
improvements and made application for final plat approval by the City
Council. Any future subdivision of any portion of the property subject to such
prior preliminary plat approval shall be made in conformance with these
regulations.
C. AMENDMENTS
1. These Subdivision Regulations may be amended from time to time by the City
Council. Such amendments as may be proposed shall first be submitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for study and recommendation. The
Commission shall report within a reasonable time, after which the City
Council shall give notice of and hold a public hearing on the proposed
amendment. The amendment shall become effective from and after its
adoption and publication as required by law.
0. ACRE SUBDIVISION
1. When land is subdivided and subdivision plat shows one or more lots
containing more than one (1) acre of land suitable for future resubdivision into
smaller building sites, the Commission may require that such parcel of land be
so subdivided as to allow for future streets and the extension of the existing
street system to the acre.
E. AUDITOR'S PLATS
1. The Commission and Council shall have the right to waive provisions
governing preliminary and final approval and public improvements for
Auditor's Plats providing there is on file with the City a copy of the request of
the County Auditor ordering such plat and a letter from the Auditor stating that
the plat as submitted meets the requirements for which the Auditor has
ordered the plat. An Auditor's Plat shall not be construed to mean a
subdivision.
F. VACATION OF PLATS
1. Shall be in accordance with the provisions of Sections 354.22 and 354.23 of
the Code of Iowa.
3-2
G. VARIATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
1. Whenever the tract proposed to be subdivided is of such unusual size or
shape or is surrounded by such development of unusual conditions that the
strict application of the requirements contained in these regulations would
result in substantial hardship or injuries, the Council, upon written
recommendation of the Commission, may modify or vary such requirements
to the end that the subdivider is allowed to develop the property in a
reasonable manner; provided, however, that all such variations and
exceptions granted hereunder shall be in harmony with the intended spirit of
these regulations and granted with a view toward protecting the public
welfare and interest of the City and surrounding area.
H. FEES
1. Filing Fee. Before a preliminary plat or final plat shall be considered by the
Commission, the applicant or agent shall deposit with the City Clerk a filing
fee as established by the City Counci I. The appropriate fees shall be
deposited at the time of filing of each of the preliminary plat and final plat.
The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the City Clerk and may be
periodically altered or amended by Resolution of the City Council.
2. Costs. In addition to the plat filing fees, the subdivider shall be responsible
for just and reasonable costs incurred by the City for review of plats and
construction drawings, and during the course of construction of the
improvements for inspection, testing or other work deemed necessary by the
City to assure proper construction in accordance with the approved
construction drawings and applicable standards and ordinances.
I. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
1. Enforcing Officer. It shall be the duty of the Administrative Official or person
designated by the City Council to enforce these regulations and to bring to the
attention of the City Council of any violations or lack of compliance herewith.
2. Action By Law or Equity. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken
by law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent
unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a
violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises and
these remedies shall be in addition to penalties for violation of this Code of
Ordinances.
3-3

SECTION IV
PLATTING PROCEDURES AND PLAT REQUIREMENTS
A. PRELIMINARY PLATTING PROCEDURE
Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall consult with Administrative
Official of the City to become familiar with the regulations of the Ordinances and
Comprehensive Plan concerning the ultimate land use of the proposed development, the
suitability of the location of the proposed subdivision, the most advantageous subdivision
plan, the arrangement of streets, alleys and lots, and the sanitary and water services
required for the lots.
1. Whenever the owner of any tract or parcel of land within jurisdiction of this
Ordinance wishes to subdivide or plat the same, said person shall attend a
pre-application conference and provide a sketch plan of the proposed
development to discuss the feasibility and design prior to submitting a formal
application. Participants at the pre-application conference may be the
developer or developer's agent, the developer's engineer, landscape architect
or land surveyor; the Administrative Official and City Engineer; and any other
official of government or private utility deemed by the City to have an interest
in the layout for the facilities to be furnished in the subdivision.
The purpose of the "Pre-Application Conference" is to afford the developer an
opportunity to meet and receive information and assistance of the City, and to
consult informally before preparation of the preliminary plat and before
formal application for its approval is submitted to the City.
The time and place of the pre-application conference shall be set by the
Administrative Official within seven (7) days of the submission of the request
and any accompanying exhibits of the development.
2. Preliminary Plat. After the pre-application conference, if the owner of any
tract or parcel of land within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance does wish to
subdivide or plat the same, said person shall cause to be prepared a
preliminary plat of said subdivision, and shall submit nine (9) copies of said
preliminary plat and other information to the Administrative Official. The
preliminary plat shall contain such information and data as is required by this
Ordinance.
3. The Administrative Official shall immediately transmit seven (7) copies of the
preliminary plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission, one (1) copy to the
City Engineer, and one (1) copy to the Utility Advisory Board.
4-1
4. The Planning and Zoning Commission may, at its discretion, hold a public
hearing on the preliminary plat; consider the recommendations of the City
Engineer and Administrative Official as well as the following factors:
(a) The relation of the proposed subdivision to the Comprehensive Plan and
public interest, and conformance with the City Zoning Ordinance, and
plats within two miles of the City with the County Zoning Ordinance.
(b) The effect of the proposed subdivision on the environment.
(c) The compliance of the proposed subdivision with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
(d) The suitability of the area for the proposed development, with special
attention to site features such as topographic and subsurface conditions.
(e) The availability of utilities and various public services such as police and
fire protection, schools, parks and solid waste disposal.
(f) The availability of access from existing highways and streets and the
nature of the altered traffic pattern that may result from the proposed
subdivision.
(g) The use of sound planning and engineering practices in developing the
plat and its features.
5. The Commission shall, within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the plat, submit
its recommendations to the City Council whether of approval, modification or
disapproval, stating its reasons therefore. The subdivider, may, however,
agree to an extension of time not to exceed sixty (60) days. A copy of the
recommendation shall be forwarded to the subdivider.
6. The City Council, upon receipt of the Commissions' recommendation, or after
the forty-five (45) days or any extension thereof shall have passed, shall by
resolution grant approval of or reject the preliminary plat. If the preliminary
plat is rejected, the City Council shall advise the subdivider of any changes
which are desired or should have consideration before approval will be given.
Approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council shall constitute approval
to proceed with preparation of the construction plans and final plat but shall
not be deemed approval of the subdivision.
4-2
B. CONSTRUCTION PLANS
1. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council, the owner
shall cause to be prepared by a registered engineer construction plans of at
least one phase of the approved preliminary plat. The construction plans shall
be in accordance with the design standards of the subdivision regulations and
standard specifications by the City. The construction plans and specifications
shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and upon its recommendation
approved by the City Council prior to commencement of improvements. Two
(2) certified copies of the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (I DN R)
approved construction drawings, and other permits as required by the State
and County regulatory agencies must be received prior to acceptance and
approval of construction plans by the City Council. Construction may
commence after City Council approval, and the improvements completed
within one (1) year of the approval of preliminary plat, unless an extension is
granted by the City Council.
2. Plans and profiles of all streets and alleys shall be drawn at a 50-foot
horizontal scale and a 5-foot vertical scale. Profiles shall show location, size
and grade of all conduits, sewers, pipelines, etc., to be placed under the
streets and alleys. Profiles of roadways and east and west streets shall be
drawn so that the west end of the profile shall be at the left side of the
drawing. Profiles of north and south streets shall be drawn so that the south
end of the profile shall be at the left side of the drawing.
C. FINAL PLATTING PROCEDURE
1. A final plat shall be submitted within one (1) year of the approval of the
preliminary plat, and approval of public improvements of at least one phase
of the preliminary plat or such approval shall expire and the preliminary plat
shall be resubmitted for approval prior to preparation of a final plat.
2. Procedures for final plats shall be the same as set out for preliminary plats
above, except that a public hearing shall not be required.
3. Upon approval of the final plat, a certification of approval signed by the
Mayor and attested by the City Clerk shall be affixed to the original tracing of
the final plat and copies of the same filed with the County Auditor and
County Recorder, along with such other certifications and instruments as may
be required by law.
4-3
D. MINOR PLAT
1. To simplify the approval procedures in those subdivisions for which all
required public improvements are in place, the minor subdivision will waive
the preliminary plat procedure and requirements when the conditions below
have been met.
(a) Upon recommendation and determination of the Administrative Official
with the recommendation of the City Engineer that the proposed
subdivision meets the conditions as specified in Definitions;
Subdivision - Minor, a developer may be permitted to proceed with a
minor subdivision.
(b) The minor plat shall be processed in the same manner as required for
final plat.
E. AUDITOR'S PLAT
With regard to Auditor's Plats as distinguished from proprietor's plats the Commission and
City Council shall have the right to waive provisions governing preliminary approval and
public improvements outlined in Sections A, B, C and D.
1. Providing there is on file with the Commission a copy of the request of the
Floyd County Auditor ordering such plat and a letter from said Auditor stating
that the plat as submitted meets the requirements for which the Auditor has
ordered the plat.
F. PERMITS
1. Following the submittal of Certification of Recording of the final plat, the
applicant or property owners within the recorded plat may make application
to the City for the certificate of zoning compliance and/or building permits, in
accordance with the City's regulations. Occupancy permits will not be issued
until the above procedures have been completed.
G. PLATS WITHIN TWO (2) MILES OF A CITY
1. The procedure for plats within two (2) miles of a city having extraterritorial
subdivision control shall be in accordance with provisions of Section 354.9
Code of Iowa and the same as set out for preliminary and final plats in
Sections A, B, C and D, and as hereinafter provided.
(a) The subdivider shall also file such plats with the County in accordance
with its established procedures.
(b) The Commission shall submit its recommendations to the County.
4-4
(c) If action by the County is in accord with the recommendations of the
Commission, the City Council shall concur with such action, provided
that the design standards and improvements required are not less than
those established herein.
(d) The City Council shall have the right to waive such requirements, as are
contained in this Ordinance, for such subdivisions whenever the City
Council, upon recommendation by the Commission is satisfied that
equally suitable regulations have been placed on these subdivisions by
the Board of Supervisors of Floyd County.
(e) A plat shall be considered to have been approved and authorized for
filing with the County Auditor and County Recorder only after it has
been approved by the City Council, as prescribed by this Ordinance and
by the Floyd County Board of Supervisors.
H. PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE
1. The City Council or the Planning and Zoning Commission may request such
professional assistance as deemed necessary to properly evaluate the plats
submitted.
I. PERFORMANCE BOND
1. Before the final plat of any area shall be approved by the City Council and
recorded, the subdivider shall make and install the improvements described in
this section. In lieu of final completion of the minimum improvements before
the plat is finally approved, the subdivider may, subject to approval by the
City Council and recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
post a performance bond, approved by the City Attorney and City Treasurer,
with the City Council, which bond will ensure to the City that the
improvements will be completed by the subdivider within one (1) year after
approval of the preliminary plat. The amount of the bond shall not be less
than the estimated cost of the improvements and the amount of the estimate
must be approved by the City Engineer. If the improvements are not
completed within the specified time, the City may use the bond or any
portion thereof to complete same. For plats located in unincorporated areas
within two (2) miles of the corporate limits, the Commission and Council may
waive the requirements of this section provided they are satisfied that the
subdivision regulations of the County governing the area within which the
subdivision is located are sufficient to ensure adequate conformance with
these regulations.
4-5
If a performance bond is posted, final acceptance of the plat will not
constitute final acceptance by the City of any improvements to be constructed.
Improvements will be accepted only after all construction has been
completed, all in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and
City specifications.
4-6
SECTION V
PRELIMINARY PLAT
Preliminary plats submitted to the City for approval shall contain and show on the plat
drawing the following information.
A. GENERAL
The preliminary plat of a subdivision is not intended to serve as record plat. Its purpose is
to show on a map all information needed to enable the Commission and City Council to
determine whether the proposed development is in public interest.
B. IDENTIFICATION AND DESCRIPTION
1. Proposed name of subdivision (not duplicating name of any plat heretofore
recorded in Floyd County - as the case might be).
2. Legal description of the plat.
3. Names and addresses of owner, or subdivider having control of the tract,
name and seal of registered surveyor who prepared topographic survey, and
designer of the plan.
4. Graphic (engineering) scale not smaller than one inch to 100 feet.
5. North-point (designated as true north).
6. Date of initial preparation and subsequent revision dates.
C. EXISTING CONDITIONS
1. Boundary line of proposed subdivision clearly indicated.
2. Total approximate acreage therein.
3. Existing Zoning Districts.
4. Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted streets or
other rights-of-way, showing type of improvement, if any, railroad and utility
rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings and
structures, easements and section and corporate lines, within the tract and to a
distance of 100 feet beyond the tract.
5-1
5. location and size of existing sewers, water mains, culverts or other
underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of 100 feet beyond
the tract, and also indicating such data as grades, invert elevations and
locations of catch basins, manholes and hydrants.
6. location map, drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals 1,000 feet,
showing boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided land, within
an area bounded by nearest arterial streets or other natural boundaries
identifying type of use an ownership of surrounding land and showing
alignments of existing streets.
7. Topographic data including existing and proposed contours at vertical
intervals of not more than two feet except in extreme topographical
conditions or as determined by the City Engineer such vertical intervals may
be not more than five feet. Topographic data shall refer to the City of Charles
City Datum. Water sources, marshes, rock outcrops, other significant features,
and soil boring data at locations and depths as may be required by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
8. locations of or reference to locations of existing monuments or survey
markers used in preparation of survey and grade elevation or each
monument and marker.
9. The 100-year flood limits of drainage courses and streams.
D. SUBDIVISION DESIGN FEATURES
1. layout of streets - showing right-of-way widths and street names (not
duplicating name of any street heretofore used in the City or its environs,
unless street is an extension of or in line with an already named street - in
which event that name shall be used) and showing proposed through streets
extended to boundaries of subdivision.
2. location and width of alleys, pedestrian ways, and utility easements.
3. Existing and proposed center line, and roadway width of each street and alley.
4. Typical cross-sections of streets together with an indication of the
proposed storm-water runoff.
5. layout, numbers and typical dimensions of lots to the nearest foot, and
proposed land use for each, lot, parcel or tract.
5-2
6. Minimum front and side-street building setback lines - indicating dimensions.
7. layout of sidewalks and recreation trails.
8. Areas intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use - indicating, in each,
the approximate area in acres.
9. Source of domestic water supply and type of sewage disposal, locations of
sites for community domestic water plant and/or community sewage
treatment plant.
10. layout of utility systems including sanitary sewer, water and storm sewer
systems.
11. Where municipal water supply and sanitary sewers are reasonably available,
the subdivider shall connect to these utility systems. Where municipal systems
are not available, proposed water supply and sewage treatment shall be
indicated on the plat. The City Council may require "dry sanitary sewers"
within a subdivision which is reasonable for future connections to municipal
sewer system.
12. Percolation test results as approved by Floyd County shall be provided to the
City for subdivisions with individual water supply and wastewater treatment
system.
13. Stormwater management plan of the subdivision with stormwater drainage
computations where retention and/or detention facilities are proposed.
5-3

SECTION VI
FINAL PLAT
A. GENERAL
1. Preparation. The final plat of the proposed subdivision is intended to serve
as the record plat. The final plat shall be prepared from an accurate survey by
a licensed land surveyor. Plat boundary, lot dimensions and bearings, street
locations, area and bearings and the location of all land dedicated to the City
for public purposes shall be accurately shown to scale and shall comply with
Chapters 354 and 355, Code of Iowa within the tolerances established by the
Code of Iowa.
2. Preliminary Plat On file. A final plat shall not be submitted until the
preliminary plat has been approved by the City Council.
3. Conformity With Preliminary Plat. The final plat shall be submitted in
substantial conformance with the approved preliminary plat.
4. Exhibits. Accompanying material shall not be shown on the plat drawings but
as separate exhibits.
5. Accompanying Material. All accompanying material shall be deemed a part
of the final plat. Any action taken on the accompanying material shall be
considered the same and in effect as action on the plat.
B. CONTENTS Of FINAL PLAT
All plats submitted shall contain and show on the plat drawing the following items:
1. Identification. The name under which the proposed subdivision is to be
recorded, compass point, date and scale.
2. Legal Description. Complete legal description of the property being platted
and its acreage. Legal description shall be metes and bounds. The boundary
shall be accurately tied to section corners as required in Chapter 355.8 of the
Code of Iowa.
3. Reference Ties. Reference ties to section corners found or set as reference
monuments for plat shall be in accordance with Chapter 355.11 of the Code
of Iowa.
4. Surveyor. Names and address of the land surveyor.
6-1
5. Streets, Railroads and Rights-of-Way. Names, widths, and location of all
existing or proposed streets, alleys, railroads and other public rights-of-way in
the proposed subdivision.
6. Existing Easements. location and character of all existing easements within
the proposed subdivision including notation of recorded book and page
number.
7. Park Land Dedication. The location and size of the parcel of land, if any, that
the subdivider is dedicating to the City for park purposes. If the City has
elected to accept a voluntary cash contribution in lieu of actual land
dedication, such contribution shall be submitted with the final plat.
8. Survey Data. Sufficient data shall be shown to positively describe the bounds
of every lot, block, street, easement, or other areas shown on the plat, as well
as the outer boundaries of the subdivisions. All distances shall be shown in
feet to the nearest one-hundredth (1/100th) of a foot. The course of each such
line shown on the plat shall be indicated by a bearing reference. All bearings
and angles shown shall be given to at least the nearest 30 seconds of arc.
Curve data for control lines such as boundary lines, etc. shall include as a
minimum radius, central angle, curve length, chord, chord bearing, tangent,
and degree of curvature. Curve data for all other lines shall include as a
minimum radius, central angle, curve length, chord and chord bearing.
9. lot Numbers. Proposed lot numbers as designated on the approved
preliminary plat.
10. Public Sites. Any proposed sites for schools, parks or other public or
semi-public areas as shown on the approved preliminary plat.
11. Boundaries. Boundaries of the proposed subdivision shall be indicated by a
heavy line.
12. Monuments. All monumentation as required by Section 355.6 Code of Iowa,
shall be designated on the plat and a legend provided describing the
monuments, surveyor's cap number and the date the monuments will be or
were set.
13. Setback lines. Building setback lines shown on all lots in accordance with
the zoning classification.
14. Proposed Easements. Proposed easements for public utility purposes.
6-2
15. When a proposed entrance of the subdivision is onto a controlled access
street or road, letter of approval of the City's Engineer regarding such entrance
shall accompany the final plat. Where such control is exercised by the Iowa
Department of Transportation, the approval of this body shall accompany the
final plat.
16. land Surveyor's Certificate. Certification of land surveyor.
17. Any plat not containing all of the information specified above shall not be
considered by the Commission.
C. MATERIAL TO ACCOMPANY FINAL PLAT
The following material shall be submitted for Commission and Council consideration:
1. Final Plat. The final plat of the subdivision in substantial conformance of the
preliminary plat.
2. As-Built Construction Drawings. Construction drawings as approved by the
City Engineer and City Council.
3. Protective Covenants. The protective covenants applicable to the plat.
Protective covenants shall be noted on the final plat, or appropriately
referenced thereon.
4. Deed. A deed to the City, properly executed, for all streets, park areas and
any other property intended for public use.
5. Owner's Certificate. A certificate by the owner and spouse, if any, that the
subdivision is with free consent and is in accordance with the desires of the
owners. This certificate must be signed and acknowledged by the owner and
spouse before notary public to take the acknowledgments of deeds.
6. Such other documents as are required by Section 354.11 Code of Iowa which
shall be submitted to the County Recorder, prior to recording including a
statement from the mortgage holders or lien holders, if any, an opinion by an
attorney-at-law who has examined the abstract of title of the land being
platted, a certified resolution by each governing body as required by
Section 354.8, and a certificate of the treasurer that the land is free from
certified taxes and certified special assessments.
7. Performance bonds in the amount and form in conformance with these
regulations if applicable.
8. Maintenance bonds in the amount and form in conformance with these
regulations.
6-3
9. Resolution Accepting Public Property. Resolution of acceptance for public
property to be deeded to the City.
10. Resolution Accepting Final Plat. A prepared resolution for the City to accept
the final pl at.
D. MINOR PLAT
1. Purpose and Intent. To simplify the approval procedures in those
subdivisions for which all required public improvements are in place, the
minor subdivision will waive the preliminary plat procedure when the
conditions below have been met.
2. Procedure. Upon the recommendation from the pre-application conference,
the determination of the Administrative Official with the recommendation of
the City Engineer that the proposed subdivision meets the conditions as
specified in Chapter I, Section 2 Definitions; Subdivision-Minor, a developer
may be permitted to proceed with a minor subdivision.
3. Application. The application for a minor subdivision shall be submitted to
the Administrative Official prior to the Planning Commission meeting at
which time the plat is to be acted upon. The following shall be submitted
with the application:
(a) Application fee.
(b) Number of copies of the plat as required by the Administrative Official.
(c) Statement listing all owners of record of the land being platted.
(d) A list providing property addresses, owner and their mailing addresses of
all properties within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the plat
obtained from the Floyd County Recorder's office.
(e) Any other supplemental material as required for final plat.
4. Application Acceptance or Refusal: Upon submittal of the minor subdivision
plat, the Administrative Official shall review the plat to ensure all data
required has been provided. The submitted application and supplemental
material shall then be forwarded to the City Engineer for review of correctness
of form. Specifically, the City Engineer may refuse to proceed with a minor
subdivision plat if one or more of the following conditions are present.
(a) The proposed lots violate the City's zoning or subdivision ordinance.
6-4
(b) The plat would require the dedication or vacation of any public
right-of-way.
(c) The plat would require the vacation of any necessary easements.
(d) In the opinion of the City Engineer, additional public right-of-way should
be dedicated.
(e) In the opinion of the City Engineer, the plat does not conform to the
Comprehensive Plan or other plans for the area.
If any of the above conditions are found and the developer wishes to proceed
to subdivide, the preliminary and final plat procedure shall be adhered to in
lieu of minor plat.
5. Planning Review. The City Clerk shall provide copies of the plat with a
request for written comments in seven (7) days from the City Engineer, City
Attorney, and any other utilities or governmental officials that are deemed
necessary.
6. Planning Commission Review. The minor subdivision plat shall be reviewed
by the Planning Commission in accordance with Planning Commission
review of a final plat.
7. Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall act on minor
subdivision in accordance with Planning Commission action of a final plat.
8. City Council Action. The minor subdivision plat presented to the City
Council shall be identical to the plat acted upon by the Planning Commission.
Upon approval of the minor subdivision plat by the City Council, a certificate
of recommended approval by the Planning Commission and approval by the
Mayor of the City shall be signed. The minor plat shall be signed by the
Chairperson and Secretary of the Planning Commission, and the Mayor and
Clerk.
9. Approve Minor Subdivision Plat Recording. The minor subdivision plat shall
be recorded in accordance with final plat recording provisions including
supporting documentation to accompany final plat.
10. Minor Subdivision Plat Limit. The minor subdivision plat shall become null
and void in accordance with final plat provisions unless an extension is
granted per said section.
11. Minor Subdivision Plat Information. The minor subdivision plat shall be
prepared in accordance with the final plat requirements.
6-5

SECTION VII
BONDS
A. PERFORMANCE BOND
1. General. Before the City Council approves the final plat, all of the
improvements required shall be constructed and accepted by formal
resolution of the City Council. Before passage of said resolution of
acceptance, the City Engineer shall report that said improvements
meet all City specifications and ordinances or other requirements
and agreements between the Subdivider and the City. This
requirement may be waived if the Subdivider will post a cash or
corporate surety bond or certified check or surety approved by the
City Council with the City, guaranteeing that said improvements will
be constructed within a period of one (1) year from acceptance of
the preliminary plat. Such performance bonds shall comply with all
statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the City Attorney
as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in these
regulations. This requirement may also be waived if the City is
constructing the improvements, or, if the city has entered into a
development agreement with the Subdivider under the terms of
which financing for the construction of the improvements is derived
from tax revenues committed by the City or from a combination of
tax revenues and money committed from other sources which the
City deems to provide sufficient assurance that the improvements
will be completed within one year from the acceptance of the
preliminary plat.
2. Separate Bonds Required. A separate bond shall be posted for each
phase of the construction such as sanitary sewer, water main, storm
sewer, pavement, sidewalks, etc.
3. Amounts. Bond amounts will be determined by submitting to the
City the quantities of work to be completed and cost estimates
therefor as prepared by the subdivider's engineer for the
improvements involved. All estimates shall be approved by the City
Engineer with recommendation to the City Council.
4. Approval. All bonds shall be approved by the City Council as to
amount and surety and conditions. The Council may at any time
during the period of such bonds accept a substitution of principal or
surety on the bond upon recommendation of the Commission.
7-1
5. Release or Reduction. The performance bond may not be released
or reduced except as follows:
(a) The Council will not accept dedication of required
improvements, nor release nor reduce a performance bond,
until the City Engineer has submitted a recommendation stating
that all required improvements have been satisfactorily
completed and until the applicant's engineer has certified to the
City through submission of detailed, record drawings of the
improvement indicating location, dimensions, materials, and
other information required by the City, that all public
improvements are in accordance with construction drawings for
the subdivision as prescribed in these regulations.
(b) A performance bond will be released upon actual dedication and
acceptance of the public improvements. Partial release or
reduction of the original bonds may be approved by the City
Council upon dedication and acceptance of the improvements
completed. The amount of the reduction shall be the ratio that
the completed improvements bear to the total public
improvement bonds originally submitted.
B. MAINTENANCE BONDS
1. Posted. The subdivider shall at the time of acceptance of the public
improvements by the City Council, post maintenance bonds in an
amount described herein as sufficient and as approved by the City
Attorney as to form, sufficiency and manner of execution as set forth
in these regulations.
2. Separate Bonds Required. A separate bond shall be posted for each
phase of the construction such as sanitary sewer, water main, storm
sewer, pavement, sidewalks, etc.
3. Time Period. The subdivider shall be required to maintain all
required improvements free of defects due to faulty materials and
workmanship after acceptance of said improvements by the City
Council for a period specified below:
(a) Sanitary Sewer - two (2) years
(b) Water Main - two (2) years
(c) Storm Sewer - two (2) years
7-2
4. Subcontractor Bonds. Maintenance bonds posted by the
subdivider's contractor may be accepted.
5. Amount. Maintenance bonds shall be in the amount of the
performance bonds if performance bonds were accepted by the City.
C. RECORDS AND REQUIREMENTS
The City Clerk shall maintain a record of all bonds and the expiration dates
thereof. All contractors and developers whose public improvements are
secured by bonds which improvements have not been completed prior to ninety
(90) days of their expiration, shall be seived with a written notice by ordinary
mail by the Clerk advising the developer or contractor that the improvements
have not been completed. The notice shall describe the improvement, state the
final date for completion, and shall inform the developer or contractor that if
the improvement is not completed and accepted by the City on or before the
expiration date, the City will proceed to call the bond. A copy of the notice
shall be mailed to the financial institution or insurance company furnishing the
bond. The written notice shall be served by mailing not less than eighty (80)
days prior to the expiration date for the completion of the public improvement.
D. PROCEDURE ON DEFAULT
In the event that the required public improvements have not been completed
and accepted by the City prior to the final expiration date, the City shall, within
a reasonable time thereafter, not to exceed thirty (30) days, make a written
demand upon the insurance company or financial institution furnishing the
bond, and the insurance company or financial institution shall forthwith pay to
the City the amount of the bond. Any action to enforce collection of the bond
shall be commenced by the City within six (6) months following the expiration
date for the improvement, notwithstanding any contrary provision in the
instrument. Cost of collection shall be paid by the Owner.
E. SURVIVAL OF OBLIGATION
The obligation of the insurance company or financial institution furnishing the
bond shall survive the expiration date to the extent necessary to permit
enforcement of the obligation by the City according to the terms of this
Ordinance. Any contrary terms and provisions in the bond or letter of credit
shall be of no force or effect.
7-3

SECTION VIII
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
A. STREET PLAN
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and locations of all streets shall conform
to the Comprehensive Plan; and shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to reasonable circulation of traffic within the subdivision and adjoining
lands, to topographical conditions, to runoff of storm water, to public convenience and
safety, and in their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the area to be served.
8. STREETS
1. All right-of-way widths for public and private streets shall conform to the
following minimum dimensions in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan:
Arterial Streets
Collector Streets
local Streets
Half Streets
Cul-de-sac Streets
Cul-de-sac Radius
100 feet
80 feet
66 feet
one-half the total right-of-way of the proposed
street or 40 feet, whichever is the smaller
60 feet
52 feet
2. Right-of-way widths of major trafficways including freeways, parkways,
major and secondary thoroughfares shall be in accordance with those
designated on the Comprehensive Plan of Charles City.
3. Tangents of at least 100 feet in length shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
4. Where there is a deflection in horizontal center lines within a given block
at any one point in excess of ten degrees, a curve shall be inserted with a
radius of not less than:
Arterial Streets
Collector Streets
local Streets
500 feet
300 feet
100 feet
5. Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical
parabolic curves. Minimum length in feet of these curves shall provide a
stopping sight distance of not less than 300 feet.
6. Local streets shall be so aligned that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
8-1
7. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 150 feet shall be avoided.
8. It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences
encourage safe and efficient traffic flow, and in general, be at or near right
angles, avoiding acute angles. An intersection of more than two streets
shall be avoided unless specific conditions of design indicate otherwise.
9. Alleys are not permitted in residential areas - unless deemed necessary
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
10. Cul-de-sac streets shall be not more than 500 feet in length measured
along their center lines from the streets of origin to the ends of their
rights-of-way, unless there are not more than 15 lots abutting the
cul-de-sac. Each cul-de-sac shall have a terminus of nearly circular
shape with a minimum diameter of 100 feet.
11. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable
development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of
these regulations; and where the City Council finds it will be practicable to
require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is
subdivided. Wherever an existing or dedicated half street is adjacent to a
tract. A half street, where included, shall be graded at one level and the
regrading or new construction of any half street shall conform to the grade
and pavement of the adjacent half street.
12. Private streets with right-of-way width as required by these regulations,
enabling access to interior lots from public streets, are permitted in
residential subdivisions containing lots of two acres in area and over.
13. Provision shall be made for serving lots for residential use abutting
arterial streets and highways by either the use of a) local access street,
b) backing lots to the arterial street with a screen planting contained in a
non-access reservation along the rear property line, c) deeper lots
fronting on the arterial street with rear service alleys. These methods are
recommended for the purpose of providing adequate protection of
residential properties and to afford separation of through and local
traffic.
14. Gradients of streets shall be at least 0.5 percent and not exceed on:
Arterial Streets
Collector Streets
Local Streets
5 percent
7 percent
10 percent
8-2
15. All streets less than 37 feet back to back to have a 2.5 percent cross
slope, and all streets wider than 37 feet back to back to have
2.0 percent cross slope of inside lane and 3.0 percent cross slope of
outside lane.
C. ALLEYS AND PEDESTRIAN WAYS
1. Alleys shall be at least 20 feet wide, where permitted, in residential
areas. Alleys, at least 22 feet wide, shall be provided in commercial
areas - unless such areas are otherwise provided with off-street loading
space.
2. Pedestrian ways shall be at least 12 feet wide and a shrub or tree hedge
shall be installed at side boundary lines.
D. EASEMENTS
Easements shall be provided for any overhead or underground utility service including
storm-water drainage, where necessary. They shall be not less than 20 feet wide, and be
established at the rear of each lot and along such other lot lines as to provide continuity
of alignment from block to block. At deflection points in these easements, if overhead
utility lines are contemplated, additional easements shall be established for pole-line
anchors.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream,
there shall be provided a drainage easement to accommodate the 100-year storm
occurrence flood limits substantially within the lines of such water course. It shall
include an additional area of at least 15 feet in which adjoining both edges of the
established area that has been affected by damaging flood waters, as certified by the
subdivider's engineer.
E. BLOCK STANDARDS
1. The maximum length of blocks containing lots 75 feet and over in width
shall be 1,800 feet, and the maximum length of blocks containing lots less
than 75 feet in width shall be 1,200 feet. Blocks over 900 feet long may
require pedestrian ways at their approximate centers. The use of additional
access ways to schools, parks or other destinations may be specified by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Blocks intended for commercial, industrial, and institutional use must be
designated as such, and the plan must show adequate off-street areas to
provide for parking, loading docks, and such other facilities as may be
required to accommodate motor vehicles.
8-3
3. Rounded corners shall be provided at street intersections of 20 feet radius
for local streets and 25 feet radius for collector and arterial streets.
4. Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited
access thoroughfare right-of-way, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such
right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening
land as for; a) park purposes, b) deep residential lots backing to railroad or
arterial street with planting screen in a no-access area at rear property lines
of lots, or c) motor vehicle parking, business, or industry in appropriate
districts. Such distances shall be determined with due regard for the
requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
F. LOT STANDARDS
1. In general, lots should be as nearly rectangular in shape as practicable.
2. Width and area of lots shall conform with lot widths and area
requirements set forth in the Zoning Ordinances of the City of
Charles City. In case of corner lots, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may make variations to encourage the proper development
of intersection design and traffic safety; and corner lots shall be
increased in width by 25 percent over the width of typical interior lot
except where the typical lot is 90 feet wide or more.
3. Depth of lots shall be in accordance with City Zoning Ordinance
requirements, but not less than 115 feet in depth for interior lots and
90 feet in depth for corner lots.
4. All lots shall abut on a publicly-dedicated street.
5. Side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street line - or
substantially so.
6. Butt lots shall be platted at least five feet wider than the average
interior lots in developments containing lots less than 12,000 square
feet in area.
7. Double-frontage lots are not permitted except:
{a) Where lots back upon an arterial street, and in such instances,
vehicular and pedestrian access between the lots and the
arterial street is prohibited, and
8-4
(b) Where topographic or other conditions render subdividing
otherwise unreasonable, such double frontage lots shall have an
additional depth of at least 20 feet in order to allow for a
protective screen planting on one frontage.
8. Lots abutting upon a water course, drainage way, channel, or
stream shall be an additional depth or width, as required, to
provide an acceptable building site.
9. In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all
natural features, such as tree growth, water courses, historic spots,
or similar conditions.
G. ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS
If any plat of subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares which are therein
dedicated as such, whether located within the corporate limits of the City of
Charles City or in part outside thereof, or contains existing streets located outside
of said corporate limits, the approval of the plat by the City Council or the
subsequent annexation of the property to the City, shall not constitute an
acceptance by the City of such streets or thoroughfares, nor of the improvements
constructed or installed thereon or therein, irrespective of any act or acts by an
officer, agent, or employee of the City with respect to such streets or
improvements. The acceptance of such streets or thoroughfares shall be made only
by the adoption of a resolution by the City Council after there has been filed, with
the City Clerk, a certificate by the City Engineer certifying that all improvements
required to be constructed or installed in or upon such streets or thoroughfares in
connection with the approval of the plat of subdivision by the City Council have
been fully completed and the construction or installation thereof has been
approved by him.
8-5

SECTION IX
REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
A. GENERAL
No final plat shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission without receiving
a statement signed by the City Engineer certifying that the improvements described in the
subdivider's plans and specifications, together with agreements, meet the minimum
requirements of the City, County, State and other authorities having jurisdiction. The
subdivider will be required to furnish the City Engineer with any engineering calculations,
including storm drainage computations, pertinent to the subdivision which he may require
to adequately check the design. Improvements shall also comply with the following:
B. SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
1. Provided By Subdivider. The subdivider of land being platted shall make
adequate provision for the disposal of sanitary sewage from the platted area.
The subdivider shall at own expense construct a sanitary sewer system
including all necessary pumping stations, manholes and other necessary
appurtenances to provide for the discharge of sanitary sewage from all lots or
parcels of land within the platted area. The minimum sewer pipe size shall be
eight (8) inches at a minimum grade of 0.4 percent. The installation of such
sewers shall be under the supervision and inspection of the City Engineer and
the subdivider shall be responsible for reasonable charges for such expenses
incurred by the City.
2. Design. All sewers shall be designed by a registered engineer and sized with
capacity to permit ultimate development of the sewer service area in
accordance with the Iowa Department of Natural Resources standards. The
sewer lines shall be constructed to the extremities of the development where
necessary to accommodate future extension.
3. Connection To Municipal System. Subdivisions located within the corporate
limits of the City of Charles City shall be connected to the municipal sewer
system. Only with approval of the City Council as recommended by the City
Engineer shall private sewage disposal or treatment be allowed. When
allowed, design of such facilities shall be subject to the requirements and
approval of the City, the County and the Iowa Department of Natural
Resources.
(a) Dry Sewers. All subdivisions, except minor subdivisions, shall have
sanitary sewers installed. Where sanitary sewers cannot be reasonably
connected to existing sewer, the sanitary sewers shall be installed as "dry
sewers" and capped for future connection unless this provision is waived
by the City Council upon recommendation by the City Engineer.
9-1
(b) Where sanitary sewers of larger capacity than necessary are required as
directed by the City Council, to serve the subdivision as delineated in
the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall be required to pay for the
proportionate benefit of the installation to his subdivision as established
by the City Council.
4. location. All sanitary sewers shall be constructed within the street
right-of-way as directed by the City Engineer.
5. Easements. When sanitary sewers are not constructed in the street
right-of-way the subdivider shall dedicate permanent easements to the City for
all sanitary sewers required by the City. These easements shall have a
minimum width of fifteen (15) feet each side of the sewer center lines.
Additional width may be required to ensure access by City maintenance
equipment.
6. Service Lines. Sewer service lines shall be installed to the right-of-way line to
serve each lot in the subdivision. Service lines shall be laid at ninety (90)
degree angle to the sewer main. Service lines shall be a minimum of four (4)
inch diameter for single family and duplex family housing, and six (6) inch
diameter for all other uses unless lesser size is approved by City Engineer.
Duplex and townhouse shall have a separate service line to each unit.
Developer and contractor shall accurately record the location of the service
line during construction with respect to lot corners, pavement and other
physical features. Said locations shall be furnished to the City. A steel post
shall be located at the end of each service with the top of the post to be
placed within one foot above the final ground surface. The post shall be
painted green to indicate a sanitary sewer service location.
7. Plans and Specifications. Sanitary sewers shall be constructed in accordance
with the approved construction drawings and Standard Specifications of the
City.
C. WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
1. Supplied By Subdivider. The subdivider of land being platted shall make
adequate provisions for the supplying of water to the platted area. The
subdivider shall at own expense construct a complete water system together
with all necessary appurtenances to provide adequate water to all lots or
parcels of land within the platted area. The main supplying water to the
subdivision shall not be less than eight (8) inches in diameter. The installation
of such water lines shall be under the supervision and inspection of the City
and the subdivider shall be responsible for all reasonable charges for such
expense incurred by the City.
9-2
2. Design. All water mains shall be designed by a registered engineer and sized
with capacity to permit ultimate development of the water service area. The
water lines shall be constructed to the extremities of the development where
necessary to accommodate future extensions.
3. Location. All water mains shall be constructed in the street right-of-way
outside the pavement slab whenever possible.
4. Easements. When water mains are not constructed in the street right-of-way
the subdivider shall dedicate permanent easements to the City for all water
mains required. These easements shall have a minimum width of ten (1 O) feet
each side of the water main center line. Additional width may be required to
ensure access by City maintenance equipment.
5. Service Lines. Water service lines shall be installed to the right-of-way line of
the lots to be served. Service lines shall be laid at ninety (90) degrees to the
water main and shall be a minimum of three-fourths (3/4) inch in diameter
K copper for single family and duplex family housing. Multi-family,
commercial or industrial land use shall be sized as required for the specific
function. Service lines shall be provided with corporation cocks at the main
and curb stops located as required by the City Standard Specifications.
Duplex and townhouses shall have a separate service line to each unit.
Developer and contractor shall accurately record the location of the service
line during construction with respect to lot corners, pavement and other
permanent physical features. Said locations shall be furnished to the City. A
steel post shall be left standing at the end of each service adjacent to the curb
stop to mark the location. The post shall be painted blue to indicate a water
distribution service location.
6. Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions. Fire
hydrants shall be located at street intersections and spaced no more than three
hundred (300) feet in commercial and industrial areas, and no more than four
hundred (400) feet in residential areas.
7. Valves. Valves shall be spaced at equal spacings no more than eight hundred
(800) feet apart in residential areas, and no more than four hundred (400) feet
apart in commercial and industrial areas.
8. Plans and Specifications. Water system shall be constructed in accordance
with the approved construction drawings and Standard Specifications of the
City.
9. Where water mains of larger capacity are required as directed by the City
Council to serve future growth in the vicinity of the subdivision, the
subdivider shall be required to pay for the proportionate benefit of the
installation to his subdivision as established by the City Council.
9-3
D. STORM SEWER SYSTEM
1. Provided By Subdivider. The subdivider of land being platted shall make
adequate provision for the disposal of storm water from the platted area. The
subdivider shall at own expense construct a storm sewer system including all
necessary piping, manholes and other necessary appurtenances to provide for
the discharge of storm water and sump pump water from all lots or parcels of
land and the streets and alleys within the platted area, to a connection with
the City's storm sewer system, or make provisions, to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer and Council, for the storm water to reach the City's storm sewer
system or drainage courses by surface flow. A sump pump collector system
shall be installed. The sump pump collector system will service the necessary
lots and discharge into the City's storm sewer system or other approved outlet.
Developer and contractor shall accurately record the location of the sump
service lines during construction with respect to lot corners, pavement and
other physical features. Said locations shall be furnished to the City. A steel
post shall be located at the end of each sump service with the top of the post
to be located within one foot above the final ground surface. The post shall
be painted yellow to indicate a sump service line location.
2. Design. All storm drainage facilities shall be designed by a registered
engineer and sized with capacity to permit ultimate development of the
drainage basin, but in no case less than the five (5) year storm frequency in
pipe design, and 100-year storm frequency for overland stormwater drainage
design of ditches and culverts. The improvements shall be constructed to the
extremities of the development where necessary to accommodate future
extension and shall conform to current City standard specifications.
3. Detention Facilities. The City of Charles City requires stormwater detention
facilities for all developments of one acre or more and for developments of
less than one acre when conditions warrant.
Stormwater detention facilities in residential subdivisions may be accepted for
ownership and maintenance by the City. Facilities in commercial, office,
institutional, mixed use or industrial planned unit developments and
subdivisions may also be accepted by the City, except where ownership of
fifty percent or more of the development or subdivision is held by the same
entity or is otherwise under common ownership.
Acceptance of stormwater detention facilities is subject to the following
requirements:
9-4
(a) An owner of property of one acre or more must construct the stormwater
detention facility in accordance with the subdivision plans approved by
the City and must dedicate the facility to the City as a condition of final
plat approval.
(b) The owner must continue to own and maintain the facility until (1) the
facility has been fully completed, (2) 80% of the platted lots have been
fully developed, and (3) adequate erosion control measures, as approved
by the City, have been installed on the remaining 20% of the lots.
Acceptance of the facility must be by the City Council as required by the
Subdivision Ordinance.
(c) The owner must agree that once the City accepts the facility, periodic
inspection, administrative and maintenance expenses for the facility will
be assessed against the lots in the subdivision in proportion to the
acreage of each lot as a percentage of the acreage in the subdivision or
planned unit development, and that the costs will be collected in the
same manner as general property taxes. Such costs will be dependent
upon the condition of the facility.
(d) Acceptance of the facility for a non-residential subdivision or planned
unit development will be based on the preliminary plat approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission for a subdivision, or the conceptual
development plan approved by the City.
(e) When the proposed subdivision may have a detrimental effect by increasing
the intensity of storm water run-off into the City storm water drainage
system or onto adjoining properties, detention methods may be required by
the City Engineer to ensure the on-site control of said run-off.
(f) Design of detention facility shall be based on release rate of five (5) year
storm occurrence event under undeveloped conditions and detention
based on 100-year occurrence storm event under developed conditions.
4. Location. All storm sewers shall be constructed in the street right-of-way
outside the pavement slab whenever possible.
5. Easements. When storm sewers are not constructed in the street right-of-way
the subdivider shall dedicate permanent easements to the City for all storm
sewers required by the City. These easements shall have a minimum width of
fifteen (15) feet each side of the sewer center line. Additional width may be
required to ensure access by the City maintenance equipment.
9-5
6. Dams. Where dams are proposed in any subdivision, they shall be designed
by a registered engineer. A preliminary engineering report including soil
investigations and design procedures shall be submitted to the City for review.
When such dam is constructed, the subdivider's engineer shall certify to the
City that the dam is constructed in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications.
7. Lake or Stream. If a tract being subdivided contains a body of water or portion
thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the
body of water among the owners of adjacent lots. The Commission may
approve an alternative plan of ownership and use stating the ownership of, and
responsibility for, safe maintenance of the body of water. Where a water
course separate the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has
access, provisions shall be made for suitable vehicular/pedestrian access.
E. SITE AND STREET GRADING
1. Site Grading. The subdivider shall grade any portion of the preliminary plat
subject to development into lots so that each lot will be useable and suitable
for the erection of residences or other land use structures including all required
overland drainage courses within easements. Grading shall be in accordance
with the erosion control requirements of the City and the Iowa Department of
Natural Resources (IDNR).
(a) A pollution prevention plan for all sites of one acre or greater including
any permits required from the IDNR shall be provided to the City
Engineer before any grading of the site and lots is undertaken.
(b) All stumps, trees that cannot be saved, boulders and similar items shall be
removed.
2. Street Grading. The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded, including
the sub-grade of the areas to be paved.
F. STREET IMPROVEMENTS
1. All public and private streets shall be improved with pavements to an overall
width in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan having the following
minimum dimensions:
Type of Street
Arterial
Pavement Width
(between face of curbs)
(feet)
31 - 49
9-6
Minimum
Pavement Thickness
(inches)
8 reinforced or
9 non-reinforced PCC
Type of Street Pavement Width Minimum
(between face of curbs) Pavement Thickness
(feet) (inches)
Collector 31-37 7 reinforced or
8 non-reinforced PCC
Local 31 6 reinforced or
7 non-reinforced PCC
Cul-de-sac 31 6 reinforced or
7 non-reinforced PCC
Cul-de-sac 40
Radius
2. Pavements in cul-de-sac turn-arounds shall have a minimum diameter of
80 feet - measured from the outside curb.
3. Pavements shall be installed in accordance with City of Charles City
standards and specifications.
4. Curbs and gutters shall be installed in accordance with City of
Charles City standard specifications.
5. All curb corners shall have a radii of not less than 20 feet for local
streets and 25 feet for intersections with arterial and collector streets.
6. All parkways within the dedicated street area shall be graded and
seeded in an approved manner.
7. All curb cuts must be at least 25 feet from the end of the radius return at
all corners.
8. Subdrains and 6 inches of granular subgrade shall be provided under
street pavement in accordance with City of Charles City standard
specifications unless a geotechnical soils report is provided and
approved by City Engineer indicating that subdrains and/or granular
subgrade is not required.
G. SIDEWALKS
Sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides of streets within the subdivision in
accordance with the City Standard Specifications. The subdivider of the land being
platted shall submit to the City a performance bond guaranteeing the construction of
all sidewalks within three (3) years of the date of final plat approval by the City
Council. The amount of said bond shall be the estimated cost of constructing all
required sidewalks.
9-7
1. Sidewalks shall conform to the following standards:
(a) location. Sidewalks shall be located in the street right-of-way one
(1) foot from the right-of-way line and shall be four (4) feet in
width. The sidewalk thickness shall be four (4) inches (minimum)
of portland cement concrete. Where the sidewalk crosses the
driveway, the thickness shall be six (6) inches (minimum) or the
thickness of the driveway, whichever is greater.
(b) Grade. The area between the curb and nearest edge of the
sidewalk shall have a slope of one-half (1/2) inch per foot toward
the curb. This shall be the method for determining the grade of the
sidewalk.
(c) Crosswalks. Crosswalks may be required in blocks over nine
hundred (900) feet long or in areas where curved streets require
excessive out-of-distance travel. If required, they shall be located
in a pedestrian way right-of-way not less than twenty (20) feet in
width, be a minimum four (4) feet wide unless part of a trail in
which case a minimum to ten (10) feet wide and shall be
constructed by the developer.
(d) Handicap Ramps. Handicap ramps shall be installed at all
intersections and at certain mid-block locations for all new or
reconstruction of curb and sidewalks in accordance with the
requirements of the federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
and state accessibility requirements. Ramps for the handicapped
shall have a textured non-skid surface. The maximum ramp slope
shall be 1 in 12.
H. STREET LIGHTS
1. Required. Street lights will be required in all subdivisions for public
streets unless a variance is granted by the City. Street light locations
shall be shown on the utility plan provided by the utility company for
the subdivision.
2. location. Exact street light locations will be determined by the City in
consultation with the utility company. As a general guideline, street
lights shall be placed at all street intersections and at other intermediate
points as necessary, but in no case shall the street lights be more than
three hundred (300) feet apart.
9-8
3. Costs. The owner of the land being platted shall pay the material and
installation costs of all street lights required, and the City will pay the
energy costs for operation after acceptance of installation. The
installation of streetlights shall be completed within one year
completion of subdivision construction.
I. PUBLIC UTILITIES
1. Underground. All utility lines and mains including telephone, electric,
cable TV, fiber optic, and street lighting lines, gas and other necessary
facilities except electric lines of nominal voltage in excess of fifteen
thousand (15,000) volts shall be installed underground. The subdivider
shall be responsible for making the necessary arrangements with the
utility companies for installation of such facilities. Said utility lines shall
be installed in such a manner so as not to interfere with other
underground utilities. Underground utility lines which cross
underneath the right-of-way of any street, alley or pedestrian way should
be installed in conduit prior to the improvement of any such street, alley
or pedestrian way in the subdivision. Underground utilities installed
after the streets, alley or pedestrian way is improved shall be installed by
boring and jacking techniques or open cut subject to approval by City
Engineer. Incidental appurtenances, such as transformers and their
enclosures, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meters and meter
cabinets maybe placed above ground but shall be located so as to not
be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
2. Easements. Twelve (12) foot wide public utility easements shall be
provided along the plat boundary and along the rear of all lots within
the subdivision. Additional utility easements shall be provided along
side lot lines totaling twelve (12) feet in width to provide for utility line
and access to such rear lines at sufficient intervals to allow ease of
access from one such easement to the next as required by the utility
companies. All utility easements shall have access to a public
right-of-way.
J. STREET SIGNS
1. Street signs shall be erected so as to identify every street within the
subdivision and shall be so designed and constructed as to conform
with existing street signs. They shall be installed at a height of not less
than seven (7) feet and shall be placed no less than one foot, nor more
than ten, from the edge of the pavement as directed by the City
Engineer.
9-9
K. STREET TREES
1. In subdividing property, tree plantings adjacent to or within street
rights-of-way shall be required.
2. Tree plantings adjacent to or within street rights-of-way:
(a) In any yard adjacent to street rights-of-way, trees shall be planted
at a minimum ratio of one overstory tree for every forty (40) feet of
lot frontage, or for understory trees, every thirty (30) feet of lot
frontage.
(b) Trees shall be planted in the front yard adjacent to the street
right-of-way or within the street right-of-way subject to approval of
the City Council.
(c) Trees planted shall conform to the requirements of the City
Standard Specifications.
3. Recommended Species of Trees. The varieties of trees permitted by
this section for the use indicated are specified in the following
subparagraphs. All trees shall have a trunk diameter (measured
12 inches above the ground) of not less than 2-1/2 inches.
(a) U nderstory - less than 30 feet in height at maturity:
Hawthorn
Dogwood
Hornbeam
Amur Maple
Mayday Trees
Amur Corktree
Yellowwood
Serviceberry
Japanese Tree Lilac
Redbud
T artarian Maple
Japanese Pagoda Tree
Amur Cherry
Hophornbeam
Crabapples
European Hornbeam
Horse Chestnut
(b) Overstory - Greater than 30 feet in height at maturity:
Sugar Maple
Black Maple
Green Ash
White Oak
Red Oak
Swamp White Oak
Chinkapin Oak
Kentucky Coffeetree
Basswood
Redmond Linden
River Birch
Ginkgo (Male var.)
Norway Maple
White Ash
9-10
English Oak
Shingle Oak
Shagbark Hickory
Bitternut Hickory
Thornless Honeylocust
Cucumber Magnolia
Little leaf Linden
Shellbark Hickory
Mockernut Hickory
Hackberry
Sycamore
Bur Oak
Black Oak
9-11
Black Cherry
Paper Birch

SECTION X
PARKS AND RECREATION
A. PURPOSE
This Ordinance is enacted to ensure that land is properly located and preserved and park
and recreation facilities provided to accommodate future community growth; and to
further ensure that the cost of providing the community facilities necessary to serve the
additional residents brought in to the community through subdivision development may
be most equitably apportioned on the basis of the additional public requirements created
by such subdivision development.
B. PARK SITE DEDICATION AND RESERVATION
This Ordinance is required to ensure the reservation of well-located and appropriately
sized open spaces. Park areas must be created and preserved in adequate quantity to
provide access to all citizens as the community continues to grow. Further, these spaces
must be provided for by the subdivision development that creates the demand.
1. Requiring developers to construct and maintain private recreational facilities
or dedicate such facilities to Charles City is one method of ensuring that new
development takes care of the park needs created by the new residents and
their families moving into the new developments. This must be done in order
to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens
that will be residing in, or occupying, the new developments.
2. Payment In-Lieu-Of Park Land. Where dedication of land is not compatible
with the general subdivision plan of the developer, the developer, at his
option, may request the City to accept a cash payment in lieu of the
dedication of such land. In this event, the developer may pay to the City a
cash payment as hereinafter determined which shall be placed in a special
fund by the City and shall be used solely for the acquisition and/or
development of park and recreational lands to serve the residents of the City.
3. The Charles City Comprehensive Plan Update report adopted by the City
encourages development and renovation of existing parks, the development
of trails, development and use of floodplains for passive and active recreation
activities and development of soccer facilities to serve existing and new
residents of the community.
10-1
C. PARK LAND DEDICATION AND DEVELOPMENT
1. The general criteria of park land dedication shall be determined by the
following formula:
Residential Uses: Minimum Lot Area Percentage of
Per Unit Total Land Area
25,000 sq. ft. to 40,000 sq. ft. or 3%
greater
8,000 sq. ft. to 24,999 sq. ft. 5%
2,499 sq. ft. or less to 7,999 sq. ft. 10%
2. The following criteria will be used by the City to determine what land shall be
dedicated for private or public recreational facilities.
(a) The Charles City Comprehensive Plan Update report.
(b) The topography, geology, access, and location of land in the subdivision
that is suitable for the development of parks.
(c) The size and shape of the subject property and land available for
dedication.
(d) The location of existing or proposed park sites and trails.
D. PAYMENT IN LIEU OF DEDICATION
1. Method of Payment. The payment in-lieu-of land shall be based on the fair
market value of the acres of land in the development that otherwise would
have been dedicated as a park site. The fair market value shall be determined
by the City by taking the total per-acre value of the total development and
determining the proportionate value of the dedication of land required, as
determined under Subsection C. For purposes of this section, fair market
value shall be determined by the following method:
(a) City staff, after consultation with persons having knowledge of real estate
values in the City by reason of their occupations, such as realtors,
appraisers, and persons responsible for making loans on property shall
establish fair market value of the property subject to approval of the
report by the City Council.
(b) The Council shall, by resolution, thereupon establish the average
per-acre fair market value, which shall be used to determine the basis for
the cash contribution permitted under this Ordinance until such value is
changed or amended by subsequent resolution.
10-2
2. Percentage Contribution. In no event shall any voluntary payments by
developers required under the provisions of this Ordinance be in a greater
percentage in relation to the total value of the land within the plat than the
maximum required percentage of total land area as set forth in subsection B.
of this section.
3. Criteria for Requiring Dedication and a Payment In-lieu-Of. There may be
situations when a combination of land dedication and a contribution in-lieu-of
land are both advisable. These occasions will arise when:
(a) Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the location
for a park site. That portion of the land within the subdivision falling
within the park location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid and a
payment in-lieu-of shall be accepted for any additional land that would
have to be dedicated.
(b) A major part of the local park or recreational site has already been
acquired and only a small portion of land is needed from the
development to complete the site. The remaining portions shall be
required by dedication, and a payment in-lieu-thereof maybe accepted.
E. SPECIAL FUND
All payments in-lieu-of park land collected by the City shall be deposited in a special fund
to be known and designated as "special fund for the acquisition and development of park
and recreational facilities" and such funds shall be used for such purposes and at such
places and in such manner as shall be determined and directed by the City following
recommendations by the Park Board, after consultation with the subdivider or developer,
and which shall be consistent with the intent of this Ordinance; and authorization for
creation of said fund is granted. Any and all interest accumulated upon such funds shall
be added to the special fund and be used only for acquisition and development of parks
and recreational areas including trails.
F. PROCEDURES
1. Pre-Application Conference for Plat Submittal. At the pre-application
conference, the City, the developer and a representative from the Park Board,
if available, shall review the requirements for park land dedication, and
criteria and standards as described in the subdivision regulations. At the time
of such conference, the Park Board shall be immediately notified, by the City,
of the description and location of the land proposed to be platted.
10-3
2. Preliminary Plat. At the time of filing a preliminary plat or site plan with the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the owner or developer of the property
shall, as part of such filing, indicate whether he desires to dedicate property
for park and recreational purposes or whether he desires voluntarily to pay a
fee in-lieu-thereof. If he desires to dedicate land for this purpose, he shall
designate the area thereof on the preliminary plat or site plan as submitted, a
copy of which shall be immediately delivered to the Park Board.
3. Review and Recommendation by the Park Board. When the preliminary plat
or site plan is received which proposes the dedication of park land, a copy of
said plat or plan shall be immediately forwarded to the Park Board. Upon
receipt of said plat or plan, the Park Board shall review the same and make
recommendations and suggestions thereon with regard to placement, size,
design and location of said park or recreational area. Within fifteen days after
receipt of a copy of said plat or plan, the Park Board shall make
recommendations and the same shall be forwarded to the City Council with a
copy to the Planning and Zoning Commission. Failure of the Park Board to
make recommendations with the fifteen day aforesaid mentioned shall be
interpreted as agreement with the plat or plan as submitted.
4. Planning and Zoning Commission Action. As a part of its recommendations
to the City Council on the preliminary plat or preliminary site plan, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall make recommendations on the
location of the proposed land dedication, delineating the boundaries thereof.
If the developer requests to make a voluntary cash contribution in-lieu-of
dedication, he must so advise the Commission which will then determine the
amount of such contribution, using the formula herein above provided.
5. Prerequisites for Approval of final Plat or Site Plan. Where a dedication is
required it shall be accomplished by providing the City with a properly
executed warranty deed, dedicating the required land to the City without cost
to the City. Where fee in-lieu-of dedication is accepted, the same shall be
paid in the manner hereinafter set forth:
(a) Method of Payment. If the developer chooses to make a cash
contribution in-lieu-of land dedication, he may make payment as
follows:
1) By payment to the City Clerk, prior to approval of the final plat.
10-4
2) By submitting to the Council on a form approved by the City
Attorney his covenants running with the land, suitable for
recording, and promising to pay to the City a proportionate part of
such contribution at the time of issuance of each building permit
for such subdivision. The amount of such proportionate payment
shall be determined by dividing the total cash payment for such
subdivision by the number of lots in such subdivision. Any
payments remaining unpaid shall constitute a lien against the real
estate until paid. A copy of such covenants shall be placed on file
with the City Clerk.
6. Development of Dedicated Area. It shall be the duty of the Park Board of the
City to properly develop and maintain the dedicated area for park and
recreational purposes.
10-5
